CITY CODE
of
LONG BEACH, WASHINGTON
2007
Code current through:
Ord. 1047, passed September 15, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Long Beach, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 1047, passed September 15, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 818
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE LONG BEACH, WASHINGTON CITY CODE
   AND ESTABLISHING AN EFFECTIVE DATE
Be It Ordained by the mayor and city council of the city of Long Beach,
Washington, as follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of the city of Long Beach, Washington prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official
code and law of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
Passed this 7th day of February, 2007.
Approved this                       day of                          ,
         .
                                            
      Mayor
Attest:
                                            
      City Clerk
AYES: 4
NAYS: 0
ABSENT: 1
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
LONG BEACH CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Long Beach. This city
code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the LONG BEACH CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the section itself, when
reference is made to this city code by title in any legal documents. (2007
Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect,
except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2007 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (2007 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or provision may be changed or omitted. Said code, while
in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city
clerk-treasurer when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2007
Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city
code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; budget ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (2007 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2007 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed
as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance
of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances
contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a
new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue,
or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving
any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the
time of the adoption of this city code. (2007 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this city code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by reference or
any codes or portions of codes adopted herein is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted
by reference or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Long Beach".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this city code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2007 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Long Beach, county of Pacific, state of Washington.
CODE: The city code of the city of Long Beach.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Long
Beach.
COUNTY: The county of Pacific, state of Washington.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Washington.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (2007 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2007
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalties; County Jail
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Fines For Parking Violations
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTIES; COUNTY JAIL:
Unless otherwise specified in this code, any person who shall violate any
provision of this code shall be punished pursuant to the following general
penalty provisions:
   A.   Penalties Assessed, County Jail Use:
      1.   Misdemeanor Penalties; Jail:
         a.   Any person who violates any provision of this code, or any city
ordinance, which violation is designated a misdemeanor, shall be subject, upon
conviction, to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or to
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment. In the event of a continuing violation or failure to comply, the
second and subsequent days shall constitute a gross misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and/or imprisonment not to
exceed three hundred sixty-five (365) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
However, for any city ordinance that is identical to a state law, the penalty
shall be the same as the state law.
         b.   All persons that are arrested in the city, convicted and subject
to imprisonment, will be imprisoned in the Pacific County jail.
      2.   Civil Infraction: Any person violating any provision of this code
which is designated a civil offense shall have committed a civil infraction,
and shall be assessed a monetary penalty as follows:
         a.   First offense: Class 3; seventy-five ($75.00), not including
statutory assessments.
         b.   Second offense arising out of the same facts as the first
offense: Class 2; one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), not including statutory
assessments.
         c.   Third offense arising out of the same facts as the first offense:
Class 1; three hundred ($300.00), not including statutory assessments.
   B.   Separate Offense: Every person violating any of the provisions of this
code is guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which
the violation is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person.
   C.   Nuisance: In addition to the penalties set forth in subsection A of
this section, all remedies given by law for the prevention and abatement of
nuisances shall apply regardless of any other remedy 1 . (2007 Code; amd. Ord.
992, 1-19-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5, chapter 2 of this code.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in section
1-4-1 of this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this city code
the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this city code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but
not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this city code
and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2007 Code)
1-4-3: FINES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS 1 :
A. Park in handicapped zone                                   $250.00
B. Double parked                                              50.00
C. Park on sidewalk/planting strip                            50.00
D. Park within an intersection                                50.00
E. Park on or in crosswalk                                    50.00
F. Park between safety zones                                  50.00
G. Park beside/opposite excavation (obstructing traffic)      50.00
H. Park where prohibited by sign                              50.00
I. Park in front of driveway                                  50.00
J. Park within 5 feet of curb radius/driveway/intersection    50.00
K. Park within 15 feet of fire hydrant                        50.00
L. Park within 20 feet of crosswalk                           50.00
M. Park within 30 feet of traffic control sign/signal         50.00
N. Park within 20 feet of fire station driveway               50.00
O. Park within 25 feet opposite side of fire station driveway 50.00
P. Park more than 12 inches from curb road edge               50.00
Q. Park on wrong side of roadway                              50.00
 
(Ord. 766, 8-1-2002; amd. Ord. 990, 1-19-2021)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 7, chapter 2 of this code for parking regulations.
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this city code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS AND DOCUMENTS
SECTION:
1-5-1: City Classification
1-5-2: City Seal
1-5-3: Official Newspaper
1-5-4: Deeds Of Conveyance; Execution
1-5-5: Discrimination Prohibited
1-5-1: CITY CLASSIFICATION:
The city adopts the classification of noncharter code city operating under the
mayor-council plan of government as set forth in Revised Code of Washington
chapter 35A.12, endowed with all the applicable rights, powers, privileges,
duties and obligations of noncharter code cities as set forth in Revised Code
of Washington chapter 35A.12 as the same now exists; including, but not by way
of limitation, those set forth in Revised Code of Washington chapter 35A.11;
and further including any and all supplements, amendments or other
modifications of Revised Code of Washington title 35A which may hereafter be
enacted. (1988 Code § 1.08.010)
1-5-2: CITY SEAL:
   A.   Custody: There shall be a common seal for the city, and it shall be
kept in the custody of the city clerk-treasurer. (1988 Code § 1.20.010)
   B.   Design: The seal of the city shall be circular in form, of ordinary
size and shall represent by its impression the words "Corporate Seal, 1922"
surrounded by scrollwork on the outside of which, and between the scroll work
and the outer edge of the seal, which shall be milled, shall be the words "Long
Beach, Pacific County, Washington". (1988 Code § 1.20.020)
1-5-3: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The "Chinook Observer", a weekly newspaper, published in the city, is named and
designated as the official newspaper of and for the city as its official
newspaper for such publications as are necessary and all matters necessary for
publication or notice. (1988 Code § 1.16.010)
1-5-4: DEEDS OF CONVEYANCE; EXECUTION:
All deeds of conveyance of real property by the city, and all other sealed
instruments, shall be executed by the mayor and city clerk-treasurer, and may
be delivered by either of them; provided, that such deeds or other sealed
instruments shall be executed and delivered only upon resolution of the city
council directing such execution and delivery. (1988 Code § 2.36.020)
1-5-5: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
The city shall not discriminate in the granting of licenses, hiring of
employees, issuance of contracts, or in any other matter or manner relating to
municipal business, against any person on account of age, sex, marital status,
race, creed, color, national origin, or the presence of any sensory, mental, or
physical disability or the use of a trained dog guide or service animal by a
disabled person, unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification;
provided, that the prohibition against discrimination because of such
disability shall not apply if the particular disability prevents the proper
performance of the particular worker involved. (1988 Code § 2.36.010; amd. 2007
Code)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election And Terms Of Office
1-6-2: Council Meetings
1-6-3: Mayor, Duties And Authority
1-6-4: Salaries
1-6-1: ELECTION AND TERMS OF OFFICE:
   A.   Election: Officers shall be elected at biennial municipal elections to
be conducted as provided in Revised Code Of Washington chapter 35A.29. The
mayor and the council members shall be elected for four (4) year terms of
office and until their successors are elected and qualified and assume office.
The requisite number of council members shall be elected biennially as the
terms of their predecessors expire and shall serve for terms of four (4) years.
The positions to be filled on the city council shall be designated by
consecutive numbers and shall be dealt with as separate offices for all
election purposes. Election to positions on the council shall be by majority
vote from the city at large.
   B.   Qualifying For Office: The mayor and council members shall qualify by
taking an oath or affirmation of office and as may be provided by law, or
ordinance. (2007 Code)
1-6-2: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings 1 : The city council shall meet on the first and third
Thursday of each calendar month, with the meetings to commence at the hour of
three o'clock (3:00) P.M. Should the meeting date fall on a holiday, the
meeting shall take place on the following Friday.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any
three (3) members of the council by written notice delivered to each member of
the council, the city clerk-treasurer and the city administrator at least
twenty four (24) hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting.
   C.   Open Meetings: All council meetings shall be open to the public except
as permitted by Revised Code Of Washington chapter 42.30. No ordinance or
resolution shall be passed, or contract let or entered into, or bill for the
payment of money allowed at any meeting not open to the public, nor at any
public meeting the date of which is not fixed by ordinance, resolution, or
rule, unless public notice of such meeting has been given by such notice to
each local newspaper of general circulation, as provided in Revised Code Of
Washington 42.30.080 as now or hereafter amended.  (2007 Code; amd. Ord. 913,
8-3-2015; Ord. 1047, 9-15-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 35A.13.170, 42.30.080.
1-6-3: MAYOR, DUTIES AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   Executive And Administrative Officer: The mayor shall be the chief
executive and administrative officer of the city, in charge of all departments
and employees, with authority to designate assistants and department heads.
   B.   General Duties And Authority:
      1.   The mayor may appoint and remove a chief administrative officer or
assistant administrative officer, if so provided by ordinance.
      2.   He shall see that all laws and ordinances are faithfully enforced
and that law and order is maintained in the city, and shall have general
supervision of the administration of city government and all city interests.
      3.   All official bonds and bonds of contractors with the city shall be
submitted to the mayor or such person as he may designate for approval or
disapproval.
      4.   He shall see that all contracts and agreements made with the city or
for its use and benefit are faithfully kept and performed, and to this end he
may cause any legal proceedings to be instituted and prosecuted in the name of
the city, subject to approval by majority vote of all members of the council.
      5.   The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the City Council, when
present, but shall have a vote only in the case of a tie in the votes of the
Council members with respect to matters other than the passage of any
ordinance, grant, or revocation of franchise or license, or any resolution for
the payment of money.
      6.   He shall report to the Council concerning the affairs of the City
and its financial and other needs, and shall make recommendations for Council
consideration and action.
      7.   He shall prepare and submit to the Council a proposed budget, as
required by Revised Code of Washington chapter 35A.33.
      8.   The Mayor shall have the power to veto ordinances passed by the
Council and submitted to him as provided in Revised Code of Washington
35A.12.130, but such veto may be overridden by the vote of a majority of all
Council members, plus one more vote.
      9.   The Mayor shall be the official and ceremonial head of the City and
shall represent the City on ceremonial occasions; except that, when illness or
other duties prevent the Mayor's attendance at an official function and no
Mayor Pro Tempore has been appointed by the Council, a member of the Council or
some other suitable person may be designated by the Mayor to represent the City
on such occasion. (2007 Code)
1-6-4: SALARIES:
The salary of the Mayor shall be seven hundred dollars ($700.00) per month, and
the salary of each Council member shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) per
month. The Mayor and Council may refuse compensation at any time if they
provide written notice to the City Treasurer. The refusal shall be in effect
through December 31st of the year specified in the notice. (Ord. 961, 10-15-
2018; amd. Ord. 995, 6-28-2021)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Employee Retirement System
1-7-1: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
   A.   Participation In Retirement System: The city authorizes and approves
the membership and participation of its eligible employees in the public
employees' retirement system pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 41.40.062,
and authorizing the expenditures of the necessary funds to cover its
proportionate share for participation in the system. (1988 Code § 2.44.010;
amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Commencement: Participation membership in the public employees'
retirement system shall commence January 1, 1968. (1988 Code § 2.44.020)
CHAPTER 8
HEARING EXAMINER 1
SECTION:
1-8-1: Position Established; Appointment
1-8-2: Duties
1-8-3: Appeal
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  11-2A-3 of this code.
1-8-1: POSITION ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
As authorized by Revised Code Of Washington 35A.63.170, the position of hearing
examiner is hereby established for the city. The hearing examiner will be
selected by the mayor and the contract ratified by the city council. The mayor
may select multiple hearing examiners to serve concurrently. (Ord. 793, 2-16-
2005)
1-8-2: DUTIES:
The duties of the hearing examiner will be as follows:
   A.   The hearing examiner shall conduct land use hearings for those actions
identified in the zoning regulations including, but not limited to: variances,
conditional use permits, rezones, shoreline substantial development permits,
and long plats.
   B.   The hearing examiner shall perform other duties as established by the
city council, including conducting appeals related to the summary abatement of
unfit or dangerous buildings.
   C.   The hearing examiner may establish rules of procedure for the hearing
and will make the final decision consistent with applicable city, state, and
federal land use laws and other applicable provisions.
   D.   The hearing examiner will prepare written findings of fact and
conclusions of law to support the decision. The written decision, supported by
findings of fact and conclusions of law, will be mailed to the applicant and
filed with the city within ten (10) working days from the date of the hearing,
unless a different time frame is explicitly stated elsewhere in this code.
(Ord. 927, 3-7-2016)
1-8-3: APPEAL:
Any party of record aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner shall
have the right to appeal the decision to the Pacific County superior court. The
appeal shall be in writing and delivered to city hall within twenty one (21)
calendar days of the hearing examiner's decision, unless a different time frame
is explicitly stated elsewhere in this code. No new evidence will be accepted
by the superior court. The appeal is limited to the record presented to the
hearing examiner. (Ord. 927, 3-7-2016)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Court Established
1-9-1: COURT ESTABLISHED:
There is established, effective January 1, 1986, the municipal court of the
city. The court shall have jurisdiction and shall exercise all powers vested in
the municipal court system by the legislature of the state of Washington,
together with such powers and jurisdiction as are generally conferred upon such
courts in the state of Washington either by common law or express statute 1 .
(1988 Code § 2.16.010)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 3.50.
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC RECORDS ACT RULES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Authority, Purpose And Findings
1-10-2: Public Records Index Order
1-10-3: Purpose
1-10-4: Public Records Officer
1-10-5: Processing Of Public Records Requests
1-10-6: Processing Of Public Records Requests - Electronic Records
1-10-7: Public Records Requests
1-10-8: Availability Of Public Records
1-10-9: Costs Of Providing Copies Of Public Records
1-10-10: Review Of Denials Of Public Records Requests
1-10-11: Exemptions Provided By Other Statutes
1-10-1: AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
   A.   Authority: Section 42.56.070(1) of the Revised Code of Washington (RCW)
requires the city to make available for inspection and copying nonexempt public
records in accordance with published rules. The Public Records Act ("the Act")
under RCW 42.56.010 defines "public record" to include any "writing containing
information relating to the conduct of government or the performance of any
governmental or proprietary function prepared, owned, used, or retained by any
state or local agency regardless of physical form or characteristics."
   B.   Purpose Of Rules: The purpose of these Rules is to establish the
procedures the City of Long Beach ("the City") will follow in order to provide
full access to public records, fullest assistance to inquirers and the
timeliest possible action as required by RCW 42.56.100, mindful of the further
requirement that the Rules must also protect the records from damage or
disorganization and prevent excessive interference with other essential
functions of the City.
   These Rules provide information to persons wishing to request access to
public records of the City and establish processes for both requestors and City
staff that are designed to best assist members of the public in obtaining such
access.
   C.   Findings Regarding Index:
      1.   RCW 42.56.070(1) requires all cities and public agencies to maintain
and make available a current index of various public records. RCW 42.56.070(4)
provides that if maintaining such an index would be unduly burdensome, a city
need not maintain such an index but it must issue and publish a formal order
specifying the reasons why and the extent to which compliance would be unduly
burdensome.
      2.   The City of Long Beach is comprised of many departments which
maintain separate databases and/or record keeping systems. The City produces or
receives many records each day. The records are diverse, complex and stored in
multiple locations and multiple computer systems and databases. It would be
extremely difficult, unduly burdensome, and would interfere with City
operations to compile and maintain a central index of records.
      3.   The development and maintenance of a city index would be extremely
costly and would provide little benefit to the public compared to the expense
in maintaining the index. The City's operations do not allow for the addition,
revision, or reassignment of duties of existing personnel so that an index may
be developed and maintained. Anticipated city revenues do not allow for
additional staff for the purpose of creating and maintaining such an index.
(Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-2: PUBLIC RECORDS INDEX ORDER:
Pursuant to RCW 42.56.070(4), the City Council orders the following:
   A.   The City of Long Beach is not required to maintain a current index of
public records due to findings of the City Council that the requirement to do
so is unduly burdensome and would interfere with City operations and such a
list is nearly impossible to create and/or maintain; and
   B.   Pursuant to RCW 42.56, the City of Long Beach shall disclose all public
records and any indexes of public records maintained by the City to the extent
not exempt from disclosure pursuant to RCW Chapter 42.56 or other applicable
laws. (Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedure for obtaining public
records from the City of Long Beach as required by RCW 42.56 as currently
enacted or hereafter amended. (Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-4: PUBLIC RECORDS OFFICER:
Any person wishing to request access to public records of the City, or seeking
assistance in making such a request, should follow the procedures set forth in
these Rules and contact the Public Records Officer (the "PRO") of the City to
submit such a request or to obtain assistance in making such a request:
   Clerk
   City of Long Beach
   115 Bolstad Ave W
   PO Box 310
   Long Beach, WA 98631
   Phone (360) 642-4421
   Fax (360) 642-8841
The PRO shall complete training as required by RCW 42.56.152 on the Public
Records Act (chapter 42.56 RCW) and records retention (chapter 40.14 RCW). This
training is required after the PRO assumes responsibilities and under the
schedule in RCW 42.56.152 for refresher courses. (Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-5: PROCESSING OF PUBLIC RECORDS REQUESTS:
   A.   Providing "Fullest Assistance:" Mindful of the requirements of RCW
42.56.100, to the extent reasonably possible, the PRO will process requests in
the order allowing the most requests to be processed in the most efficient
manner. In an effort to better understand the request and provide all
responsive records, the PRO can inquire about the purpose for the request, but
the requestor is not required to answer except to establish whether inspection
and copying would violate RCW 42.56.070(9) (see subsection E below) or other
statute which exempts or prohibits production of specific information or
records to certain persons.
   B.   Acknowledging Receipt Of Request: Within five (5) business days of
receipt of the request, not including the day the request was received, the
weekend or holiday as provided by RCW 1.12.040, the PRO will do one or more of
the following:
      1.   Make the records available for inspection or copying;
      2.   If copies are requested and payment or payment of a deposit is made
as provided in section
1-10-7 below, or terms of payment are agreed upon, send the copies to the
requestor;
      3.   Provide a reasonable estimate of any additional time needed to
respond to the request and a date by which the records will be produced in
whole or in part depending on whether the records are being provided in
installments. The factors used to estimate the additional time needed must be
based upon objective criteria. Additional time is allowed under the following
circumstances:
         a.   To request clarification from the requestor if the request is
unclear or does not sufficiently identify the requested records. Such
clarification may be requested and provided by telephone. If the clarification
is made by telephone, the PRO will confirm the scope of the clarification in
writing. The confirmation will be deemed the correct statement of the scope of
the request unless the requestor responds with a supplemental request;
         b.   To locate and assemble the information requested;
         c.   To notify third persons or agencies in the event the requested
records contain information that may affect rights of others and may be exempt
from production; or
         d.   To determine whether any of the information requested is exempt
from production and that a denial should be made as to all or part of the
request; or
      4.   Deny or redact the request, specifying the reasons for denial or
redaction, including supporting legal citations.
   C.   Failure To Respond:
      1.   By The PRO: If the PRO does not respond in writing within five
business days of receipt of the request for disclosure, the requestor should
consider contacting the PRO to determine the reason for the failure to respond.
      2.   By The Requestor: If the requestor fails to respond to an agency
request to clarify the request, and the entire record is unclear, the City need
not respond to it. Otherwise, the City must respond to those portions of the
request that are clear.
   D.   Injunction: Pursuant to RCW 42.56.565, the City may seek to enjoin the
inspection or copying of any nonexempt public record by persons serving
criminal sentences in state, local, or privately operated correctional
facilities.
   E.   Records Exempt From Production: Some records are exempt from
production, in whole or in part. If a record is exempt from production and
subject to denial, the PRO will state the specific exemption and provide a
brief explanation of the denial and how the exemption applies to the record
being withheld. This explanation should be sufficient to enable the requestor
to make a threshold determination of whether the claimed exemption and denial
is proper. If only a portion of a record is exempt from production, but the
remainder is not exempt, the PRO will redact the exempt portions, produce the
nonexempt portions, and indicate to the requestor why portions of the record
are being redacted. (For the purposes of these Rules, redact means the exempt
information will be covered in some manner and then the record will be
photocopied and the photocopy then disclosed.)
   Some records by law require third party notification or consent. The PRO
will notify the requestor of the notification or consent requirement and add
sufficient time to the estimated response time.
   The City is also prohibited by statute from producing lists of individuals
for commercial purposes. Therefore, if a request is received for any type of
list of individuals, an inquiry as to whether the requestor intends to use the
list for commercial purposes must be answered before the list can be provided.
If the answer is that it will be used for such purposes, the list cannot be
produced.
   F.   Inspection Of Records:
      1.   Consistent with other demands, the City shall promptly provide space
to inspect public records. No member of the public may remove a document from
the viewing area or disassemble or alter any document. The requestor shall
indicate which documents he or she wishes the City to copy or scan, if any, and
provide payment for those copies or scans.
      2.   The requestor must claim or review the assembled records within
thirty (30) days of the PRO'S notification to him or her that the records are
available for inspection or copying/scanning. The PRO will notify the
requestor, in writing, of this requirement and inform the requestor that he or
she should contact the PRO to make arrangements to claim or review the records.
If the requestor or a representative of the requestor fails to claim or review
the records within the thirty (30) day period or make other arrangements, the
PRO may close the request and re-file the assembled records. Other public
records requests can be processed ahead of a subsequent request by the same
person for the same or almost identical records, which can be processed as a
new request.
   G.   Providing Records In Installments: When the request is for a large
number of records, the PRO may provide access for inspection and copying in
installments, if he or she reasonably determines that it would be practical to
provide the records in that manner. If, within thirty (30) days, the requestor
fails to inspect the entire set of records or one or more of the installments,
the PRO may stop searching for the remaining records and close the request.
   H.   Closing Withdrawn Or Abandoned Request: When the requestor either
withdraws the request or fails to fulfill his or her obligations to inspect the
records or pay the deposit or final payment for the requested copies, the PRO
will close the request and so inform the requestor.
   I.   Later Discovered Documents: If, after the PRO has informed the
requestor that he or she has provided all available records, the PRO becomes
aware of additional responsive documents existing at the time of the request
that had not been provided previously, he or she will promptly inform the
requestor of the additional documents and provide them on an expedited basis.
   J.   Requests For Information Or Nonexistent Records: Requests for
information are not public records requests. An agency is not required to
conduct legal research for a requestor. An agency is not required to create
records to respond to a request. (Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-6: PROCESSING OF PUBLIC RECORDS REQUESTS - ELECTRONIC RECORDS:
   A.   Requesting Electronic Records: The process for requesting electronic
public records is the same as for requesting paper public records.
   B.   Providing Electronic Records: If public records are requested in an
electronic format, the PRO will provide the nonexempt records or portions of
such records that are reasonably locatable in an electronic format that is used
by the agency and is generally commercially available, or in a format that is
reasonably translatable from the format in which the agency keeps the record.
Costs for providing electronic records are governed by PRA Rule 070 below.
   C.   Retaining Electronic Copies: Because an electronic record is usually
more susceptible to manipulation and alteration than a paper record, the City
will keep, when feasible, an electronic copy of the electronic records it
provides to a requestor to be able to show the exact records it provided if
necessary. (Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-7: PUBLIC RECORDS REQUESTS:
   A.   Any person wishing to inspect or copy public records of the City should
make the request in writing on the City's request form attached as Exhibit A,
or by letter, fax, or email addressed to the PRO and including the following
information:
   Name of requestor; address of requestor; other contact information,
including telephone number and any e-mail address; identification of the public
records adequate for the PRO to locate the records; and the date and time of
day of the request.
   B.   A public record request must be for identifiable records. A request for
all or substantially all records prepared, owned, used, or retained by an
agency is not a valid request for identifiable records, provided that a request
for all records regarding a particular topic or containing a particular keyword
or name shall not be considered a request for all of the City's records.
   C.   If the requestor wishes to have copies or scans of the records made
instead of simply inspecting them, he or she should so indicate and make
arrangements with the PRO to pay for copies or scans of the records as provided
in
1-10-9 below.
   D.   A form is available for use by requestors at the office of the PRO and
on-line at www.longbeachwa.gov.
   E.   Public records requests are public records and subject to inspection or
copying.
   F.   The PRO shall accept requests for public records that contain the above
information by telephone or in person. The PRO will confirm receipt of the
information and the substance of the request in writing. The confirmation will
be deemed the correct statement of the scope of the request unless the
requestor responds with a different statement of the scope.
   G.   Records requests may only include existing records. They cannot be used
to obtain copies of records not yet in existence.
   H.   The City may deny a bot request that is one of multiple requests from
the requestor to the agency within a twenty-four (24) hour period, if the City
establishes that responding to the multiple requests would cause excessive
interference with other essential functions of the City. A "bot" request means
a request for public records that the City reasonably believes was
automatically generated by a computer program or script. (Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-8: AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC RECORDS:
   A.   Availability: Public records are available for inspection and copying
during normal business hours of the City, Monday through Friday, eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., excluding legal holidays. Inspection
of records shall occur at the central offices of the City unless another
location is approved by the PRO or designee.
   B.   Organization Of Records: The City will maintain its records in a
reasonably organized manner. While committed to fully comply with the Act and
these Rules, the City must also take reasonable actions to protect records from
damage and disorganization and prevent excessive interference with other
essential functions of the City. A requestor shall not take City records from
City offices. A variety of records are available on the City's web site at
www.longbeachwa.gov. Requestors are encouraged to view the documents available
on the web site prior to submitting a records request. (Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-9: COSTS OF PROVIDING COPIES OF PUBLIC RECORDS:
   A.   No fee will be charged for the inspection of public records or locating
public records and making them available for copying, except as described in
RCW 52.56.120(3).
   B.   The City shall charge the following costs for providing copies of
public records:
      1.   Fifteen cents ($0.15) per page for photocopies of public records,
printed copies of electronic public records when requested by the person
requesting records, or for the use of City equipment to photocopy public
records;
      2.   Ten cents ($0.10) per page for public records scanned into an
electronic format or for the use of agency equipment to scan the records;
      3.   Five cents ($0.05) per each four (4) electronic files or attachment
uploaded to e-mail, cloud-based data storage service or other means of
electronic delivery;
      4.   Ten cents ($0.10) per gigabyte for the transmission of public
records in an electronic format or for the use of agency equipment to send the
records electronically. The City shall take reasonable steps to provide the
records in the most efficient manner available to the agency in its normal
operations;
      5.   The actual cost of any digital storage media or device provided by
the City, the actual cost of any container or envelope used to mail the copies
to the requestor, and the actual postage or delivery charge.
      6.   Sixty-seven cents ($0.67) per minute of staff time for redaction of
any law enforcement requested body-worn camera footage. These charges are based
on the average per-minute salaries of the city employees responsible for video
redaction. See RCW 42.56.240 (14)(f)(1).
   C.   The charges in subsection B of this section may be combined to the
extent that more than one type of charge applies to copies produced in response
to a particular request.
   D.   The City may charge a flat fee of up to two dollars ($2.00) for any
request as an alternative to fees authorized under subsection B of this section
when the City reasonably estimates and documents that the costs allowed under
this subsection are clearly equal to or more than two dollars ($2.00). An
additional flat fee shall not be charged for any installment after the first
installment of a request produced in installments. If the City has elected to
charge the flat fee in this subsection for an initial installment, it may not
charge the fees authorized in subsection B2 on subsequent installments.
   E.   The City shall not impose copying charges under this section for access
to or downloading of records that the City routinely posts on its Website prior
to receipt of a request, unless the requestor has specifically requested that
the City provide copies of such records through other means.
   F.   A requestor may ask the City to provide, and if requested, the City
shall provide a summary of the applicable charge before any copies are made and
the requestor may revise the request to reduce the number of copies to be made
and reduce the applicable charges.
   G.   The City may include a customized service charge, as allowed by RCW
42.56.120(3).
   H.   The City may require a deposit in an amount not to exceed ten percent
of the estimated cost of providing copies for a request. If the City makes a
request available on a partial or installment basis, the City may charge for
each part of the request as it is provided. If an installment of a records
request is not claimed or reviewed, the City is not obligated to fulfill the
balance of the request. The City may waive any charge assessed for a request
pursuant to City rules and regulations. The City may enter into any contract,
memorandum of understanding or other agreement with a requestor that provides
an alternative fee arrangement to the charges authorized in this section, or in
response to a voluminous or frequently occurring request.
   H.   The PRO will not charge sales tax when it makes copies or scans of
public records but if the records are sent to a third party for copying/
scanning, that third party may charge sales tax and the requestor will be
responsible for payment of that tax as well as the third party's actual charges
for copies or scans.
   I.   Payment: Payment may be made by cash, check, or money order made
payable to the City.
   J.   Other Copying Charges: The Act generally governs copying charges for
public records, but several specific statutes govern charges for particular
kinds of records. The following non-exhaustive list provides some examples: RCW
46.52.085 (charges for traffic accident reports); RCW 10.97.100 (copies of
criminal histories) and RCW 70.58.107 (charges for birth certificates). The
City will charge the amount authorized pursuant to these other statutes rather
than as provided under the Act.
   K.   Use Of Outside Vendor: An agency is not required to copy/scan records
at its own facilities. An agency can send the project to a commercial copying/
scanning center and bill the requestor for the amount charged by the vendor. An
agency can arrange with the requestor to pay the vendor directly. An agency
cannot charge the default per page copying/scanning charge when its cost at a
vendor is less. (Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-10: REVIEW OF DENIALS OF PUBLIC RECORDS REQUESTS:
   A.   Internal Administrative Review Of Denial Of Access: If the City makes a
denial or partial denial of a records request, the City shall immediately
conduct an internal review of that decision. The denial or partial denial shall
be immediately sent to the City Attorney, who shall consult with the City
Administrator on the decision.
   B.   Consideration Of Petition For Review: The denial or partial denial
shall be deemed complete at the end of the second business day following the
denial or partial denial of inspection, and shall constitute final agency
action.
   C.   Judicial Review: Any person may obtain court review of: (1) the City's
denials or partial denial of public records requests; or the reasonableness of
the estimate of the amount of time provided by the City; or the reasonableness
of the City's estimate of the charges to produce copies of public records, as
provided in RCW 42.56.550. (Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
1-10-11: EXEMPTIONS PROVIDED BY OTHER STATUTES:
   A.   Exemptions. RCW 42.56.070(2) requires the city to set forth "for
informational purposes" every law, in addition to the Act, that exempts or
prohibits the production of public records. Requestors should be aware of the
following exemptions, outside the Act, that may restrict the availability of
some records held by the City for inspection and copying/scanning:
RCW 2.64.111                  Documents regarding discipline/retirement of
                              judges
RCW 2.64.113                  Confidentiality - violations
RCW 4.24.550                  Information on sex offenders
RCW 5.60.060                  Privileged communications
RCW 5.60.070                  Court-ordered mediation records
RCW 7.68.140                  Victims' compensation claims
RCW 7.69A.030(4)              Child victims and witnesses - protection of
                              identity
RCW 7.69A.050                 Rights of child victims and witnesses - addresses
RCW 7.75.050                  Records of Dispute Resolution Centers
RCW 9.02.100                  Reproductive privacy
RCW 9A.82.170                 Financial institution records - wrongful
                              disclosure
RCW 9.51.050                  Disclosing transaction of grand jury
RCW 9.51.060                  Disclosure of grand jury deposition
RCW 9.73.090(1)(c)            Prohibition regarding specified emergency
                              response personnel recordings
RCW 10.27.090                 Grand jury testimony/evidence
RCW 10.27.160                 Grand jury reports - release to public only by
                              judicial order
RCW 10.29.030                 Organized crime special inquiry judge
RCW 10.29.090                 Records of special inquiry judge proceedings
RCW 10.52.100                 Records identifying child victim of sexual
                              assault
RCW 10.77.210                 Records of persons committed for criminal
                              insanity
RCW 10.97.040                 Criminal history information released must
                              include disposition
Disclosure of identity of suspect to victim
RCW 10.97.080                 Inspection of criminal record by subject
RCW 13.32A.090                Crisis residential centers notice to parent about
                              child
RCW 13.34.115                 Court dependency proceedings
RCW 13.40.217                 Juveniles adjudicated of sex offenses - release
                              of information
RCW 13.50.010                 Maintenance of and access to juvenile records
RCW 13.50.050                 Juvenile offenders
RCW 13.50.100                 Juvenile/children records not relating to
                              offenses
RCW 13.60.020                 Missing children information
RCW 13.70.090                 Citizen juvenile review board - confidentiality
RCW 18.04.405                 Confidentiality of information gained by CPA
RCW 18.19.060                 Notification to clients by counselors
RCW 18.19.180                 Confidential communications with counselors
RCW 19.215.020                Destruction of personal health and financial
                              information
RCW 19.34.240(3)              Private digital signature keys
RCW 19.215.030                Compliance with federal rules
RCW 26.04.175                 Name and address of domestic violence victim in
                              marriage records
RCW 26.12.170                 Reports of child abuse/neglect with courts
RCW 26.23.050                 Child support orders
RCW 26.23.120                 Child support records
RCW 26.26.041                 Uniform Parentage Act - protection of
                              participants
RCW 26.26.450                 Confidentiality of genetic testing
RCW 26.33.330                 Sealed court adoption records
RCW 26.33.340                 Agency adoption records
RCW 26.33.343                 Access to adoption records by confidential
                              intermediary
RCW 26.33.345                 Release of name of court for adoption or
                              relinquishment
RCW 26.33.380                 Adoption - identity of birth parents confidential
RCW 26.44.010                 Privacy of reports on child abuse and neglect
RCW 26.44.020(19)             Unfounded allegations of child abuse or neglect
RCW 26.44.030                 Reports of child abuse/neglect
RCW 26.44.125                 Right to review and amend abuse finding -
                              confidentiality
RCW 27.53.070                 Records identifying the location of
                              archaeological sites
RCW 29A.08.720                Voter registration records - place of
                              registration confidential
RCW 29A.08.710                Voter registration records - certain information
                              exempt
RCW 35.102.145                Municipal business and occupation tax -
                              Confidentiality, privilege, and disclosure
Chapter 40.14 RCW             Preservation and destruction of public records
RCW 42.23.070(4)              Municipal officer disclosure of confidential
                              information prohibited
RCW 42.41.030(7)              Identity of local government whistleblower
RCW 42.41.045                 Non-disclosure of protected information
                              (whistleblower)
RCW 46.52.080                 Traffic accident reports - confidentiality
RCW 46.52.083                 Traffic accident reports - available to
                              interested parties
RCW 46.52.120                 Traffic crimes and infractions - confidential use
                              by police and courts
RCW 46.52.130(2)              Abstract of driving record
RCW 48.62.101                 Local government insurance transactions - access
                              to information
RCW 50.13.060                 Access to employment security records by local
                              government agencies
RCW 50.13.100                 Disclosure of non-identifiable information or
                              with consent
RCW 51.28.070                 Worker's compensation records
RCW 51.36.060                 Physician information on injured workers
RCW 60.70.040                 No duty to disclose record of common law lien
RCW 68.50.105                 Autopsy reports
RCW 68.50.320                 Dental identification records - available to law
                              enforcement agencies
Chapter 70.02 RCW             Medical records - access and disclosure - entire
                              chapter (HC providers)
RCW 70.05.170                 Child mortality reviews by local health
                              departments
                              Public health agency information regarding
RCW 70.24.022                 sexually transmitted disease investigations -
                              confidential
RCW 70.24.024                 Transcripts and records of hearings regarding
                              sexually transmitted diseases
RCW 70.24.105                 HIV/STD records
RCW 70.28.020                 Local health department TB records - confidential
RCW 70.41.200                 Hospital quality improvement committee records
                              and accreditation reports
RCW 70.48.100                 Jail records and booking photos
RCW 70.58.055                 Birth certificates - certain information
                              confidential
RCW 70.58.104                 Vital records, research confidentiality
                              safeguards
RCW 70.94.205                 Washington Clean Air Act - confidentiality of
                              data.
RCW 70.96A.150                Alcohol and drug abuse treatment programs
RCW 70.123.075                Client records of domestic violence programs
RCW 70.125.065                Records of rape crisis centers in discovery
RCW 71.05.390                 Information about mental health consumers
RCW 71.05.395                 Chapter 70.02 RCW applies to mental health
                              records
RCW 71.05.400                 Information to next of kin or representative
RCW 71.05.425                 Notice of release or transfer of committed person
                              after offense dismissal
RCW 71.05.427                 Information that can be released
RCW 71.05.430                 Statistical data
RCW 71.05.440                 Penalties for unauthorized release of information
RCW 71.05.445                 Release of mental health information to Dept. of
                              Corrections
RCW 71.05.620                 Authorization requirements and access to court
                              records
RCW 71.05.630                 Release of mental health treatment records
RCW 71.05.640                 Access to treatment records
RCW 71.05.650                 Accounting of disclosures
                              Mental health information system - state, county
RCW 71.24.035(5)(g)           and regional support networks - confidentiality
                              of client records
RCW 71.34.200                 Mental health treatment of minors - records
                              confidential
RCW 71.34.210                 Court records for minors related to mental health
                              treatment
RCW 71.34.225                 Release of mental health services information
RCW 71A.14.070                Records regarding developmental disability -
                              confidentiality
RCW 72.09.345                 Notice to public about sex offenders
RCW 72.09.585(3)              Disclosure of inmate records to local agencies -
                              confidentiality
RCW 73.04.030                 Veterans discharge papers exemption (see related
                              RCW 42.56.440)
RCW 74.04.060                 Applicants and recipients of public assistance
RCW 74.04.520                 Food stamp program confidentiality
RCW 74.09.900                 Medical assistance
RCW 74.13.121                 Financial information of adoptive parents
RCW 74.13.280                 Children in out-of-home placements -
                              confidentiality
RCW 74.20.280                 Child support enforcement - local agency
                              cooperation, information
RCW 74.34.095                 Abuse of vulnerable adults - confidentiality of
                              investigations and reports
RCW 82.32.330                 Disclosure of tax information
RCW 84.36.389                 Confidential income data in property tax records
                              held by assessor
RCW 84.40.020                 Confidential income data supplied to assessor
                              regarding real property
Selected Federal Confidentiality Statutes and Rules
18 USC 2721 - 2725            Driver and License Plate Information
20 USC 1232g                  Family Education Rights and Privacy Act
23 USC 409                    Evidence of certain accident reports
42 USC 290dd-2                Confidentiality of Substance Abuse Records
42 USC 405(c)(2)(C)(viii) (I) Limits on Use and Disclosure of Social Security
                              Numbers.
42 USC 654(26)                State Plans for Child Support
42 USC 671(a)(8)              State Plans for Foster Care and Adoption
                              Assistance
42 USC 1396a(7)               State Plans for Medical Assistance
7 CFR 272.1(c)                Food Stamp Applicants and Recipients
34 CFR 361.38                 State Vocational Rehabilitation Services Programs
42 CFR Part 2 (2.1 - 2.67)    Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient
                              Records
42 CFR 431.300 - 307          Safeguarding Information on Applicants and
                              Recipients of Medical Assistance
42 CFR 483.420                Client Protections for Intermediate Care
                              Facilities for the Mentally Retarded
42 CFR 5106a(b)(2)(A)         Grants to States for Child Abuse and Neglect
                              Prevention and Treatment Programs
45 CFR 160-164                HIPAA Privacy Rule
                              USCG regulations regarding confidentiality of
46 CFR 40.321                 drug and alcohol test results done by marine
                              employers
 
(Ord. 1019, 6-5-2023)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
JOINT PACIFIC COUNTY HOUSING AUTHORITY
SECTION:
2-1-1: Finding Of Necessity
2-1-2: Authority
2-1-3: Deactivation Of Prior Housing Authority
2-1-4: Joint Authority Administration
2-1-1: FINDING OF NECESSITY:
The city council finds that:
   A.   There are unsanitary and unsafe inhabited dwellings located within the
corporate limits of the city and overall Pacific County;
   B.   There is a shortage of safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations
available at rents affordable to persons of low to moderate income and to
senior citizens throughout Pacific County;
   C.   Unsafe and unsanitary dwelling accommodations pose a threat to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and Pacific County;
   D.   Pacific County and the cities of Ilwaco, Long Beach, Raymond, and South
Bend do not independently possess sufficient resources to rehabilitate unsafe
and unsanitary dwelling accommodations; and
   E.   Participation in the joint Pacific County housing authority would
promote the rehabilitation of unsafe and unsanitary housing, and promote
efficiency and cooperation between Pacific County and within the cities of
Ilwaco, Long Beach, Raymond, and South Bend. (Ord. 801, 7-6-2005, eff. 7-6-
2005)
2-1-2: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Establishment Of Authority: The city hereby approves the formation by
Pacific County of a joint city-county housing authority between Pacific County,
the city, and any of the following cities that also approve of the formation:
Ilwaco, Raymond, and South Bend.
   B.   Name Of Authority: The joint authority shall be the "joint Pacific
County housing authority" (hereinafter "joint authority").
   C.   Jurisdiction Of Authority: The joint authority shall possess those
powers and authorities as established under Revised Code of Washington
35.82.070, a nonprofit, separate, quasi-municipal corporation under the laws of
the state of Washington.
   D.   Financial Support Of Authority: The joint authority shall be self-
supporting. Neither Pacific County, nor the cities of Ilwaco, Long Beach,
Raymond or South Bend shall be liable for any current expenses, long term debt,
or contingent liability of the joint authority. (Ord. 801, 7-6-2005, eff. 7-6-
2005)
2-1-3: DEACTIVATION OF PRIOR HOUSING AUTHORITY:
   A.   Deactivation Of Pacific County Housing Authority: Upon activation of
the joint authority, the Pacific County housing authority as established by
Pacific County resolution 90-036 and the board to which members were appointed
by Pacific County resolution 90-040 shall be officially deactivated. The assets
of the Pacific County housing authority, including both real and personal
property, and funding sources shall be transferred to the joint authority. The
debts of the Pacific County housing authority shall be assumed by the joint
authority. Any debt or other liability of the Pacific County housing authority
which preexists the creation of the joint authority shall not be assumed by nor
assigned to Pacific County, the city of Ilwaco, the city of Long Beach, the
city of Raymond, or the city of South Bend.
   B.   Deactivation Authority: Upon deactivation of the joint authority,
assets shall be applied and distributed pursuant to Revised Code of Washington
35.82.325; provided, however, that the Pacific County housing authority, if
reactivated at the time of said deactivation, shall be entitled to the return
of all assets held by it prior to the formation of the joint authority, and the
Pacific County housing authority shall assume all debts encumbering and/or
associated with said assets. (Ord. 801, 7-6-2005, eff. 7-6-2005)
2-1-4: JOINT AUTHORITY ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Board Membership: The governing board of the joint authority shall
consist of five (5) regular members and one alternate member. Board members
shall serve for three (3) year terms, unless removed in accordance with this
section.
   B.   Board Appointment: One regular board member shall be appointed to the
governing board of the joint authority (hereinafter "joint board") by the mayor
of each participating city. The board of Pacific County commissioners shall
also appoint one regular board member to the joint board from the
unincorporated citizenry. In addition, the board of Pacific County
commissioners shall appoint one alternate board member from the county overall,
who, in the absence of any regular board member during a regular or special
meeting of the board, shall function as a regular board member.
   C.   Board Officers: The joint board shall schedule a yearly organizational
meeting, during which the calendar budget shall be adopted, and the office of
board chair and board secretary shall be elected by and from among the members
of the joint board.
   D.   Yearly Report: The joint board shall provide a yearly written report to
the mayors of the cities of Ilwaco, Long Beach, Raymond and South Bend, and to
the board of Pacific County commissioners. The yearly report shall include a
status report regarding projects and programs undertaken by the joint
authority, and a summary of the joint authority budget for the present calendar
year.
   E.   Removal Of Board Members: A board member may be removed at any time by
the appointing official(s) for cause.
   F.   Board Vacancies: Mid-term vacancies resulting from resignation, removal
or other cause shall be filled by the appointing official(s) for the length of
the remaining term.
   G.   Bylaws: The joint board may adopt, and from time to time amend, bylaws
and other rules of operation. (Ord. 801, 7-6-2005, eff. 7-6-2005)
TITLE 3
FINANCES AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Funds
3-1-2: Returned Checks; Charge Imposed
3-1-1: FUNDS:
   A.   Trust Fund: There is created a trust fund for the city in which shall
be deposited all revenue sharing funds received from the United States under
public law 95-512, and treasury department of the United States regulations
made pursuant to public law 95-512. (1988 Code § 3.36.010)
   B.   Claims Fund; Salary Fund: The city shall establish a claims fund and a
salary fund, which funds shall be used to receive and disburse monies for other
operating funds of the city.
      1.   Salary Fund: This is a fund into which monies may be placed from
time to time as directed by the legislative authority from any funds available
and upon which warrants may be drawn and cashed for the purpose of paying any
monies due city employees for salaries and wages. The accounts of the city
shall be so kept that they shall show the department or departments and amounts
to which the payment is properly chargeable.
      2.   Claims Fund: This is a fund into which may be paid monies from time
to time from any funds which are available and upon which warrants may be
issued and paid in payment of claims against the city for any purpose. The
accounts of the city shall be so kept that they shall show the department or
departments and the respective amounts for which the warrant is issued and
paid. (1988 Code § 3.36.020)
   C.   Petty Cash: Each cash register in city hall shall have one hundred
dollars ($100.00) initial starting cash; the cash register reserve shall have
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all registers for purpose of having proper
change on hand; and the petty cash reserve shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for
incidental expenditures. (Ord. 720, 6-1-1998; amd. Ord. 1037, 10-7-2024)
3-1-2: RETURNED CHECKS; CHARGE IMPOSED:
A charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) is imposed for any check, payable to the
city, returned by the bank for insufficient funds, closed account or other such
reason. (1988 Code § 3.40.010; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Contracting Of City Services
3-2-2: Small Works Roster
3-2-3: Expenditure Approval
3-2-1: CONTRACTING OF CITY SERVICES:
   A.   Review And Approval Required; Reimbursement: The city shall allow the
contracting out of city services after review and approval by the city council.
The city council shall review each individual project and determine if it is
suitable for city involvement. If the city council determines that a given
project is appropriate for city work forces to undertake, the city council
shall then establish to what extent the city shall be reimbursed for costs and
administrative overhead. It is specifically stipulated that the city council
may allow city services to be rendered on private property and/or for private
purposes. However, the cost for any city services rendered on private property
and/or private use shall be fully reimbursed to the city.
   B.   Payment In Advance: The city council may request that the estimated
cost of any city service be paid in advance of providing such service.
   C.   Time Of Providing Service: The city council, after consultation with
the city administrator, shall establish when services are to be provided. (1988
Code § 3.32.010)
3-2-2: SMALL WORKS ROSTER 1 :
   A.   Purpose And Intent: This section provides uniform small works roster
provisions to award contracts for construction, building, renovation,
remodeling, alteration, repair, or improvement of real property. These
provisions may be used in lieu of other procedures to award contracts for such
work with an estimated cost of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) or
less. The city may award contracts using the small works roster process under
this section using the limited public works process under subsection C of this
section.
   B.   Creating Rosters; Procedure For Awarding Contracts:
      1.   The city may create a single general small works roster, or may
create a small works roster for different specialties or categories of
anticipated work. Where applicable, small works rosters may make distinctions
between contractors based upon different geographic areas served by the
contractor. The small works roster or rosters shall consist of all responsible
contractors who have requested to be on the list and, where required by law,
are properly licensed or registered to perform such work in the state. The city
may require eligible contractors desiring to be placed on a roster or rosters
to keep current records of any applicable licenses, certifications,
registrations, bonding, insurance, or other appropriate matters on file with
the city as a condition of being placed on a roster or rosters. At least once a
year, the city shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the
city a notice of the existence of the roster or rosters and solicit the names
of contractors for such roster or rosters. In addition, responsible contractors
shall be added to an appropriate roster or rosters at any time they submit a
written request and necessary records. Master contracts may be required to be
signed that become effective when a specific award is made using a small works
roster.
      2.   The city shall secure telephone, written, or electronic quotations
from contractors on the appropriate small works roster to assure that a
competitive price is established and to award contracts to the lowest
responsible bidder, as defined in Revised Code of Washington 43.19.1911.
Invitations for quotations shall include an estimate of the scope and nature of
the work to be performed as well as materials and equipment to be furnished.
However, detailed plans and specifications need not be included in the
invitation. This subsection does not eliminate other requirements for
architectural or engineering approvals as to quality and compliance with
building codes. Quotations may be invited from all appropriate contractors on
the appropriate small works roster.
      3.   A contract awarded from a small works roster under this section need
not be advertised.
      4.   Immediately after an award is made, the bid quotations obtained
shall be recorded, open to public inspection, and available by telephone
inquiry.
   C.   Limited Public Works Process:
      1.   In lieu of awarding contracts under subsection B of this section,
the city may award a contract for work, construction, alteration, repair, or
improvement projects estimated to cost less than thirty five thousand dollars
($35,000.00) using the limited public works process provided under this
subsection. Public works projects awarded under this subsection are exempt from
the other requirements of the small works roster process provided under
subsection B of this section and are exempt from the requirement that contracts
be awarded after advertisement, as provided under Revised Code of Washington
39.04.010.
      2.   For limited public works projects, the city shall solicit electronic
or written quotations from a minimum of three (3) contractors from the
appropriate small works roster and shall award the contract to the lowest
responsible bidder, as defined under Revised Code of Washington 43.19.1911.
After an award is made, the quotations shall be open to public inspection and
available by electronic request. The city shall attempt to distribute
opportunities for limited public works projects equitably among contractors
willing to perform in the geographic area of the work. The city shall maintain
a list of the contractors contacted and the contracts awarded during the
previous twenty four (24) months under the limited public works process,
including the name of the contractor, the contractor's registration number, the
amount of the contract, a brief description of the type of work performed, and
the date the contract was awarded. For limited public works projects, the city
may waive the payment and performance bond requirements of Revised Code of
Washington chapter 39.08 and the retainage requirements of Revised Code of
Washington chapter 60.28, thereby assuming the liability for the contractor's
nonpayment of laborers, mechanics, subcontractors, materialmen, suppliers, and
taxes imposed under Revised Code of Washington title 82 that may be due from
the contractor for the limited public works project; however, the city shall
have the right of recovery against the contractor for any payments made on the
contractor's behalf.
   D.   Breaking Project Into Units Or Accomplishing In Phases: The breaking of
any project into units or accomplishing any projects by phases is prohibited if
it is done for the purpose of avoiding the maximum dollar amount of a contract
that may be let using the small works roster process or limited public works
process. (2007 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 35.23.352(3) and 39.04.155.
3-2-3: EXPENDITURE APPROVAL:
   A.   It is established that, prior to encumbering any city funds for any
single purchase of supplies or services in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00), the department head shall obtain approval from the city
administrator.
   B.   For expenditures greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the
majority of the city council shall review and approve such expenditures. (1988
Code § 3.28.020; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Tax Levied; Rate
3-3-2: Administration And Collection
3-3-3: Records Inspection
3-3-4: Referendum
3-3-5: Effective Date
3-3-1: TAX LEVIED; RATE:
   A.   Levy: There is levied a sales and use tax, as the case may be, as
authorized by Revised Code of Washington chapter 82.14, upon every taxable
event, as therein provided, occurring in the city. The tax shall be imposed
upon and collected from those persons or entities from whom the state sales and
use tax is collected. (1988 Code § 3.16.070)
   B.   Rate: The rate of tax imposed by subsection A of this section shall be
one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the selling price in the case of the use tax.
(1988 Code § 3.16.080)
3-3-2: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Compliance With Statute: The administration and collection of the tax
imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of Revised
Code of Washington chapter 82.14.
   B.   Contract With State: The mayor is authorized to enter into a contract
with the state department of revenue for the administration of this tax. (1988
Code § 3.16.090)
3-3-3: RECORDS INSPECTION:
The city consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify
the city for inspection of records for the state department of revenue. (1988
Code § 3.16.100)
3-3-4: REFERENDUM:
The sales and use tax imposed by this chapter is subject to referendum election
that conforms to the requirements and procedures set forth in Revised Code of
Washington 82.14.036 proposing that the tax or tax rate increase be approved or
repealed by the voters. The city clerk-treasurer, or his authorized deputy,
shall serve as the filing officer as required by Revised Code of Washington
82.14.036. (1988 Code § 3.16.110)
3-3-5: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect January 1, 1987. (1988 Code §
3.16.120)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Exercise Of Revenue License Power
3-4-3: Administrative Provisions
3-4-4: Definitions
3-4-5: Imposition Of The Tax; Tax Or Fee Levied
3-4-6: Doing Business With The City
3-4-7: Multiple Activities Credit When Activities Take Place In One Or More
Cities With Eligible Gross Receipt Taxes
3-4-8: Deductions To Prevent Multiple Taxation Of Manufacturing Activities And
Prior To January 1, 2008, Transactions Involving More Than One City With An
Eligible Gross Receipts Tax
3-4-9: Assignment Of Gross Income Derived From Intangibles
3-4-10: Allocation And Apportionment Of Income When Activities Take Place In
More Than One Jurisdiction
3-4-11: Allocation And Apportionment Of Printing And Publishing Income When
Activities Take Place In More Than One Jurisdiction
3-4-12: Exemptions
3-4-13: Deductions
3-4-14: Tax Part Of Overhead
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the city's authority to license
for revenue as authorized by article XI, section 12 of the Washington state
constitution and Revised Code of Washington 35A.11.020. (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007,
eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-2: EXERCISE OF REVENUE LICENSE POWER:
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the
city to license for revenue. The provisions of this chapter are subject to
periodic statutory or administrative rule changes or judicial interpretations
of the ordinances or rules. The responsibility rests with the licensee or
taxpayer to reconfirm tax computation procedures and remain in compliance with
this code. (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-3: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
The administrative provisions contained in chapter 10 of this title shall be
fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated
to the contrary herein. (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 975,
11-4-2019)
3-4-4: DEFINITIONS:
In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall
be applied. Words in the singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural shall include the singular.
BUSINESS: Includes all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit,
or advantage to the taxpayer or to another person or class, directly or
indirectly.
BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX OR GROSS RECEIPTS TAX: A tax imposed on or measured
by the value of products, the gross income of the business, or the gross
proceeds of sales, as the case may be, and that is the legal liability of the
business.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USE: The following uses of products, including
byproducts, by the extractor or manufacturer thereof:
   A.   Any use as a consumer; and
   B.   The manufacturing of articles, substances or commodities.
DELIVERY: The transfer of possession of tangible personal property between the
seller and the buyer or the buyer's representative. Delivery to an employee of
a buyer is considered delivery to the buyer. Transfer of possession of tangible
personal property occurs when the buyer or the buyer's representative first
takes physical control of the property or exercises dominion and control over
the property. "Dominion and control" means the buyer has the ability to put the
property to the buyer's own purposes. It means the buyer or the buyer's
representative has made the final decision to accept or reject the property,
and the seller has no further right to possession of the property and the buyer
has no right to return the property to the seller, other than under a warranty
contract. A buyer does not exercise dominion and control over tangible personal
property merely by arranging for shipment of the property from the seller to
itself. A buyer's representative is a person, other than an employee of the
buyer, who is authorized in writing by the buyer to receive tangible personal
property and take dominion and control by making the final decision to accept
or reject the property. Neither a shipping company nor a seller can serve as a
buyer's representative. It is immaterial where the contract of sale is
negotiated or where the buyer obtains title to the property. Delivery terms and
other provisions of the uniform commercial code 1  do not determine when or
where delivery of tangible personal property occurs for purposes of taxation.
DIGITAL CODE AND DIGITAL GOODS: Have the same meaning as in Revised Code of
Washington 82.04.192.
DIGITAL PRODUCTS: Means digital goods, digital codes, digital automated
services, and the services described in Revised Code of Washington 82.04.050(2)
(g) and (6)(b).
DIRECTOR: The finance and administrative services director of the city or any
officer, agent or employee of the city designated to act on the director's
behalf.
ELIGIBLE GROSS RECEIPTS TAX: A tax which:
   A.   Is imposed on the act or privilege of engaging in business activities
within section
3-4-5 of this chapter; and
   B.   Is measured by the gross volume of business, in terms of gross receipts
and is not an income tax or value added tax; and
   C.   Is not, pursuant to law or custom, separately stated from the sales
price; and
   D.   Is not a sale or use tax, business license fee, franchise fee, royalty
or severance tax measured by volume or weight, or concession charge, or payment
for the use and enjoyment of property, property right or a privilege; and
   E.   Is a tax imposed by a local jurisdiction, whether within or without the
state of Washington, and not by a country, state, province, or any other
nonlocal jurisdiction above the county level.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS:
   A.   Commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the
exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business
when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting
such business.
   B.   This definition sets forth examples of activities that constitute
engaging in business in the city, and establishes safe harbors for certain of
those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de
minimis business activities in the city without having to register and obtain a
business license or pay city business and occupation taxes. The activities
listed in this definition are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow
the definition of "engaging in business" in subsection A of this definition. If
an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the
city shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and
applicable law.
   C.   Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities
conducted within the city by a person, or its employee, agent, representative,
independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf constitutes
engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business
license 2 :
      1.   Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use,
or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real
property permanently or temporarily located in the city;
      2.   Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining, an office, place of
business, or other establishment in the city;
      3.   Soliciting sales;
      4.   Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or
tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance;
      5.   Providing technical assistance or service, including quality
control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in
connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf;
      6.   Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or
construction of, real or tangible personal property;
      7.   Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other
similar agreements;
      8.   Collecting current or delinquent accounts;
      9.   Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste,
construction debris, or excavated materials;
      10.   Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and
labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising,
landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real
estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property;
      11.   Rendering professional services such as those provided by
accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers,
professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations,
chemists, consultants, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors,
detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians;
      12.   Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales
or orders are solicited at the meetings;
      13.   Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent
contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the city,
acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers;
      14.   Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving
customer complaints;
      15.   In store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and
owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took
place;
      16.   Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or
maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf;
      17.   Accepting or executing a contract with the city, irrespective of
whether goods or services are delivered within or without the city, or whether
the person's office or place of business is within or without the city.
   D.   If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent
contractor, broker or another acting on the person's behalf, engages in no
other activities in or with the city but the following, it need not register
and obtain a business license and pay tax:
      1.   Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer;
      2.   Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity,
other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions;
      3.   Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and
conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in
connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf;
      4.   Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the
property is not used in the city;
      5.   Attending, but not participating in a "trade show" or "multiple
vendor events". Persons participating at a trade show shall review the city's
trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances;
      6.   Conducting advertising through the mail;
      7.   Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the city.
   E.   A seller located outside the city merely delivering goods into the city
by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business
license, provided that it engages in no other business activities in the city.
Such activities do not include those in subsection D of this definition. The
city expressly intends that engaging in business includes any activity
sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the tax under the law
and the constitutions of the United States and the state of Washington. Nexus
is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that
constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts.
EXTRACTING: Is the activity engaged in by an extractor and is reportable under
the extracting classification.
EXTRACTOR: Every person who from the person's own land or from the land of
another under a right or license granted by lease or contract, either directly
or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services,
for sale or for commercial or industrial use, mines, quarries, takes or
produces coal, oil, natural gas, ore, stone, sand, gravel, clay, mineral or
other natural resource product; or fells, cuts or takes timber, Christmas
trees, other than plantation Christmas trees, or other natural products; or
takes fish, shellfish, or other sea or inland water foods or products.
"Extractor" does not include persons performing under contract the necessary
labor or mechanical services for others; or persons meeting the definition of
farmer.
EXTRACTOR FOR HIRE: A person who performs under contract necessary labor or
mechanical services for an extractor.
GROSS INCOME OF THE BUSINESS: The value proceeding or accruing by reason of the
transaction of the business engaged in and includes gross proceeds of sales,
compensation for the rendition of services, gains realized from trading in
stocks, bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness, interest, discount, rents,
royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and other emoluments however
designated, all without any deduction on account of the cost of tangible
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount,
delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and
without any deduction on account of losses.
GROSS PROCEEDS OF SALES: The value proceeding or accruing from the sale of
tangible personal property or for services rendered, without any deduction on
account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs,
interest, discount paid, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever
paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.
MANUFACTURER OR TO MANUFACTURE:
   A.   Every person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the
necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial
or industrial use from the person's own materials or ingredients any products.
When the owner of equipment or facilities furnishes, or sells to the customer
prior to manufacture, materials or ingredients equal to less than twenty
percent (20%) of the total value of all materials or ingredients that become a
part of the finished product, the owner of the equipment or facilities will be
deemed to be a processor for hire, and not a manufacturer. A business not
located in this city that is the owner of materials or ingredients processed
for it in this city by a processor for hire shall be deemed to be engaged in
business as a manufacturer in this city.
   B.   "To manufacture" means all activities of a commercial or industrial
nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials or
ingredients so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful product is
produced for sale or commercial or industrial use, and shall include:
      1.   The production of special made or custom made articles;
      2.   The production of dental appliances, devices, restorations,
substitutes, or other dental laboratory products by a dental laboratory or
dental technician;
      3.    Crushing and/or blending of rock, sand, stone, gravel, or ore; and
      4.   The producing of articles for sale, or for commercial or industrial
use from raw materials or prepared materials by giving such materials,
articles, and substances of trade or commerce new forms, qualities, properties
or combinations including, but not limited to, such activities as making,
fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging,
curing, mild curing, preserving, canning, and the preparing and freezing of
fresh fruits and vegetables.
   C.   "To manufacture" shall not include the production of computer software
if the computer software is delivered from the seller to the purchaser by means
other than tangible storage media, including the delivery by use of a tangible
storage media where the tangible storage media is not physically transferred to
the purchaser.
MANUFACTURING: The activity conducted by a manufacturer and is reported under
the manufacturing classification.
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in
bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company,
joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political
subdivision of the state of Washington, corporation, limited liability company,
association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether
mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise and the United States
or any instrumentality thereof.
RETAIL SERVICE: Shall include the sale of or charge made for personal,
business, or professional services including amounts designated as interest,
rents, fees, admission, and other service emoluments however designated,
received by persons engaging in the following business activities:
   A.   Amusement and recreation services including, but not limited to, golf,
pool, billiards, skating, bowling, swimming, bungee jumping, ski lifts and
tows, basketball, racquetball, handball, squash, tennis, batting cages, day
trips for sightseeing purposes, and others, when provided to consumers.
"Amusement and recreation services" also include the provision of related
facilities such as basketball courts, tennis courts, handball courts, swimming
pools, and charges made for providing the opportunity to dance. The term
"amusement and recreation services" does not include instructional lessons to
learn a particular activity such as tennis lessons, swimming lessons, or
archery lessons;
   B.   Abstract, title insurance, and escrow services;
   C.   Credit bureau services;
   D.   Automobile parking and storage garage services;
   E.   Landscape maintenance and horticultural services but excluding: 1)
horticultural services provided to farmers and 2) pruning, trimming, repairing,
removing, and clearing of trees and brush near electric transmission or
distribution lines or equipment, if performed by or at the direction of an
electric utility;
   F.   Service charges associated with tickets to professional sporting
events; and
   G.   The following personal services: physical fitness services, tanning
salon services, tattoo parlor services, steam bath services, Turkish bath
services, escort services, and dating services.
   H.   The term shall also include the renting or leasing of tangible personal
property to consumers and the rental of equipment with an operator.
RETAILING: The activity of engaging in making sales at retail and is reported
under the retailing classification.
SALE AT RETAIL OR RETAIL SALE:
   A.   Every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced,
fabricated, or imprinted) to all persons irrespective of the nature of their
business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof,
persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real
or personal property of or for consumers, other than a sale to a person who
presents a resale certificate under Revised Code of Washington 82.04.470 and
who:
      1.   Purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in
the regular course of business without intervening use by such person; or
      2.   Installs, repairs, cleans, alters, imprints, improves, constructs,
or decorates real or personal property of or for consumers, if such tangible
personal property becomes an ingredient or component of such real or personal
property without intervening use by such person; or
      3.   Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in
producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of
which such property becomes an ingredient or component or is a chemical used in
processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical
reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being
produced for sale; or
      4.   Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in
producing ferrosilicon which is subsequently used in producing magnesium for
sale, if the primary purpose of such property is to create a chemical reaction
directly through contact with an ingredient of ferrosilicon; or
      5.   Purchases for the purpose of providing the property to consumers as
part of competitive telephone service, as defined in Revised Code of Washington
82.04.065. The term shall include every sale of tangible personal property
which is used or consumed or to be used or consumed in the performance of any
activity classified as a "sale at retail" or "retail sale" even though such
property is resold or utilized as provided in subsection A1, A2, A3, A4 of this
definition or this subsection A5 following such use.
      6.   Purchases for the purpose of satisfying the person's obligations
under an extended warranty as defined in subsection G of this definition, if
such tangible personal property replaces or becomes an ingredient or component
of property covered by the extended warranty without intervening use by such
person.
   B.   Every sale of tangible personal property to persons engaged in any
business activity which is taxable under section
3-4-5 of this chapter.
   C.   Includes the sale of or charge made for tangible personal property
consumed and/or for labor and services rendered in respect to the following:
      1.   The installing, repairing, cleaning, altering, imprinting, or
improving of tangible personal property of or for consumers, including charges
made for the mere use of facilities in respect thereto, but excluding charges
made for the use of coin operated laundry facilities when such facilities are
situated in an apartment house, rooming house, or mobile home park for the
exclusive use of the tenants thereof, and also excluding sales of laundry
service to nonprofit healthcare facilities, and excluding services rendered in
respect to live animals, birds and insects;
      2.   The constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or
existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of
or for consumers, including the installing or attaching of any article of
tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal
property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation, and shall also
include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the
moving of earth excepting the mere leveling of land used in commercial farming
or agriculture;
      3.   The charge for labor and services rendered in respect to
constructing, repairing, or improving any structure upon, above, or under any
real property owned by an owner who conveys the property by title, possession,
or any other means to the person performing such construction, repair, or
improvement for the purpose of performing such construction, repair, or
improvement and the property is then reconveyed by title, possession, or any
other means to the original owner;
      4.   The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in
respect to the cleaning, fumigating, razing or moving of existing buildings or
structures, but shall not include the charge made for janitorial services; and
for purposes of this section the term "janitorial services" shall mean those
cleaning and caretaking services ordinarily performed by commercial janitor
service businesses including, but not limited to, wall and window washing,
floor cleaning and waxing, and the cleaning in place of rugs, drapes and
upholstery. The term "janitorial services" does not include painting, papering,
repairing, furnace or septic tank cleaning, snow removal or sandblasting;
      5.   The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in
respect to automobile towing and similar automotive transportation services,
but not in respect to those required to report and pay taxes under chapter
82.16 Revised Code of Washington;
      6.   The sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging and all
other services, except telephone business and cable service, by a hotel,
rooming house, tourist court, motel, trailer camp, and the granting of any
similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or
leasing of real property, and it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real
property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or
lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. For the
purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed that the sale of and charge
made for the furnishing of lodging for a continuous period of one month or more
to a person is a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to
enjoy the same;
      7.   The sale of or charge made for tangible personal property, labor and
services to persons taxable under subsections C1, C2, C3, C4, C5 and C6 of this
definition when such sales or charges are for property, labor and services
which are used or consumed in whole or in part by such persons in the
performance of any activity defined as a "sale at retail" or "retail sale" even
though such property, labor and services may be resold after such use or
consumption. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to modify
subsection A of this definition and nothing contained in subsection A of this
definition shall be construed to modify this subsection.
   D.   Includes the providing of competitive telephone service to consumers.
   E.   Includes the sale of canned software other than a sale to a person who
presents a resale certificate under Revised Code of Washington 82.04.470,
regardless of the method of delivery to the end user, but shall not include
custom software or the customization of canned software.
   F.   Includes the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in
respect to the building, repairing, or improving of any street, place, road,
highway, easement, right of way, mass public transportation terminal or parking
facility, bridge, tunnel, or trestle which is owned by a municipal corporation
or political subdivision of the state, the state of Washington, or by the
United States and which is used or to be used primarily for foot or vehicular
traffic including mass transportation vehicles of any kind (public road
construction).
   G.   Includes the sale of or charge made for an extended warranty to a
consumer. For purposes of this subsection, "extended warranty" means an
agreement for a specified duration to perform the replacement or repair of
tangible personal property at no additional charge or a reduced charge for
tangible personal property, labor, or both, or to provide indemnification for
the replacement or repair of tangible personal property, based on the
occurrence of specified events. The term "extended warranty" does not include
an agreement, otherwise meeting the definition of "extended warranty" in this
subsection, if no separate charge is made for the agreement and the value of
the agreement is included in the sales price of the tangible personal property
covered by the agreement.
   H.   Includes the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in
respect to the constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or
existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of
or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city
housing authority created pursuant to chapter 35.82 Revised Code of Washington,
including the installing, or attaching of any article of tangible personal
property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a
part of the realty by virtue of installation (government contracting).
   I.   Shall not include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing
of land and the moving of earth of or for the United States, any
instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority. Nor shall the
term include the sale of services or charges made for cleaning up for the
United States, or its instrumentalities, radioactive waste and other byproducts
of weapons production and nuclear research and development.
   J.   Shall not include the sale of or charge made for labor and services
rendered for environmental remedial action.
   K.    Shall also include the following sales to consumers of digital goods,
digital codes, and digital automated services:
      1.   Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser the right of
permanent use;
      2.   Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser a right of use
that is less than permanent;
      3.   Sales in which the purchaser is not obligated to make continued
payment as a condition of the sale; and
      4.   Sales in which the purchaser is obligated to make continued payment
as a condition of the sale. A retail sale of digital goods, digital codes, or
digital automated services under this subsection includes any services provided
by the seller exclusively in connection with the digital goods, digital codes,
or digital automated services, whether or not a separate charge is made for
such services. For purposes of this subsection, “permanent” means perpetual or
for an indefinite or unspecified length of time. A right of permanent use is
presumed to have been granted unless the agreement between the seller and the
purchaser specifies or the circumstances surrounding the transaction suggest or
indicate that the right to use terminates on the occurrence of a condition
subsequent.
   L.   Shall also include the installing, repairing, altering, or improving of
digital goods for consumers.
SALE AT WHOLESALE, WHOLESALE SALE: Any sale of tangible personal property which
is not a retail sale, and any charge made for labor and services rendered for
persons who are not consumers, in respect to real or personal property and
retail services, if such charge is expressly defined as a retail sale or retail
service when rendered to or for consumers. Sale at wholesale also includes the
sale of telephone business to another telecommunications company as defined in
Revised Code of Washington 80.04.010 for the purpose of resale, as contemplated
by Revised Code of Washington 35.21.715.
SALE, CASUAL OR ISOLATED SALE:
   Casual Or Isolated Sale: A sale made by a person who is not engaged in the
business of selling the type of property involved on a routine or continuous
basis.
   Sale: Any transfer of the ownership of, title to, or possession of, property
for a valuable consideration and includes any activity classified as a "sale at
retail", "retail sale", or "retail service". It includes renting or leasing,
conditional sale contracts, leases with option to purchase, and any contract
under which possession of the property is given to the purchaser but title is
retained by the vendor as security for the payment of the purchase price. It
also includes the furnishing of food, drink, or meals for compensation whether
consumed upon the premises or not.
SERVICES: Those activities that do not fall within one of the other tax
classifications used by the city.
TAXPAYER: Any "person", as herein defined, required to have a business license
under this chapter or liable for the collection of any tax or fee under this
chapter, or who engages in any business or who performs any act for which a tax
or fee is imposed by this chapter.
VALUE OF PRODUCTS:
   A.   The value of products, including byproducts, extracted or manufactured,
shall be determined by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof whether
such sale is at wholesale or at retail, to which shall be added all subsidies
and bonuses received from the purchaser or from any other person with respect
to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products or byproducts by the
seller.
   B.   Where such products, including byproducts, are extracted or
manufactured for commercial or industrial use; and where such products,
including byproducts, are shipped, transported or transferred out of the city,
or to another person, without prior sale or are sold under circumstances such
that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of
the subject matter of the sale; the value shall correspond as nearly as
possible to the gross proceeds from sales in this state of similar products of
like quality and character, and in similar quantities by other taxpayers, plus
the amount of subsidies or bonuses ordinarily payable by the purchaser or by
any third person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such
products. In the absence of sales of similar products as a guide to value, such
value may be determined upon a cost basis. In such cases, there shall be
included every item of cost attributable to the particular article or article
extracted or manufactured, including direct and indirect overhead costs. The
director may prescribe rules for the purpose of ascertaining such values.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsection B of this definition, the value of a product
manufactured or produced for purposes of serving as a prototype for the
development of a new or improved product shall correspond to: 1) the retail
selling price of such new or improved product when first offered for sale; or
2) the value of materials incorporated into the prototype in cases in which the
new or improved product is not offered for sale.
VALUE PROCEEDING OR ACCRUING: The consideration, whether money, credits,
rights, or other property expressed in terms of money, a person is entitled to
receive or which is actually received or accrued. The term shall be applied, in
each case, on a cash receipts or accrual basis according to which method of
accounting is regularly employed in keeping the books of the taxpayer.
WHOLESALING: Engaging in the activity of making sales at wholesale, and is
reported under the wholesaling classification. (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-
2008; amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW title 62A.
2 1. See also title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
3-4-5: IMPOSITION OF THE TAX; TAX OR FEE LEVIED:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, there is hereby
levied upon and shall be collected from every person a tax for the act or
privilege of engaging in business activities within the city, whether the
person's office or place of business be within or without the city. The tax
shall be in amounts to be determined by application of rates against gross
proceeds of sale, gross income of business, or value of products, including
byproducts, as the case may be, as follows:
      1.   Upon every person engaging within the city in business as an
extractor; as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such
business shall be equal to the value of the products, including byproducts,
extracted within the city for sale or for commercial or industrial use,
multiplied by the rate of two-tenths of one percent (2/10 of 1 percent). The
measure of the tax is the value of the products, including byproducts, so
extracted, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be
made to points outside the city.
      2.   Upon every person engaging within the city in business as a
manufacturer, as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such
business shall be equal to the value of the products, including byproducts,
manufactured within the city, multiplied by the rate of two-tenths of one
percent (2/10 of 1 percent). The measure of the tax is the value of the
products, including byproducts, so manufactured, regardless of the place of
sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the city.
      3.   Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of making
sales at wholesale; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such
business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business
without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise
sold, multiplied by the rate of two-tenths of one percent (2/10 of 1 percent).
      4.   Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of making
sales at retail, as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such
business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business,
without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise
sold, multiplied by the rate of two-tenths of one percent (2/10 of 1 percent).
      5.   Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of: a)
printing, b) both printing and publishing newspapers, magazines, periodicals,
books, music, and other printed items, c) publishing newspapers, magazines and
periodicals, d) extracting for hire, and e) processing for hire; as to such
persons, the amount of tax on such business shall be equal to the gross income
of the business multiplied by the rate of two-tenths of one percent (2/10 of 1
percent).
      6.   Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of making
sales of retail services; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to
such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of sales multiplied by the
rate of two-tenths of one percent (2/10 of 1 percent).
      7.   Upon every other person engaging within the city in any business
activity other than or in addition to those enumerated in the above
subsections; as to such persons, the amount of tax on account of such
activities shall be equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the
rate of two-tenths of one percent (2/10 of 1 percent). This subsection
includes, among others, and without limiting the scope hereof (whether or not
title to material used in the performance of such business passes to another by
accession, merger or other than by outright sale), persons engaged in the
business of developing, or producing custom software or of customizing canned
software, producing royalties or commissions, and persons engaged in the
business of rendering any type of service which does not constitute a sale at
retail, a sale at wholesale, or a retail service.
   B.   The gross receipts tax imposed in this section shall not apply to any
person whose gross proceeds of sales, gross income of the business, and value
of products, including byproducts, as the case may be, from all activities
conducted within the city during any calendar year is equal to or less than
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), or is equal to or less than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) during any quarter if on a quarterly reporting basis. (Ord.
829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-6: DOING BUSINESS WITH THE CITY:
Except where such a tax is otherwise levied and collected by the city from such
person, there is hereby levied a tax on the privilege of accepting or executing
a contract with the city. Such tax shall be levied and collected whether goods
or services are delivered within or without the city and whether or not such
person has an office or place of business within or without the city.
Except as provided in section
3-4-10 of this chapter, as to such persons the amount of tax shall be equal to
the gross contract price multiplied by the rate under section
3-4-5 of this chapter that would otherwise apply if the sale or service were
taxable pursuant to that section. (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd.
Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-7: MULTIPLE ACTIVITIES CREDIT WHEN ACTIVITIES TAKE PLACE IN ONE OR MORE
CITIES WITH ELIGIBLE GROSS RECEIPT TAXES:
   A.   Taxable Business Activities: Persons who engage in business activities
that are within the purview of two (2) or more subsections of section
3-4-5 of this chapter shall be taxable under each applicable subsection.
   B.   Undue Burden: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, if
imposition of the city's tax would place an undue burden upon interstate
commerce or violate constitutional requirements, a taxpayer shall be allowed a
credit to the extent necessary to preserve the validity of the city's tax, and
still apply the city tax to as much of the taxpayer's activities as may be
subject to the city's taxing authority.
   C.   Documentation: To take the credit authorized by this section, a
taxpayer must be able to document that the amount of tax sought to be credited
was paid upon the same gross receipts used in computing the tax against which
the credit is applied.
   D.   Selling Products Extracted Or Manufactured: Persons taxable under the
retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling products in
this city shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross
receipts taxes paid: 1) with respect to the manufacturing of the products sold
in the city, and 2) with respect to the extracting of the products, or the
ingredients used in the products, sold in the city. The amount of the credit
shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to
the sale of those products.
   E.   Manufactured Products Using Ingredients Extracted: Persons taxable
under the manufacturing classification with respect to manufacturing products
in this city shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible
gross receipts taxes paid with respect to extracting the ingredients of the
products manufactured in the city. The amount of the credit shall not exceed
the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the manufacturing
of those products.
   F.   Selling Products Printed, Or Published And Printed: Persons taxable
under the retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling
products in this city shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any
eligible gross receipts taxes paid with respect to the printing, or the
printing and publishing, of the products sold within the city. The amount of
the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with
respect to the sale of those products. (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008;
amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-8: DEDUCTIONS TO PREVENT MULTIPLE TAXATION OF MANUFACTURING ACTIVITIES AND
PRIOR TO JANUARY 1, 2008, TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING MORE THAN ONE CITY WITH AN
ELIGIBLE GROSS RECEIPTS TAX:
   A.   Amounts subject to an eligible gross receipts tax in another city that
also maintains nexus over the same activity. For taxes due prior to January 1,
2008, a taxpayer that is subject to an eligible gross receipts tax on the same
activity in more than one jurisdiction may be entitled to a deduction as
follows:
      1.   A taxpayer that has paid an eligible gross receipts tax, with
respect to a sale of goods or services, to a jurisdiction in which the goods
are delivered or the services are provided may deduct an amount equal to the
gross receipts used to measure that tax from the measure of the tax owed to the
city.
      2.   Notwithstanding the above, a person that is subject to an eligible
gross receipts tax in more than one jurisdiction on the gross income derived
from intangibles such as royalties, trademarks, patents, or goodwill shall
assign those gross receipts to the jurisdiction where the person is domiciled
(its headquarters is located).
      3.   A taxpayer that has paid an eligible gross receipts tax on the
privilege of accepting or executing a contract with another city may deduct an
amount equal to the contract price used to measure the tax due to the other
city from the measure of the tax owed to the city.
   B.   Person Manufacturing Products Within And Without: A person
manufacturing product within the city using products manufactured by the same
person outside the city may deduct from the measure of the manufacturing tax
the value of products manufactured outside the city and included in the measure
of an eligible gross receipts tax paid to the other jurisdiction with respect
to manufacturing such products. (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord.
975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-9: ASSIGNMENT OF GROSS INCOME DERIVED FROM INTANGIBLES:
Gross income derived from the sale of intangibles such as royalties,
trademarks, patents, or goodwill shall be assigned to the jurisdiction where
the person is domiciled (its headquarters is located). (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007,
eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-10: ALLOCATION AND APPORTIONMENT OF INCOME WHEN ACTIVITIES TAKE PLACE IN
MORE THAN ONE JURISDICTION:
Gross income, other than persons subject to the provisions of chapter 82.14A
Revised Code of Washington, shall be allocated and apportioned as follows:
   A.   Gross income derived from all activities other than those taxed as
service or royalties under subsection
3-4-5A7 of this chapter shall be allocated to the location where the activity
takes place.
   B.   In the case of sales of tangible personal property, the activity takes
place where delivery to the buyer occurs.
   C.   In the case of sales of digital products, the activity takes place
where delivery to the buyer occurs. The delivery of digital products will be
deemed to occur at:
      1.   The seller’s place of business if the purchaser receives the digital
product at the seller’s place of business;
      2.   If not received at the seller’s place of business, the location
where the purchaser or the purchaser’s donee, designated as such by the
purchaser, receives the digital product, including the location indicated by
instructions for delivery to the purchaser or donee, known to the seller.
      3.   If the location where the purchaser or the purchaser’s donee
receives the digital product is not known, the purchaser’s address maintained
in the ordinary course of the seller’s business when use of this address does
not constitute bad faith;
      4.   If no address for the purchaser is maintained in the ordinary course
of the seller’s business, the purchaser’s address obtained during the
consummation of the sale, including the address of the purchaser’s payment
instrument, if no other address is available, when use of this address does not
constitute bad faith; and
      5.   If no address for the purchaser is obtained during the consummation
of the sale, the address where the digital good or digital code is first made
available for transmission by the seller or the address from which the digital
automated service or service described in Revised Code of Washington 82.04.050
(2)(g) or (6)(b) was provided, disregarding for these purposes any location
that merely provided the digital transfer of the product sold.
   D.   If none of the methods in subsection C for determining where the
delivery of digital products occurs are available after a good faith effort by
the taxpayer to apply the methods provided in subsection C1 through C5, then
the city and the taxypayer may mutually agree to employ any other method to
effectuate an equitable allocation of income from the sale of digital products.
The taxpayer will be responsible for petitioning the city to use an alternative
method under this subsection D. The city may employ an alternative method for
allocating the income from the sale of digital products if the methods in
subsections C1 through C5 are not available and the taxpayer and the city are
unable to mutually agree on an alternative method to effectuate an equitable
allocation of income from the sale of digital products.
   E.   For purposes of subsections C1 through C5, the following definitions
apply:
 
DIGITAL AUTOMATED SERVICES, DIGITAL Have the same meaning as in Revised Code
CODES, AND DIGITAL GOODS:           of Washington 82.04.192.
                                    Digital goods, digital codes, digital
DIGITAL PRODUCTS:                   automated services, and the services
                                    described in Revised Code of Washington
                                    82.04.050(2)(g) and (6)(c).
RECEIVE:                            Has the same meaning as in Revised Code of
                                    Washington 82.32.730.
 
   F.   Gross income derived from activities taxed as services and other
activities taxed under
3-4-5A. shall be apportioned to the city by multiplying apportionable income by
a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor plus the service
income factor and the denominator of which is two (2).
      1.   The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the
total amount paid in the city during the tax period by the taxpayer for
compensation and the denominator of which is the total compensation paid
everywhere during the tax period. Compensation is paid in the city if:
         a.   The individual is primarily assigned within the city;
         b.   The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business
for the tax period and the employee performs fifty percent (50%) or more of his
or her service for the tax period in the city; or
         c.   The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business
for the tax period, the individual does not perform fifty percent (50%) or more
of his or her service in any city and the employee resides in the city.
      2.   The service income factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is
the total service income of the taxpayer in the city during the tax period, and
the denominator of which is the total service income of the taxpayer everywhere
during the tax period. Service income is in the city if: the customer location
is in the city.
      3.   Gross income of the business from engaging in an apportionable
activity must be excluded from the denominator of the service income factor if,
in respect to such activity, at least some of the activity is performed in the
city, and the gross income is attributable under F2 to a city or unincorporated
area of a county within the United States or to a foreign country in which the
taxpayer is not taxable. For purposes of this subsection F3, “not taxable”
means that the taxpayer is not subject to a business activities tax by that
city or county within the United States or by that foreign country, except that
a taxpayer is taxable in a city or county within the United States or in a
foreign country in which it would be deemed to have a substantial nexus with
the city or county within the United States or with the foreign country under
the standards in Revised Code of Washington 35.102.050 regardless of whether
that city or county within the United States or that foreign country imposes
such a tax.
      4.   If the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection F
do not fairly represent the extent of the taxpayer’s business activity in the
city, the taxpayer may petition for, or the tax administrators may require, in
respect to all or any part of the taxpayer’s business activity, if reasonable:
         a.   Separate accounting;
         b.   The exclusion of any one (1) or more of the factors;
         c.   The inclusion of one (1) or more additional factors that will
fairly represent the taxpayer’s business activity in the city; or
         d.   The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable
allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income.
      5.   The party petitioning for, or the tax administrator requiring, the
use of any method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of
the taxpayer’s income pursuant to subsection F4 must prove by a preponderance
of the evidence:
         a.   That the allocation and apportionment provisions of this
subsection F do not fairly represent the extent of the taxpayer’s business
activity in the city; and
         b.   That the alternative to such provisions is reasonable. The same
burden of proof shall apply whether the taxpayer is petitioning for, or the tax
administrator is requiring, the use of an alternative, reasonable method to
effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income.
      6.   If the tax administrator requires any method to effectuate an
equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income, the tax
administrator cannot impose any civil or criminal penalty with reference to the
tax due that is attributable to the taxpayer’s reasonable reliance solely on
the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection F.
      7.   A taxpayer that has received written permission from the tax
administrator to use a reasonable method to effectuate an equitable allocation
and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income shall not have that permission
revoked with respect to transactions and activities that have already occurred
unless there has been a material change in, or a material misrepresentation of,
the facts provided by the taxpayer upon which the tax administrator reasonably
relied in approving a reasonable alternative method.
   G.   The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section.
              The gross income of the business taxable under the service classifications of a
APPORTIONABLE city's gross receipts tax, including income received from activities outside the city
INCOME:       if the income would be taxable under the service classification if received from
              activities within the city, less any exemptions or deductions available.
              A tax measured by the amount of, or economic results of, business activity conducted
              in a city or county within the United States or within a foreign country. The term
BUSINESS      includes taxes measured in whole or in part on net income or gross income or
ACTIVITIES    receipts. “Business activities tax” does not include a sales tax, use tax, or a
TAX:          similar transaction tax, imposed on the sale or acquisition of goods or services,
              whether or not denominated a gross receipts tax or a tax imposed on the privilege of
              doing business.
              Wages, salaries, commissions, and any other form of remuneration paid to individuals
COMPENSATION: for personal services that are or would be included in the individual's gross income
              under the federal internal revenue code.
CUSTOMER:     A person or entity to whom the taxpayer makes a sale or renders services or from whom
              the taxpayer otherwise receives gross income of the business.
              Means the following:
              1.   For a customer not engaged in business, if the service requires the customer to
              be physically present where the service is performed.
              2.   For a customer not engaged in business, if the service does not require the
              customer to be physically present:
CUSTOMER         a.   The customer’s residence; or
LOCATION:        b.   If the customer’s residence is not known, the customer’s billing/mailing
              address.
              3.   For a customer engaged in business:
                 a.   Where the services are ordered from;
                 b.   At the customer’s billing/mailing address if the location from which the
              services are ordered is not known; or
                 c.   At the customer’s commercial domicile if none of the above are known.
INDIVIDUAL:   Any individual who, under the usual common law rules applicable in determining the
              employer-employee relationship, has the status of an employee of that taxpayer.
PRIMARILY     The business location of the taxpayer where the individual performs his or her
ASSIGNED:     duties.
SERVICE
TAXABLE       Gross income of the business subject to tax under either the service or royalty
INCOME OR     classification.
SERVICE
INCOME:
              The calendar year during which tax liability is accrued. If taxes are reported by a
              taxpayer on a basis more frequent than once per year, taxpayers shall calculate the
TAX PERIOD:   factors for the previous calendar year for reporting in the current calendar year and
              correct the reporting for the previous year when the factors are calculated for that
              year, but not later than the end of the first quarter of the following year.
 
   H.   Assignment or apportionment of revenue under this section shall be made
in accordance with and in full compliance with the provisions of the interstate
commerce clause of the United States constitution where applicable. (Ord. 829,
12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-11: ALLOCATION AND APPORTIONMENT OF PRINTING AND PUBLISHING INCOME WHEN
ACTIVITIES TAKE PLACE IN MORE THAN ONE JURISDICTION:
Notwithstanding Revised Code of Washington 35.102.130, gross income from the
activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals, or
magazines, shall be allocated to the principal place in this state from which
the taxpayer's business is directed or managed. As used in this section, the
activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals, or
magazines, have the same meanings as attributed to those terms in Revised Code
of Washington 82.04.280(1) by the department of revenue. (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007,
eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-12: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Public Utilities: This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect
to a business activity with respect to which tax liability is specifically
imposed under the provisions of chapter 8, "Utilities Tax", of this title.
   B.   Investments: Dividends from subsidiary corporations. This chapter shall
not apply to amounts derived by persons, other than those engaging in banking,
loan, security, or other financial businesses, from investments or the use of
money as such, and also amounts derived as dividends by a parent from its
subsidiary corporations.
   C.   Insurance Business: This chapter shall not apply to amounts received by
any person who is an insurer or their appointed insurance producer upon which a
tax based on gross premiums is paid to the state pursuant to Revised Code of
Washington 48.14.020, and provided further, that the provisions of this
subsection shall not exempt any bonding company from tax with respect to gross
income derived from the completion of any contract as to which it is a surety,
or as to any liability as successor to the liability of the defaulting
contractor.
   D.   Employees:
      1.   This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the
person's employment in the capacity as an employee or servant as distinguished
from that of an independent contractor. For the purposes of this subsection,
the definition of employee shall include those persons that are defined in the
internal revenue code, as hereafter amended.
      2.   A booth renter is an independent contractor for purposes of this
chapter.
   E.   Amounts Derived From Sale Of Real Estate: This chapter shall not apply
to gross proceeds derived from the sale of real estate. This, however, shall
not be construed to allow an exemption of amounts received as commissions from
the sale of real estate, nor as fees, handling charges, discounts, interest or
similar financial charges resulting from, or relating to, real estate
transactions. This chapter shall also not apply to amounts received for the
rental of real estate if the rental income is derived from a contract to rent
for a continuous period of thirty (30) days or longer.
   F.   Mortgage Brokers’ Third-Party Provider Services Trust Accounts: This
chapter shall not apply to amounts received from trust accounts to mortgage
brokers for the payment of third party costs if the accounts are operated in a
manner consistent with Revised Code of Washington 19.146.050 and any rules
adopted by the director of financial institutions.
   G.   Amounts Derived From Manufacturing, Selling Or Distributing Motor
Vehicle Fuel: This chapter shall not apply to the manufacturing, selling, or
distributing motor vehicle fuel, as the term "motor vehicle fuel" is defined in
Revised Code of Washington 82.36.010 and exempt under Revised Code of
Washington 82.36.440, provided that any fuel not subjected to the state fuel
excise tax, or any other applicable deduction or exemption, will be taxable
under this chapter.
   H.   Amounts Derived From Liquor, And The Sale Or Distribution Of Liquor:
This chapter shall not apply to liquor as defined in Revised Code of Washington
66.04.010 and exempt in Revised Code of Washington 66.08.120.
   I.   Casual And Isolated Sales: This chapter shall not apply to the gross
proceeds derived from casual or isolated sales.
   J.   Accommodation Sales: This chapter shall not apply to sales for resale
by persons regularly engaged in the business of making retail sales of the type
of property so sold to other persons similarly engaged in the business of
selling such property where: 1) the amount paid by the buyer does not exceed
the amount paid by the seller to the vendor in the acquisition of the article
and 2) the sale is made as an accommodation to the buyer to enable the buyer to
fill a bona fide existing order of a customer or is made within fourteen (14)
days to reimburse in kind a previous accommodation sale by the buyer to the
seller.
   K.   Taxes Collected As Trust Funds: This chapter shall not apply to amounts
collected by the taxpayer from third parties to satisfy third party obligations
to pay taxes such as the retail sales tax, use tax, and admission tax. (Ord.
829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-13: DEDUCTIONS:
In computing the license fee or tax, there may be deducted from the measure of
tax the following items:
   A.   Receipts From Tangible Personal Property Delivered Outside The State:
In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax under retailing
or wholesaling amounts derived from the sale of tangible personal property that
is delivered by the seller to the buyer or the buyer's representative at a
location outside the state of Washington.
   B.   Cash Discount Taken By Purchaser: In computing tax, there may be
deducted from the measure of tax the cash discount amounts actually taken by
the purchaser. This deduction is not allowed in arriving at the taxable amount
under the extracting or manufacturing classifications with respect to articles
produced or manufactured, the reported values of which, for the purposes of
this tax, have been computed according to the "value of product" provisions.
   C.   Credit Losses Of Accrual Basis Taxpayers: In computing tax, there may
be deducted from the measure of tax the amount of credit losses actually
sustained by taxpayers whose regular books of account are kept upon an accrual
basis.
   D.   Constitutional Prohibitions: In computing tax, there may be deducted
from the measure of the tax amounts derived from business which the city is
prohibited from taxing under the constitution of the state of Washington or the
constitution of the United States.
   E.   Receipts From The Sale Of Tangible Personal Property And Services
Delivered Outside The City But Within Washington: Effective January 1, 2008,
amounts included in the gross receipts reported on the tax return derived from
the sale of tangible personal property delivered to the buyer or the buyer's
representative outside the city but within the state of Washington may be
deducted from the measure of tax under the retailing, retail services, or
wholesaling classification.
   F.   Professional Employer Services: In computing the tax, a professional
employer organization may deduct from the calculation of gross income the gross
income of the business derived from performing professional employer services
that is equal to the portion of the fee charged to a client that represents the
actual cost of wages and salaries, benefits, workers' compensation, payroll
taxes, withholding, or other assessments paid to or on behalf of a covered
employee by the professional employer organization under a professional
employer agreement.
   G.   Interest On Investments Or Loans Secured By Mortgages Or Deeds Of
Trust: In computing tax, to the extent permitted by chapter 82.14A of the
Revised Code of Washington, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by
those engaged in banking, loan, security or other financial businesses, amounts
derived from interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by
first mortgagees or trust deeds on non-transient residential properties. (Ord.
829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 975, 11-4-2019)
3-4-14: TAX PART OF OVERHEAD:
It is not the intention of this chapter that the taxes or fees herein levied
upon persons engaging in business be construed as taxes or fees upon the
purchasers or customer, but that such taxes or fees shall be levied upon, and
collectible from, the person engaging in the business activities herein
designated and that such taxes or fees shall constitute a part of the cost of
doing business of such persons. (Ord. 829, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. Ord.
975, 11-4-2019)
CHAPTER 5
GAMBLING TAX
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Applicability Of Tax And Tax Rates
3-5-3: Quarterly Tax Payments; Exceptions
3-5-4: Administration And Collection Of Tax
3-5-5: Method Of Payment
3-5-6: Failure To Make Payment
3-5-7: Notice Of Intention
3-5-8: Records Required
3-5-9: Over And Underpayment Of Tax
3-5-10: Additional Tax
3-5-11: Adopt And Enforce Rules And Regulations
3-5-12: Collection Of Taxes, Fees And Penalties
3-5-13: Limitation On Right To Recovery
3-5-14: Appeal To Council
3-5-15: Violation; Penalties
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms used shall have the same
meanings as those defined under Revised Code of Washington chapter 9.46 and
under Washington administrative code title 230, unless otherwise specifically
provided or the context in which they are used clearly indicates that they be
given some other meaning. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-2: APPLICABILITY OF TAX AND TAX RATES:
There is hereby levied upon all persons, associations, businesses, and
organizations conducting or operating within the city any of the activities
listed below, a tax in the following amounts to paid to the city:
   A.   Bingo, in the amount of gross receipts therefrom, less the amount of
money paid in cash, and/or paid for merchandise actually awarded as prizes
during the taxable period, multiplied by the rate of ten percent (10%).
   B.   Raffles, in the amount of gross receipts therefrom, less the amount of
money paid in cash, and paid in merchandise actually awarded as prizes during
the taxable period, multiplied by the rate of ten percent (10%).
   C.   Punchboards and pull-tabs, in the amount of five percent (5%) of the
gross receipts directly from the operation of the punchboards or pull-tabs
themselves. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
   D.   Social card games, in the following amounts:
      1.   For up to and including one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
gross revenues per month, the tax rate shall be five percent (5%); and
      2.   For each additional fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) gross
revenues per month, the tax rate shall increase one percent (1%), up to a
maximum tax rate of ten percent (10%) on gross revenues. (Ord. 765, 4-1-2002)
3-5-3: QUARTERLY TAX PAYMENTS; EXCEPTIONS:
Each of the various taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed on the
basis of activity during each calendar quarter year, shall be due and payable
in quarterly installments and remittance therefor, together with return forms,
shall be made to the city on or before the last day of the month after the
quarterly period in which the tax accrued. Provided, that the following
exceptions to this payment schedule shall be allowed, or required:
   A.   Whenever any persons, associations, businesses, or organizations
taxable hereunder conducting or operating a taxable activity for a period of
more than three (3) months discontinues, quits, sells or otherwise disposes of
its business or terminates the same, any tax due hereunder shall become due and
payable, and such taxpayer shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, make a
return and pay the tax due.
   B.   Whenever it appears to the city clerk-treasurer that the collection of
taxes from any taxpayer hereunder may be in jeopardy, the clerk-treasurer,
after not less than ten (10) days' notice to the taxpayer, is authorized to
require the taxpayer to remit taxes due and returns at such shorter intervals
than quarterly, as the clerk-treasurer shall deem appropriate under the
circumstances. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-4: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Administration and collection of the various taxes imposed by this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the city clerk- treasurer. Remittance of
the amount due shall be accompanied by a completed return form prescribed and
provided by the clerk- treasurer. The taxpayer shall be required to swear and
affirm that the information given in the return is true, accurate and complete.
   B.   The city clerk-treasurer is authorized, but not required, to mail to
taxpayers forms for the returns. Failure of the taxpayer to receive such form
shall not excuse a taxpayer from submitting the return and timely payment of
all taxes due. The city clerk- treasurer shall make forms available to the
public in reasonable numbers in the clerk-treasurer's office during regular
business hours.
   C.   In addition to the return form, a copy of the taxpayer's quarterly
report to the Washington state gambling commission as required by the
Washington administrative code, shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer.
(Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-5: METHOD OF PAYMENT:
Taxes payable hereunder shall be remitted to the city clerk- treasurer on or
before the time required. If payment is made by draft or check, the tax shall
not be deemed paid until the draft or check is honored in the usual course of
business, nor shall the acceptance of any sum by the clerk-treasurer be an
acquittance or discharge of the tax unless the amount paid is the full amount
due. Said return shall be filed with the city clerk- treasurer. (Ord. 641, 2-1-
1993)
3-5-6: FAILURE TO MAKE PAYMENT:
   A.   If full payment of any tax or fee due under this chapter is not
received by the clerk-treasurer on or before the due date, there shall be paid
by the taxpayer interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month on the
amount past due.
   B.   Wilful failure to make payment in full of any tax amount within thirty
(30) days following the day the amount of tax initially became due shall be
both a civil and criminal violation of this chapter. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-7: NOTICE OF INTENTION:
In order that the city may identify those persons who are subject to taxation
under this chapter, each person, business, association, or organization shall
file with the city clerk- treasurer a sworn declaration of intent to conduct an
activity taxable under this chapter upon a form to be prescribed by the clerk-
treasurer, together with a copy of the license issued therefor by the
Washington state gambling commission. The filing shall be made not later than
ten (10) days prior to conducting or operating the taxable activity. No fee
shall be charged for such filing. Failure to timely file shall not excuse any
person, business, association or organization from any tax liability. (Ord.
641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-8: RECORDS REQUIRED:
   A.   Taxpayer Records: Each person, business, association or organization
engaging in an activity taxable under this chapter shall maintain records
respecting that activity which truly, completely, and accurately disclose all
information necessary to determine the taxpayer's tax liability hereunder
during each base tax period. Such records shall be kept and maintained for a
period of not less than three (3) years. In addition, all information and items
required by the Washington state gambling commission and United States internal
revenue service respecting taxation shall be kept and maintained for the
periods required to be kept by those agencies.
   B.   Inspection And Audit:
      1.   Records Available For Inspection: All books, records and other items
required to be kept and maintained under this section shall be subject to, and
immediately made available for, inspection and audit at any time, with or
without notice, at the place where such records are kept, upon demand by the
clerk-treasurer, for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this taxing
chapter.
      2.   Records Maintained Outside Jurisdiction: Where a taxpayer does not
keep all the books, records, or items required to be kept or maintained under
this section in this jurisdiction so that the clerk-treasurer may examine them
conveniently, the taxpayer shall either:
         a.   Produce all of the required books, records, or items within ten
(10) days following a request of the city clerk-treasurer; or
         b.   Bear the actual cost of inspection by the clerk-treasurer or the
clerk-treasurer's designee at the location at which such books, records, or
items are located; provided, that a taxpayer choosing to bear these costs shall
pay in advance to the clerk- treasurer the estimated cost thereof, including,
but not limited to, round trip fare by the most rapid means, lodging, meals,
and incidental expenses. Upon completion of such audit, the actual costs shall
be determined and such shall be paid by the taxpayer. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-9: OVER AND UNDERPAYMENT OF TAX:
If it is determined by the city that a taxpayer has either overpaid or
underpaid gambling taxes for up to three (3) years prior, the following shall
apply:
   A.   For overpayment, the city shall, at the request of the taxpayer, credit
the taxpayer's account by the overpayment amount or pay said amount to the
taxpayer. This shall only apply to the prior three (3) years.
   B.   For underpayment, the city shall mail a statement to the taxpayer
showing the balance due, including the tax amount, penalty assessment and fees.
If the taxpayer fails to make payment in full within ten (10) calendar days of
such notice, the penalties contained in section
3-5-15 of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-10: ADDITIONAL TAX:
The tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed, or
levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city, except as herein
otherwise expressly provided. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-11: ADOPT AND ENFORCE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The clerk-treasurer shall have the power, and it shall be his/her duty, from
time to time, to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not
inconsistent with this chapter or with superior law, for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions hereof, and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail
to comply with any such rule or regulation. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-12: COLLECTION OF TAXES, FEES AND PENALTIES:
Any tax due and unpaid under this chapter, and all penalties or fees, shall
constitute a debt to the city and may be collected by court proceedings the
same as any other debt in like amount which shall be in addition to all other
existing remedies. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-13: LIMITATION ON RIGHT TO RECOVERY:
The statute of limitation for the recovery of tax money wrongfully withheld
from the city or paid by the taxpayer shall be five (5) years. (Ord. 641, 2-1-
1993)
3-5-14: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
Any taxpayer aggrieved by any ruling or action by the clerk- treasurer insofar
as enforcement of this chapter, or examination of records is concerned, may
appeal the same to the city council by serving, not later than ten (10) days
after receipt from the clerk-treasurer of the ruling or request of such
records, a written notice of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall stay
the action of the clerk-treasurer until the appeal is heard by the council. The
appeal shall be heard at the second regular council meeting after receipt of
the notice of appeal. The appellant, at his choice, may be represented by
counsel. The council shall notify the clerk-treasurer and appellant within five
(5) days after the appeal is heard, in writing, of the decision of the council.
(Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
3-5-15: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Civil:
      1.   Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter or lawful rule or regulation adopted by the clerk-treasurer
pursuant thereto, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) per day.
      2.   Any taxpayer who engages in, or carries on, any gambling activity
subject to a tax hereunder without having complied with the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter for each day during
which the gambling activity is carried on.
   B.   Criminal:
      1.   Any person wilfully violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a gross
misdemeanor and subject to the penalty set forth in Revised Code of Washington
9A.20.021.
      2.   Any person who knowingly causes, aids, abets, or conspires with
another to cause any person to violate any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
to this chapter shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor subject to the penalty
set forth in Revised Code of Washington 9A.20.021.
      3.   No person shall intentionally obstruct or attempt to obstruct a
public servant in the administration or enforcement of this chapter by using or
threatening to use physical force or by means of any unlawful act. Any person
who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the
penalty set forth in Revised Code of Washington 9A.20.021. (Ord. 641, 2-1-1993)
CHAPTER 6
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY EXCISE TAX
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Tax Levied
3-6-3: Additional Tax
3-6-4: Special Fund; Disposition Of Revenue
3-6-5: Administration And Collection Of Tax
3-6-6: Effective Date
3-6-7: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of "selling price", "seller", "buyer", "consumer" and all other
definitions as are now contained in Revised Code of Washington 82.08.010, and
subsequent amendments thereto, are adopted as the definitions for the tax
levied in this chapter. (Ord. 711, 7-7-1997)
3-6-2: TAX LEVIED:
There is levied a special excise tax of five percent (5%) on the sale of or
charge made for the furnishing of lodging that is subject to tax under Revised
Code of Washington chapter 82.08. The tax imposed under Revised Code of
Washington chapter 82.08 applies to the sale of or charge made for the
furnishing of lodging by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, or
trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as
distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property. It shall be
presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one
month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere
license to use or enjoy the same. (Ord. 711, 7-7-1997)
3-6-3: ADDITIONAL TAX:
The tax levied in this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or any
other tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city;
provided, the first two percent (2%) of the tax shall be deducted from the
amount of tax the seller would otherwise be required to collect and pay to the
state department of revenue under Revised Code of Washington chapter 82.08.
(Ord. 711, 7-7-1997)
3-6-4: SPECIAL FUND; DISPOSITION OF REVENUE:
There is created a special fund in the treasury of the city and all taxes
collected under this chapter shall be placed in this special fund to be used
solely for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of tourist
promotion, acquisition of tourism related facilities, or operation of tourism
related facilities or to pay for any other uses as authorized in Revised Code
of Washington chapter 67.28, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 711, 7-7-1997)
3-6-5: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX:
For the purposes of the tax levied in this chapter:
   A.   The state department of revenue is designated as the agent of the city
for the purposes of collections and administration of the tax.
   B.   The administrative provisions contained in Revised Code of Washington
82.08.050 through 82.08.066 and in Revised Code of Washington chapter 82.32
shall apply to administration and collection of the tax by the state department
of revenue.
   C.   All rules and regulations adopted by the state department of revenue
for the administration of Revised Code of Washington chapter 82.08 are adopted
by reference.
   D.   The state department of revenue is authorized to prescribe and utilize
such forms and reporting procedures as the department may deem necessary and
appropriate. (Ord. 711, 7-7-1997; amd. 2007 Code)
3-6-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The effective date of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be July 27, 1997,
following publication. (Ord. 711, 7-7-1997)
3-6-7: PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or fail to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter. Every person convicted of a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 711, 7-7-1997; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 7
REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX
SECTION:
3-7-1: Tax Imposed; Date Payable
3-7-2: Taxable Events
3-7-3: Consistency With State Tax
3-7-4: Proceeds Distribution
3-7-5: Seller's Obligation
3-7-6: Lien Provisions
3-7-7: Payment Notation
3-7-8: Excessive And Improper Payments
3-7-1: TAX IMPOSED; DATE PAYABLE:
   A.   Tax: There is imposed a tax of one percent (1%) of the selling price on
each sale of real property within the corporate limits of the city. (1988 Code
§ 3.12.010; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Due Date: The tax imposed under this chapter shall become due and
payable immediately at the time of sale and, if not so paid within thirty (30)
days thereafter, shall bear interest at the rate prescribed in Revised Code Of
Washington 82.45.100, or its successor of one percent (1%) per month from the
time of sale until the date of payment. (1988 Code § 3.12.080; amd. 2007 Code)
3-7-2: TAXABLE EVENTS:
Taxes imposed in this chapter shall be collected from persons who are taxable
by the state under Revised Code of Washington chapter 82.45 and Washington
administrative code chapter 458.61 upon the occurrence of any taxable event
within the corporate limits of the city. (1988 Code § 3.12.020)
3-7-3: CONSISTENCY WITH STATE TAX:
The taxes imposed in this chapter shall comply with all applicable rules,
regulation, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as
imposed by the state under Revised Code of Washington chapter 82.45 and
Washington administrative code chapter 481-61. The provisions of those
chapters, to the extent they are not inconsistent with this chapter, shall
apply as though fully set forth in this chapter. (1988 Code § 3.12.030)
3-7-4: PROCEEDS DISTRIBUTION:
   A.   The county treasurer shall place one percent (1%) of the proceeds of
the taxes imposed in this chapter in the county current expense fund to defray
costs of collection.
   B.   The remaining proceeds from city taxes imposed in this chapter shall be
distributed to the city monthly and those taxes imposed under subsection 3-7-1A
of this chapter shall be placed by the city clerk-treasurer in a municipal
capital improvements fund. These capital improvements funds shall be used by
the city for local improvements, including those listed in Revised Code of
Washington 35.43.040.
   C.   This section shall not limit the existing authority of this city to
impose special assessments on property benefited thereby in the manner
prescribed by law. (1988 Code § 3.12.040)
3-7-5: SELLER'S OBLIGATION:
The taxes imposed in this chapter are the obligation of the seller and may be
enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner
prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. (1988 Code § 3.12.050)
3-7-6: LIEN PROVISIONS:
The taxes imposed in this chapter and any interest or penalties thereon are a
special lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale or
until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for
the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an
election not to pursue the other. (1988 Code § 3.12.060)
3-7-7: PAYMENT NOTATION:
The taxes imposed in this chapter shall be paid to and collected by the
treasurer of the county within which is located the real property which was
sold. The county treasurer shall act as agent for the city within the county
imposing the tax. The county treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing
satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance
prior to its recording, or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case
of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the county treasurer for the
payment of the tax imposed in this chapter shall be evidence of the
satisfaction of the lien imposed in section
3-7-6 of this chapter and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for
recording satisfaction of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance
evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the county auditor for
filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto; in
case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted
until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the county
treasurer. (1988 Code § 3.12.070)
3-7-8: EXCESSIVE AND IMPROPER PAYMENTS:
If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the county treasurer for a
refund, it appears a tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or
upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or
improper payment shall be refunded by the county treasurer to the taxpayer;
provided, that no refund shall be made unless the state has first authorized
the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such
improper amount was paid as a result of a miscalculation. Any refund made shall
be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the city. (1988 Code §
3.12.090)
CHAPTER 8
UTILITIES TAX
SECTION:
3-8-1: Scope; Power To License
3-8-2: Definitions
3-8-3: Administration; Rules
3-8-4: Business License Required (Rep. by Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
3-8-5: Tax Imposed; Amount
3-8-6: Deductions
3-8-7: Quarterly Installments; Due Date
3-8-8: Delinquency Penalty; Collection
3-8-9: Overpayment
3-8-10: Recordkeeping; Inspection
3-8-11: Annexation; Copies Of Ordinance Provided
3-8-12: Tax Constitutes Lien
3-8-1: SCOPE; POWER TO LICENSE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the
city to license for revenue. (Ord. 749, 12-4-2000)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
In construing the provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise declared or
clearly apparent from the context, the following definitions apply:
BUSINESS: All activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or
advantage to the taxpayer or to another person or class, directly or
indirectly.
CELLULAR TELEPHONE SERVICE: A two-way voice and data telephone/
telecommunications system based in whole or substantial part on wireless radio
communications and which is not subject to regulation by the Washington
utilities and transportation commission (WUTC). This includes cellular mobile
service. Cellular mobile service includes other wireless radio communications
services such as specialized mobile radio (SMR), personal communications
services (PCS), and any other evolving wireless radio communications technology
which accomplishes the same purpose as cellular mobile service. "Cellular
telephone service" is included with the definition of "telephone business" for
the purpose of this chapter.
CITY: The city of Long Beach.
COMPETITIVE TELEPHONE SERVICE: The provision by any person of
telecommunications equipment or apparatus, directory advertising and lease of
telephone street directories, or service related to the equipment or apparatus
such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a
type that can be provided by persons not subject to regulation as telephone
companies under Revised Code Of Washington title 80, and for which a separate
charge is made. Transmission of communication through cellular telephones is
classified as "telephone business" rather than "competitive telephone service".
FINANCE DEPARTMENT: All those working under the direction of the clerk-
treasurer of the city.
GROSS INCOME: The value proceeding or accruing by reason of the transaction of
the business engaged in and without deduction on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount,
delivery costs, taxes or any other expenses whatsoever paid or accrued and
without any deduction on account of losses, except as otherwise provided for in
this chapter. "Gross income" does not include charges which are passed on to
subscribers or customers by a taxpayer pursuant to tariffs required by
regulatory order to compensate for the cost to the taxpayer of the tax imposed
by this chapter.
PERSON, FIRM OR CORPORATION: Such terms used interchangeably in this chapter,
mean any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate,
firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company,
business trust, corporation, association, society, or any group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or
otherwise, and includes the United States, the state of Washington and any
political subdivision thereof, including the city, provided a valid tax may be
levied upon or collected therefrom under the provisions of this chapter.
QUARTERLY PERIOD: A three (3) month period beginning the first day of the
following months: January, April, July and October.
TAX YEAR OR TAXABLE YEAR: Either the calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal
year when permission is obtained from the clerk-treasurer to use a fiscal year
in lieu of a calendar year.
TAXPAYER: Any person, firm or corporation liable to the utility tax imposed by
this chapter.
TELEPHONE BUSINESS: The business of providing access to a local telephone
network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, coin
telephone services, telephonic, video, data, pagers, or similar communication,
or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel,
cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. The term
includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations
operating exchanges. "Telephone business" does not include the providing of
competitive telephone service, or providing of cable television service, or
other providing of broadcast services by radio or television stations.
VALUE PROCEEDING OR ACCRUING: The consideration, whether money, credits, rights
or other property expressed in terms of money, actually received or accrued.
The terms shall be applied, in each case, on a cash receipts or accrual basis
according to which method of accounting is regularly employed in keeping the
books of the taxpayer. (Ord. 749, 12-4-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
3-8-3: ADMINISTRATION; RULES:
The finance department is authorized to adopt, publish and enforce, from time
to time, such rules and regulations for the proper administration of this
chapter as shall be necessary. (Ord. 749, 12-4-2000)
3-8-4: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
3-8-5: TAX IMPOSED; AMOUNT:
There is levied and there shall be collected from every person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business activities hereinafter set forth, for the
act or privilege of engaging in such activities within the city, a tax to be
known as a "utility tax" in the amounts to be determined by the application of
the rates herein stated against gross income, as follows:
   A.   Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in or carrying on a
telephone business, or a combined telephone and telegraph business, a tax equal
to six percent (6%) of the total gross operating income, including income from
intrastate toll derived from the operation of such businesses within the city.
"Telephone business" does not include the providing of competitive telephone
service, nor the providing of cable television service.
   B.   Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in or carrying on a
telegraph business, a tax equal to six percent (6%) of the total gross income
from such business in the city.
   C.   Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in or carrying on a
business of sale, delivery or distribution of electricity and electrical
energy, a tax equal to six percent (6%) of the total gross income derived from
the sales of such electricity to ultimate users in the city; provided, that
there shall not be any such tax levied upon installation charges for electrical
units.
   D.   Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in or carrying on the
business of sale, delivery, distribution or furnishing of natural gas for
domestic, business or industrial consumption, a tax equal to six percent (6%)
of the total gross income derived from such sales to ultimate users in the
city; provided, that there shall not be any such tax levied upon installation
charges for gas energy units.
   E.   Upon the sale, delivery, distribution or furnishing of water for
domestic, business or industrial consumption, a tax equal to nine percent (9%)
of the total gross income from such sales; provided, that there shall not be a
tax levied upon installation charges for individual consumer water service
lines and meters.
   F.   Upon the furnishing of sanitary sewerage collection and disposal
services for discharge by domestic, business or industrial customers, a tax
equal to nine percent (9%) of the total gross income from such business;
provided, that there shall not be any tax levied upon installation charges for
individual customer sewer laterals and connections.
   G.   Upon the furnishing of storm drainage facilities for collection of
stormwater discharge by domestic, business or industrial customers, a tax equal
to nine percent (9%) of the total gross income from such business in the city.
   H.   Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged in carrying on a garbage
collection service or business, a tax equal to nine percent (9%) of the total
gross income from such business in the city. (Ord. 749, 12-4-2000; amd. Ord.
964, 12-3-2018)
3-8-6: DEDUCTIONS:
In computing the tax levied under this chapter, there shall be deducted from
the gross income the following items:
   A.   Income derived from transactions in interstate or foreign commerce or
from any business which the city is prohibited from taxing under the
constitutions of the United States or the state of Washington.
   B.   The amount of credit losses and uncollectibles actually sustained by
taxpayers whose regular books of account are kept upon an accrual basis. (Ord.
749, 12-4-2000)
3-8-7: QUARTERLY INSTALLMENTS; DUE DATE:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly
installments. Remittance shall be made on or before the thirtieth day of the
month next succeeding the end of the quarterly period for which the tax
accrued, that is, on January 30, April 30, July 30 and October 30 of each year.
The remittance shall be made to the finance department and accompanied by a
return on a form to be provided and prescribed by the clerk- treasurer. On the
return, the taxpayer shall be required to swear or affirm that the information
therein given is full and true and that the taxpayer knows the same to be so.
(Ord. 749, 12-4-2000)
3-8-8: DELINQUENCY PENALTY; COLLECTION:
   A.   Interest Charged: If payment of any fee or tax due under this chapter
is not received by the finance department on or before the day it becomes due,
there shall be added a penalty in interest as follows:
      1.   One to forty (40) days' delinquency, ten percent (10%), with a
minimum penalty of five dollars ($5.00);
      2.   Forty one (41) to seventy (70) days' delinquency, fifteen percent
(15%) with a minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00); and
      3.   Seventy one (71) or more days' delinquency, twenty percent (20%)
with a minimum penalty of fifteen dollars ($15.00).
   B.   Remedial Action: Any tax due under this chapter and unpaid, and all
penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the city and may be collected by
court proceedings, which remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies.
(Ord. 749, 12-4-2000)
3-8-9: OVERPAYMENT:
Any money paid to the city through error or otherwise not in payment of the tax
imposed hereby or in excess of such tax shall, upon request of the taxpayer, be
credited against any tax due or to become due from such taxpayer hereunder or,
upon taxpayer's ceasing to do business in the city, be refunded to the
taxpayer. (Ord. 749, 12-4-2000)
3-8-10: RECORDKEEPING; INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation required to obtain a
business license by title 4 of this code to keep and preserve for a period of
five (5) years such books and records as will accurately reflect the amount of
gross income from which can be determined the amounts of any fee or tax for
which there may be liability under the provisions of this chapter. The term
"books and records" as used in this section, includes the taxpayer's copies of
federal excise tax returns, state of Washington excise tax returns and copies
of excise tax audits made by the United States or state of Washington, and
furnished to such person, firm or corporation, if any. The taxpayer's books and
records shall be opened for examination at all reasonable times by the clerk-
treasurer or a duly authorized representative. (Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
3-8-11: ANNEXATION; COPIES OF ORDINANCE PROVIDED:
Whenever the boundaries of the city are extended by annexation, all persons,
firms and corporations subject to this chapter will be provided copies of the
annexation ordinance by the city. (Ord. 749, 12-4-2000)
3-8-12: TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN:
Any person, firm or corporation subject to this chapter who fails or refuses to
apply for a business license pursuant to title 4, chapter 6 of this code, or to
make such tax return or to pay such tax when due, or who makes any false
statement or representation in or in connection with any such application for a
business license or such tax return, or who otherwise violates or refuses or
fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, with any rule or
regulation promulgated hereunder, or with the provisions of title 4, chapter 6
of this code, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
CHAPTER 9
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Planning And Development Fees
3-9-2: Depot Rental Fees
3-9-3: Trolley Rental Fees (Rep. by Ord. 996, 7-6-2021)
3-9-4: Veterans Field Main Stage Rental Rates
3-9-1: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT FEES:
   A.   Fee Structure: The following fees shall apply to the respective
permits; additionally the applicant shall be financially responsible for any
and all engineering services and other professional consulting services deemed
necessary by the City for complete permit and planning review:
Variance                                 $ 650.00
Conditional use                          650.00
Rezone                                   975.00
Zoning text amendment                    975.00
Comprehensive Plan amendment             975.00
Comprehensive Plan amendment with rezone 1,500.00
Boundary line adjustment                 95.00
Short plat                               650.00 + $30.00 per lot
Long plat, preliminary                   975.00 + $45.00 per lot
Long plat, final                         65.00 per lot
Resubmittal/extensions - subdivisions    325.00
Environmental checklist                  160.00
Environmental impact statement           Consultant
Shoreline substantial development permit $650.00
Shoreline conditional use                650.00
Shoreline variance                       650.00
Shoreline text amendment                 975.00
Special use permit                       100.00
Special event permit                     100.00
Critical areas checklist review          130.00
Critical areas report/assessment/        325.00
delineation/Mitigation Plan review
Critical areas exception/variance        400.00
Public notice fee                        195.00
 
   B.   Refund Of Fees: Once an application is made and fee(s) paid, an
applicant may withdraw the application. If at the time of withdrawal public
notice is not yet published, the City may refund up to fifty percent (50%) of
the fee. Once public notice is published, the City will retain the entire fee,
and refund shall not occur. (Ord. 937, 5-1-2017; amd. Ord. 962, 11-5-2018)
3-9-2: DEPOT RENTAL FEES:
   A.   Fees Established:
 
Daily rental for meetings of not-for-profit groups and organizations  $ 50.00
deemed to provide a public benefit
Daily rental for use of the facility                                  100.00
Annual rental for meetings of not-for-profit groups and organizations 250.00
deemed to provide a public benefit, up to 12 meetings per year
Cleaning deposit required                                             100.00
 
These rates shall take effect immediately and shall remain in effect unless
changed by resolution of the Long Beach City Council.
The Council has the right to waive the fees as voted upon and approved by a
majority.
   B.   Uses: Use of the facility shall be limited to meetings and other
functions that do not involve any retail sales, use of power tools, use of
cooking facilities other than small appliances such as coffee makers, and/or
activities that could damage the facility in any way.
The building is rented "as is" with tables and chairs. The entity renting the
building may move the tables and chairs, but they are not to leave the
building. Pictures on the wall will not be moved or removed. Garbage must be
removed at the end of the rental and the building will be returned to the
condition it was prior to the rental. (Ord. 938, 5-1-2017)
3-9-3: TROLLEY RENTAL FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 996, 7-6-2021)
3-9-4: VETERANS FIELD MAIN STAGE RENTAL RATES:
Fees to rent the stage are as follows:
 
Daily rentals:                                                          
For not-for-profit groups and organizations deemed to provide a public $ 50.00
benefit:
Rental for use of the facility:                                        $ 100.00
Cleaning deposit required:                                             $ 100.00
 
If the renter does not remove all garbage from the stage a fee will be charged
to the cleaning deposit to cover that cost.
The Council has the right to waive or reduce the fees as voted upon and
approved by a majority. (Ord. 973, 10-21-2019; amd. Ord. 1035, 6-17-2024)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR LOCAL TAXES
SECTION:
3-10-1: Purpose
3-10-2: Application
3-10-3: Definitions
3-10-4: License Requirements (Rep. by Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
3-10-5: Procedures
3-10-6: Payments
3-10-7: Records; Retention, Inspection
3-10-8: Accounting Methods
3-10-9: Public Work Contracts
3-10-10: Underpayment Of Tax
3-10-11: Assessment Issuance
3-10-12: Overpayment Of Tax
3-10-13: Timely File, Pay
3-10-14: Cancellation Of Penalties
3-10-15: Business Successor
3-10-16: Administrative Appeal
3-10-17: Judicial Review
3-10-18: Rules And Regulations
3-10-19: Agreements With Other Cities
3-10-20: Mailing Of Notices
3-10-21: Tax Declared Additional
3-10-22: Public Disclosure
3-10-23: Tax Constitutes Debt
3-10-24: Unlawful Actions; Violation; Penalties
3-10-25: Suspension Or Revocation Of Business License (Rep. by Ord. 914a, 8-3-
2015)
3-10-26: Closing Agreement
3-10-27: Uncollectible Taxes
3-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide consistency in administration of all
locally collected taxes. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-2: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply with respect to the taxes imposed
under chapters 5, "Gambling Tax", 8, "Utilities Tax", and 4, "Business And
Occupation Tax", of this title and under other titles, chapters, and sections
in such manner and to such extent as indicated in each such title, chapter or
section. In the event of a conflict regarding the administrative requirements
of this chapter and the administrative requirements of the chapter which
provides for the imposition of the tax, the administrative requirements of the
latter such chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in chapter 4 of this
title shall apply equally to the provisions of this chapter unless the term is
defined otherwise in this chapter. In addition, the following definitions will
apply:
DIRECTOR: The city finance and administrative services director or designee.
REPORTING PERIOD:
   A.   A one month period beginning the first day of each calendar month
(monthly); or
   B.   A three (3) month period beginning January 1, April 1, July 1 or
October 1 of each year (quarterly); or
   C.   A twelve (12) month period beginning January 1 of each year (annual).
RETURN: Any document a person is required by the city to file to satisfy or
establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the city
and that has a statutorily defined due date.
SUCCESSOR: Any person to whom a taxpayer quitting, selling out, exchanging, or
disposing of a business sells or otherwise conveys, directly or indirectly, in
bulk and not in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's business, any part of the
materials, supplies, merchandise, inventory, fixtures, or equipment of the
taxpayer. Any person obligated to fulfill the terms of a contract shall be
deemed a successor to any contractor defaulting in the performance of any
contract as to which such person is a surety or guarantor.
TAX YEAR OR TAXABLE YEAR: The calendar year. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-
2008)
3-10-4: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
3-10-5: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Other than any annual license fee or registration fee assessed under
this title, the tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in
quarterly installments. At the director's discretion, businesses may be
assigned to a monthly or annual reporting period depending on the tax amount
owing or type of tax. Tax payments are due on or before the last day of the
next month following the end of the assigned reporting period covered by the
return.
   B.   Taxes shall be paid as provided in this chapter and accompanied by a
return on forms as prescribed by the director. The return shall be signed by
the taxpayer personally or by a responsible officer or agent of the taxpayer.
The individual signing the return shall swear or affirm that the information in
the return is complete and true.
   C.   Tax returns must be filed and returned by the due date whether or not
any tax is owed.
   D.   For purposes of the tax imposed by chapter 4 of this title, any person
whose value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the
business, subject to tax after all allowable deductions, is equal to or less
than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in the current quarter, shall file a
return, declare no tax due on their return, and submit the return to the
director. The gross receipts and deduction amounts shall be entered on the tax
return even though no tax may be due.
   E.   A taxpayer that commences to engage in business activity shall file a
return and pay the tax or fee for the portion of the reporting period during
which the taxpayer is engaged in business activity.
   F.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by any other provision of
this chapter, in computing any period of days prescribed by this chapter the
day of the act or event from which the designated period of time runs shall not
be included. The last day of the period shall be included unless it is a
Saturday, Sunday, or city or federal legal holiday, in which case the last day
of such period shall be the next succeeding day which is neither a Saturday,
Sunday, or city or federal legal holiday.
   G.   If any taxpayer fails, neglects or refuses to make a return as and when
required in this chapter, the director is authorized to determine the amount of
the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base
the director's estimate of the tax or fees due. Such assessment shall be deemed
prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owed to the city by the
taxpayer. The director shall notify the taxpayer by mail or e-mail of the
amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due;
the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable.
(Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-6: PAYMENTS:
   A.   Taxes shall be paid to the director in United States currency by bank
draft, certified check, cashier's check, personal check, money order, cash, or
by wire transfer or electronic payment if such wire transfer or electronic
payment is authorized by the director. If payment so received is not paid by
the bank on which it is drawn, the taxpayer, by whom such payment is tendered,
shall remain liable for payment of the tax and for all legal penalties, the
same as if such payment had not been tendered. Acceptance of any sum by the
director shall not discharge the tax or fee due unless the amount paid is the
full amount due.
   B.   A return or remittance that is transmitted to the city by United States
mail shall be deemed filed or received on the date shown by the cancellation
mark stamped by the post office upon the envelope containing it. The director
may allow electronic filing of returns or remittances from any taxpayer. A
return or remittance which is transmitted to the city electronically shall be
deemed filed or received according to procedures set forth by the director.
   C.   If a written request is received prior to the due date, the director,
for good cause, may grant, in writing, additional time within which to make and
file returns.
   D.   The director shall keep full and accurate records of all funds received
or refunded. The director shall apply payments first against all penalties and
interest owing, and then upon the tax, without regard to any direction of the
taxpayer.
   E.   For any return not accompanied by a remittance of the tax shown to be
due thereon, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have failed or refused to file a
return and shall be subject to the penalties and interest provided in this
chapter.
   F.   Any payment made that is returned for lack of sufficient funds or for
any other reason will not be considered received until payment by certified
check, money order, or cash of the original amount due, plus a "nonsufficient
funds" (NSF) charge as per the fee resolution is received by the director. Any
license issued upon payment with an NSF check will be considered void, and
shall be returned to the director. No license shall be reissued until payment
of the NSF fee is received.
   G.   The director is authorized, but not required, to mail tax return forms
to taxpayers, but failure of the taxpayer to receive any such forms shall not
excuse the taxpayer from filing returns and making payment of the taxes or
fees, when and as due under this chapter. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-7: RECORDS; RETENTION, INSPECTION:
Every person liable for any fee or tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and
preserve, for a period of five (5) years after filing a tax return, such
records as may be necessary to determine the amount of any fee or tax for which
the person may be liable; which records shall include copies of all federal
income tax and state tax returns and reports made by the person. All books,
records, papers, invoices, vendor lists, inventories, stocks of merchandise,
and other data including federal income tax and state tax returns and reports
shall be open for examination at any time by the director or its duly
authorized agent. Every person's business premises shall be open for inspection
or examination by the director or a duly authorized agent.
   A.   If a person does not keep the necessary books and records within the
city, it shall be sufficient if such person:
      1.   Produces within the city such books and records as may be required
by the director; or
      2.   Bears the cost of examination by the director's agent at the place
where such books and records are kept; provided that the person electing to
bear such cost shall pay in advance to the director the estimated amount
thereof including round trip fare, lodging, meals and incidental expenses,
subject to adjustment upon completion of the examination.
   B.   Any person who fails, or refuses a department request, to provide or
make available records, or to allow inspection or examination of the business
premises, shall be forever barred from questioning in any court action, the
correctness of any assessment of taxes made by the city for any period for
which such records have not been provided, made available or kept and
preserved, or in respect of which inspection or examination of the business
premises has been denied. The director is authorized to determine the amount of
the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base
the estimate of the tax or fees due. Such fee or tax assessment shall be deemed
prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owing the city by the
taxpayer. The director shall notify the taxpayer by mail the amount of tax so
determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of
such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable. (Ord. 828, 12-
17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-8: ACCOUNTING METHODS:
   A.   A taxpayer may file tax returns in each reporting period with amounts
based upon cash receipts only if the taxpayer's books of account are kept on a
cash receipts basis. A taxpayer that does not regularly keep books of account
on a cash receipts basis must file returns with amounts based on the accrual
method.
   B.   The taxes imposed and the returns required hereunder shall be upon a
calendar year basis. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-9: PUBLIC WORK CONTRACTS:
The director may, before issuing any final payment to any person performing any
public work contract for the city, require such person to pay in full all
license fees or taxes due under this title from such person on account of such
contract or otherwise, and may require such taxpayer to file with the director
a verified list of all subcontractors supplying labor and/or materials to the
person in connection with said public work. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-
2008)
3-10-10: UNDERPAYMENT OF TAX:
   A.   If, upon examination of any returns, or from other information obtained
by the director, it appears that a tax or penalty less than that properly due
has been paid, the director shall assess the additional amount found to be due
and shall add thereto interest on the tax only. The director shall notify the
person by mail or e-mail of the additional amount, which shall become due and
shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, or within
such time as the director may provide in writing.
   B.   1. The director shall compute interest in accordance with Revised Code
Of Washington 82.32.050 as it now exists or as it may be amended; or
      2.   If subsection B1 of this section is held to be invalid, then the
provisions of Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.050 existing at the effective
date hereof shall apply. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-11: ASSESSMENT ISSUANCE:
The director shall not assess, or correct an assessment for, additional taxes,
penalties, or interest due more than four (4) years after the close of the
calendar year in which they were incurred, except that the director may issue
an assessment:
   A.   Against a person who is not currently registered or licensed or has not
filed a tax return as required by this chapter for taxes due within the period
commencing ten (10) years prior to the close of the calendar year in which the
person was contacted in writing by the director;
   B.   Against a person that has committed fraud or who misrepresented a
material fact; or
   C.   Against a person that has executed a written waiver of such
limitations. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-12: OVERPAYMENT OF TAX:
   A.   Any person having paid any tax, original assessment, additional
assessment, or corrected assessment of any tax may apply to the city
administrator or his/her designee within the time limitation for refund
provided in this section by applying in writing for a correction of the amount
paid, in which application the petitioner shall set forth the reasons the
amount in which the tax, interest, or penalty should be refunded.
   B.   If, upon receipt of a timely application for a refund, or during an
audit or examination of the taxpayer's records and tax returns, the city
administrator or his/her designee determines that the amount of tax, penalty,
or interest paid is in excess of that properly due, the excess amount shall be
credited to the taxpayer's account or shall be refunded to the taxpayer. Except
as provided in subsection C of this section, no refund or credit shall be made
for taxes, penalties, or interest paid more than three (3) years prior to the
beginning of the calendar year in which the refund application is made or
examination of records is completed.
   C.   The execution of a written waiver shall extend the time for applying
for, or making a refund or credit of any taxes paid during, or attributable to,
the years covered by the waiver if, prior to the expiration of the waiver
period, an application for refund of such taxes is made by the taxpayer or the
city administrator or his/her designee discovers that a refund or credit is
due.
   D.   Refunds shall be made by means of vouchers approved by the city
administrator or his/her designee and by the issuance of a city check or
warrants drawn upon and payable from such funds as the city may provide.
   E.   Any final judgment for which a recovery is granted by any court of
competent jurisdiction for tax, penalties, interest, or costs paid by any
person shall be paid in the same manner, as provided in subsection D of this
section, upon the filing with the city administrator or his/her designee a
certified copy of the order or judgment of the court.
   F.   1. The city administrator or his/her designee shall compute interest on
refunds or credits of amounts paid or other recovery allowed a taxpayer in
accordance with Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.060 as it now exists or as it
may be amended; or
      2.   If subsection F1 of this section is held to be invalid, then the
provisions of Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.060 existing at the effective
date hereof shall apply. (Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
3-10-13: TIMELY FILE, PAY:
   A.   If payment of any tax due on a return to be filed by a taxpayer is not
received by the director by the due date, the director shall add a penalty in
accordance with Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.090(1), as it now exists or as
it may be amended.
   B.   If the director determines that any tax has been substantially
underpaid as defined in Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.090(2), there shall be
added a penalty in accordance with Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.090(2), as
it now exists or as it may be amended.
   C.   If a citation or criminal complaint is issued by the director for the
collection of taxes, fees, assessments, interest or penalties, there shall be
added thereto a penalty in accordance with Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.090
(3), as it now exists or as it may be amended.
   D.   If the director finds that a person has engaged in any business or
performed any act upon which a tax is imposed under this title and that person
has not obtained from the director a license as required by title 4, chapter 1
of this code, the director shall impose a penalty in accordance with Revised
Code Of Washington 82.32.090(4), as it now exists or as it may be amended. No
penalty shall be imposed under this subsection if the person who has engaged in
business without a license obtains a license prior to being notified by the
director of the need to be licensed.
   E.   If the director determines that all or any part of a deficiency
resulted from the taxpayer's failure to follow specific written tax reporting
instructions, there shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with Revised Code
Of Washington 82.32.090(5), as it now exists or as it may be amended.
   F.   If the director finds that all or any part of the deficiency resulted
from an intent to evade the tax payable, the director shall assess a penalty in
accordance with Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.090(6), as it now exists or as
it may be amended.
   G.   The penalties imposed under subsections A through E of this section can
each be imposed on the same tax found to be due. This subsection does not
prohibit or restrict the application of other penalties authorized by law.
   H.   The director shall not impose both the evasion penalty and the penalty
for disregarding specific written instructions on the same tax found to be due.
   I.   For the purposes of this section, "return" means any document a person
is required by the city of Long Beach to file to satisfy or establish a tax or
fee obligation that is administered or collected by the city, and that has a
statutorily defined due date.
   J.   If incorporation into the city of Long Beach code of future changes to
Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.090 is deemed invalid, then the provisions of
Revised Code Of Washington 82.32.090 existing at the effective date hereof
shall apply. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-14: CANCELLATION OF PENALTIES:
   A.   The director may cancel any penalties imposed under subsection 3-10-13A
of this chapter if the taxpayer shows that its failure to timely file or pay
the tax was due to reasonable cause and not wilful neglect. Wilful neglect is
presumed unless the taxpayer shows that it exercised ordinary business care and
prudence in making arrangements to file the return and pay the tax but was,
nevertheless, due to circumstances beyond the taxpayer's control, unable to
file or pay by the due date. The director has no authority to cancel any other
penalties or to cancel penalties for any other reason except as provided in
subsection C of this section.
   B.   A request for cancellation of penalties must be received by the
director within thirty (30) days after the date the department mails the notice
that the penalties are due. The request must be in writing and contain
competent proof of all pertinent facts supporting a reasonable cause
determination. In all cases the burden of proving the facts rests upon the
taxpayer.
   C.   The director may cancel the penalties in subsection 3-10-13A of this
chapter one time if a person:
      1.   Is not currently licensed and filing returns;
      2.   Was unaware of its responsibility to file and pay tax; and
      3.   Obtained business licenses and filed past due tax returns within
thirty (30) days after being notified by the department.
   D.   The director shall not cancel any interest charged upon amounts due.
(Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-15: BUSINESS SUCCESSOR:
   A.   Whenever any taxpayer quits business, sells out, exchanges, or
otherwise disposes of his business or his stock of goods, any tax payable
hereunder shall become immediately due and payable. Such taxpayer shall, within
ten (10) days thereafter, make a return and pay the tax due.
   B.   Any person who becomes a successor shall become liable for the full
amount of any tax owing. The successor shall withhold from the purchase price a
sum sufficient to pay any tax due to the city from the taxpayer until such time
as:
      1.   The taxpayer shall produce a receipt from the city showing payment
in full of any tax due or a certificate that no tax is due; or
      2.   More than six (6) months has passed since the successor notified the
director of the acquisition and the director has not issued and notified the
successor of an assessment.
   C.   Payment of the tax by the successor shall, to the extent thereof, be
deemed a payment upon the purchase price. If such payment is greater in amount
than the purchase price, the amount of the difference shall become a debt due
such successor from the taxpayer.
   D.   Notwithstanding the above, if a successor gives written notice to the
director of the acquisition, and the department does not within six (6) months
of the date it received the notice issue an assessment against the taxpayer and
mail a copy of that assessment to the successor, the successor shall not be
liable for the tax. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-16: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL:
Any person, except one who has failed to comply with section
3-10-7 of this chapter, aggrieved by the amount of the fee or tax determined by
the city administrator to be required under the provisions of this chapter may
pay the amount due and appeal from such determination by filing a written
notice of appeal with the hearings examiner within thirty (30) days from the
date written notice of such amount was mailed to the taxpayer. A fifty dollar
($50.00) filing fee shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is
required to process the appeal. The city clerk shall, as soon as practical, fix
a time and place for the hearing of such appeal, and shall cause a notice of
the time and place thereof to be delivered or mailed to the parties. The
decision of the hearings examiner shall indicate the correct amount of the fee
or tax owing.
The decision of the city administrator or his/her designee on an application
for refund under section
3-10-12 of this chapter shall be final unless the petitioner files written
notice of appeal to the hearings examiner within thirty (30) days of the city
administrator's or his/her designee's action. A fifty dollar ($50.00) filing
fee shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is required to process
the appeal. The city clerk shall, as soon as practical, fix a time and place
for the hearing of such appeal, and shall cause a notice of the time and place
thereof to be delivered or mailed to the parties. The decision of the hearings
examiner shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the city
administrator or his/her designee, and the hearings examiner's decision shall
be final. (Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
3-10-17: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
The taxpayer or the city may obtain judicial review of the hearings examiner's
decision by applying for a writ of review with the Pacific County superior
court within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearings examiner's decision
in accordance with the procedure set forth in chapter 7.16 Revised Code Of
Washington, other applicable law, and court rules. Review by the superior court
shall be on, and shall be limited to, the record on appeal created before the
hearing examiner. The city shall have the same right of review from the
administrative decision as does a taxpayer. (Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
3-10-18: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The director shall have the power, from time to time, to adopt, publish and
enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with law
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and it shall be
unlawful to violate or fail to comply with, any such rule or regulation. (Ord.
828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-19: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER CITIES:
The director is authorized to enter into agreements with other Washington
cities which impose an "eligible gross receipts tax":
   A.   To conduct an audit or joint audit of a taxpayer by using an auditor
employed by the city of Long Beach, another city, or a contract auditor,
provided, that such contract auditor's pay is not in any way based upon the
amount of tax assessed.
   B.   When administering business and occupation tax of chapter 4 of this
title to allocate or apportion in a manner that fairly reflects the gross
receipts earned from activities conducted within the respective cities the
gross proceeds of sales, gross receipts, or gross income of the business, or
taxes due from any person that is required to pay an eligible gross receipts
tax to more than one Washington city.
   C.   When administering business and occupation tax of chapter 4 of this
title to apply the city's tax prospectively where a taxpayer has no office or
place of business within the city and has paid tax on all gross income to
another Washington city where the taxpayer is located; provided that the other
city maintains an eligible gross receipts tax, and the income was not derived
from contracts with the city. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-20: MAILING OF NOTICES:
Any notice required by this chapter to be mailed to any taxpayer or licensee
shall be sent by ordinary mail, addressed to the address of the taxpayer or
licensee as shown by the records of the director. Failure of the taxpayer or
licensee to receive any such mailed notice shall not release the taxpayer or
licensee from any tax, fee, interest, or any penalties thereon, nor shall such
failure operate to extend any time limit set by the provisions of this chapter.
It is the responsibility of the taxpayer to inform the director in writing
about a change in the taxpayer's address. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-21: TAX DECLARED ADDITIONAL:
The license fee and tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or
tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city of Long
Beach except as herein otherwise expressly provided. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007,
eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-22: PUBLIC DISCLOSURE:
For purposes of this section, unless a different meaning is clearly established
by context, the following definitions apply:
DISCLOSE: To make known to any person in any manner.
TAX INFORMATION: A. A taxpayer's identity;
   B.   The nature, source, or amount of the taxpayer's income, payments,
receipts, deductions, exemption, credits, assets, liability, net worth, tax
liability deficiencies, over assessments, or tax payments, whether taken from
the taxpayer's books and records or any other source;
   C.   Whether the taxpayer's return was, is being, or will be examined or
subject to other investigation or processing; or
   D.   Other data received by, recorded by, prepared by, or provided to the
director with respect to a taxpayer.
Provided, that tax information shall not include data, material, or documents
that do not disclose information related to a specific or identifiable
taxpayer.
   A.   Tax returns and information may be "public records" as that term is
defined in Revised Code Of Washington 42.17.020. The director shall not
disclose tax information if disclosure would violate Revised Code Of Washington
chapter 42.17 or any other law prohibiting disclosure.
   B.   Tax information may be disclosed to the following:
      1. The mayor, city administrator, members of the city council, city
attorney, city clerk, or their authorized designees, for official purposes;
      2. Any agency or officer of the United States Of America, the state of
Washington, or a tax department of any state, county, city or town, provided
that the agency or officer grants substantially similar privileges to the city,
and further provided that the agency or officer shall not further disclose the
tax information except as authorized in this section;
      3. The taxpayer to whom it pertains or to such person or persons as the
taxpayer may designate in writing as the taxpayer's designee; except that tax
information not received from the taxpayer shall not be so disclosed if the
director determines that such disclosure would compromise any investigation or
litigation by any federal, state, or local government agency in connection with
the civil or criminal liability of the taxpayer or another person, or that such
disclosure would identify a confidential informant, or that such disclosure is
contrary to any agreement entered into by the director that provides for the
reciprocal exchange of information with other government agencies which
agreement requires confidentiality with respect to such information unless such
information is required to be disclosed to the taxpayer by the order of any
court.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall prevent the use of tax information by the
director or any other agency in any civil or criminal action involving any
license, tax, interest, or penalty.
   D.   A person disclosing tax information to a person not entitled to receive
that information under this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and if the
person violating this privacy requirement is an officer or employee of the
city, such person may be required to forfeit their office or employment. (Ord.
828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-23: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
Any license fee or tax due and unpaid under this chapter, and all interest and
penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the city of Long Beach and may be
collected in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy
shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007,
eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-24: UNLAWFUL ACTIONS; VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person liable for fees under this chapter
(or other chapters as listed):
      1.   To violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the director;
      2.   To make any false statement on any license application or tax
return;
      3.   To aid or abet any person in any attempt to evade payment of a
license fee or tax;
      4.   To fail to appear or testify in response to a subpoena issued
pursuant to this chapter; or
      5.   To testify falsely in any investigation, audit, or proceeding
conducted pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a gross
misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter may be
punished by a fine and/or imprisonment as per title 1, chapter 4, "General
Penalty", of this code. Penalties or punishments provided in this chapter shall
be in addition to all other penalties provided by law.
   C.   Any person, or officer of a corporation, convicted of continuing to
engage in business after the revocation of a license shall be guilty of a gross
misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in the general penalty code in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-25: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
(Rep. by Ord. 914a, 8-3-2015)
3-10-26: CLOSING AGREEMENT:
The director may enter into an agreement in writing with any person relating to
the liability of such person in respect of any tax imposed by any of the
chapters within this title and administered by this chapter for any taxable
period(s). Upon approval of such agreement, evidenced by execution thereof by
the director and the person so agreeing, the agreement shall be final and
conclusive as to the tax liability or tax immunity covered thereby, and, except
upon a showing of fraud or malfeasance, or misrepresentation of a material
fact:
   A.   The case shall not be reopened as to the matters agreed upon, or the
agreement modified, by the director or the taxpayer.
   B.   In any suit, action or proceeding, such agreement, or any
determination, assessment, collection, payment, abatement, refund, or credit
made in accordance therewith, shall not be annulled, modified, set aside, or
disregarded. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-10-27: UNCOLLECTIBLE TAXES:
The director may charge off any tax, penalty, or interest that is owed by a
taxpayer, if the director reasonably ascertains that the cost of collecting
such amounts would be greater than the total amount that is owed or likely to
be collected from the taxpayer. A written memorandum shall evidence such
action. (Ord. 828, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: Business License Required
4-1-3: Exemptions
4-1-4: Disclaimer Of City Liability
4-1-5: Forfeiture Of Business License
4-1-6: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 4 of this Code.
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: Any person, persons, partnerships, or corporations engaged in
merchandising and/or selling a product or service for legal tender or trade.
DELIVERY: Any person, persons, partnerships, or corporations engaged in
delivering a product or service for legal tender or trade.
ITINERANT VENDOR 1 : Any person, persons, partnerships or corporation who has
no permanent physical place of business within the city limits, does not make
regular stops within the city at the request of local persons or businesses and
who desires on an intermittent basis to sell products or services within the
city limits.
OFF SEASON: The period of time in Long Beach outside of the traditional summer
season. For the purpose of this chapter, the "off season" shall be September 15
through May 15.
PEDDLING: Selling or offering for sale, barter or exchange at retail any goods,
wares, merchandise or services of any kind whatsoever by traveling from place
to place along the streets of the city or from residence to residence therein,
but shall not include solicitation or canvassing for future delivery.
"Peddling" may, in some instances, include the activities of an "itinerant
vendor" or "transient merchant", as defined herein. If a peddler is also an
"itinerant vendor" or "transient merchant", as defined herein, then those
provisions shall also be applicable. To the extent that the provisions of this
chapter relative to "peddling" are inconsistent with those relating to
"itinerant vendors" and/or "transient merchants", the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
RESIDENCE: Includes every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or
structure.
SOLICITING: Includes any one or more of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, insurance, or services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever, all for future delivery;
provided, however, that seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines,
periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication shall not
be deemed to be soliciting, and such activities are not regulated by this
chapter.
   B.   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation, or project.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of
goods, wares or merchandise in the city and who, for the purpose of conducting
such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of any kind, or
vacant lot; provided, however, this term does not include: any person selling
goods, wares or merchandise which are raised, produced or manufactured by him;
to any person selling vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products at an
established city market; to any person operating a store or refreshment stand
at a resort; or to any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to
property owned by him or upon which he resides. Itshall be prima facie evidence
that a person is a "transient merchant" if the person does not transact
business from a fixed location or if the person does not own, or lease for a
term of at least six (6) months, the property from which business is conducted.
(Ord. 812, 6-12-2006; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 1045, 8-18-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 2 of this title.
4-1-2: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Application Procedure:
      1.   Application for a business license shall be made by submitting a
completed master business application and any appropriate addenda forms, and
remitting all fees due, including handling fees established in RCW 19.02.075,
to the Washington State Department of Licensing's master license service, in
coordination with the city.
      2.   The annual business license fee shall be established by council
resolution.
      3.   A license shall be issued after the application has been fully
completed and all applicable requirements have been fully complied with. In
addition, any business requiring a state or federal license shall obtain said
licenses and provide the city with proof of their issuance prior to the
issuance of a city business license or any renewal thereof.
      4.   Neither the filing of a new or renewal application for a license
shall authorize a person to engage in or conduct a business until such license
has been granted or renewed.
      5.   Any business relocating to another address in the city shall reapply
to have a new business license reissued to reflect the new address.
      6.   If more than one business is conducted on a single premise a
separate license shall be required for each separate business conducted,
operated, engaged in or practiced.
      7.   The license shall expire on the date established by the master
license service and must be renewed on or before the expiration in order to
continue conducting business in the city. The license term and fee may be
prorated to accommodate the expiration date established by the master license
service.
      8.   A single (master) business license will be issued to the owner of a
business complex which has dealers/stations utilizing a common single
cashiering function. The owner shall provide a list of the State Department of
Revenue tax numbers for all tenants.
   B.   General Qualifications Of Licensees:
      1.   No license shall be issued, nor shall any license be renewed,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to:
         a.   An applicant who is under eighteen (18) years of age at the time
of the application, unless he/she shall obtain the written consent of said
applicant's parent or guardian to make said application;
         b.   An applicant who has had a similar license revoked or suspended,
or its predecessor;
         c.   An applicant who seeks such a license in order to practice some
illegal act or some act injurious to the public health or safety.
      2.   Any person, including city officials, may submit written complaints
or objections to the city license officer regarding the application for any
license, and that the city license officer is additionally authorized to
request and receive information from all city departments as will tend to aid
her/him in determining whether to issue or deny the license. Such information
shall be confidential unless a hearing is requested on the application, or if
the applicant shall request the information in writing. All information,
complaints or objections shall be investigated and considered by the city
license officer prior to issuing, denying or renewing any license.
   C.   License Nontransferable: Said license shall be personal and not
transferable.
   D.   Multiple Locations: If business is transacted at two (2) or more
separate locations by the same person, a separate business license will be
required for each location.
   E.   Posting Of License: Each license shall always be conspicuously posted
in each place of business.
   F.   Allowing Another To Use License: No person to whom a license has been
issued shall suffer or allow any other person for whom a separate business
license is required to operate under or display his license.
   G.   Fundraising Activities: Fundraising activities such as car washes that
are conducted for not-for-profit organizations, to include schools, shall not
require a business license, provided the service provided is offered on a
donation only basis.
   H.   Rebate: No rebate is allowed.
   I.   License Transactions - Public Record: The city finance director shall
keep a record of each person licensed to transact and carry on a business
within the city. The records shall include appropriate information concerning
the action of the city finance director in rejecting an application for a
license, or in postponing the issuance of a license, and the action of the
hearing examiner regarding a license. All such records are public records to
the extent consistent with state and federal law.
   J.   Limitations On License: Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary,
a license issued under this chapter shall not be issued to any person who uses
or occupies or proposes to use or occupy any real property or otherwise
conducts or proposes to conduct any business in violation of the provisions of
an ordinance of the City of Long Beach, specifically including the city's
zoning laws, or of the laws of the state of Washington. The granting of a
business license shall in no way be construed as permission or acquiescence in
a prohibited activity or other violation. Because the issuance of a license
under this chapter specifically denies the applicant authority to violate any
law or regulation, the city shall not be held liable for the actions of any
licensed business by virtue of having issued a license to conduct business.
   K.   Engaging In Business:
      1.   The term "engaging in business" means commencing, conducting, or
continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers,
as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves
out to the public as conducting such business.
      2.   This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute
engaging in business in the City, and establishes safe harbors for certain of
those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de
minimus business activities in the City without having to pay a business
license fee. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and
are not intended to narrow the definition of "engaging in business" in
subsection K1. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in
business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and
circumstances and applicable law.
      3.   Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities
conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative,
independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf constitutes
engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business
license.
         a.   Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to
use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or
real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.
         b.   Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining, an office, place
of business, or other establishment in the City.
         c.   Soliciting sales.
         d.   Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or
tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.
         e.   Providing technical assistance or service, including quality
control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in
connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.
         f.   Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or
construction of, real or tangible personal property.
         g.   Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or
other similar agreements.
         h.   Collecting current or delinquent accounts.
         i.   Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid
waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.
         j.   Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and
labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising,
landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real
estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.
         k.   Rendering professional services such as those provided by
accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers,
professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations,
chemists, consultants, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors,
detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.
         l.   Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales
or orders are solicited at the meetings.
         m.   Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent
contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City,
acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.
         n.   Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving
customer complaints.
         o.   In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and
owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took
place.
         p.   Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or
maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.
      4.   If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent
contractor, broker or another acting on the person's behalf, engages in no
other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register
and obtain a business license.
         a.   Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.
         b.   Meeting with government representatives in their official
capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.
         c.   Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars,
and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training
in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its
behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of director member or
attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who
attends a board meeting.
         d.   Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the
property is not used in the City.
         e.   Attending, but not participating in a "trade show" or "multiple
vendor events". Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City's
trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.
         f.   Conducting advertising through the mail.
         g.   Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.
      5.   A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the
City by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a
business license, provided that it engages in no other business activities in
the City. Such activities do not include those in subsection K4.
   The City expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity
sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under
the law and the constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington.
Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the
activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent
contacts. (Ord. 812, 6-12-2006; amd. Ord. 1045, 8-18-2025)
4-1-3: EXEMPTIONS:
To the extent set forth in this section, the following persons and/or
businesses shall be exempt from the itinerant license fee requirements of this
chapter.
   A.   Any instrumentality of the United States, State of Washington, or any
political subdivision thereof, with respect to the exercise of governmental
functions.
   B.   Any person, firm, or corporation which the city is forbidden to tax by
law.
   C.   Casual or isolated sales made by persons who are not engaged in the on-
going business of selling the type of property involved, providing that not
more than four (4) such sales events are made during any tax year.
   D.   Minors engaged in baby-sitting, delivery of newspapers, lawn mowing,
car washing, and similar activities.
   E.   Pursuant to RCW 36.71.090, no business license shall be required of any
farmer, gardener or other person to sell, deliver or peddle any fruits,
vegetables, berries, eggs or any farm produce or edibles raised, gathered, or
produced by such person.
   F.   Accredited public or private schools, colleges or universities, as to
their education endeavors only; churches and other religious bodies, as to
their religious activities only; fraternal organizations and lodges as to their
fraternal and lodge activities only; civic and charitable organizations,
including nonprofit hospitals and clinics, as to their civic and charitable
activities only; but not as to any business activities by these entities.
   G.   Any person or organization engaged in a not-for-profit (i.e.,
nonprofit) enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when it is without
private profit, for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal, or
religious purpose when such persons sufficiently demonstrate their not-for-
profit status through Internal Revenue Service documentation.
   H.   Individual vendors at fundraising events held by tax-exempt nonprofit
organizations described by Section 501(c)(3) (educational and charitable), 501
(c)(4) (social welfare), 501(c)(6) (such as a chamber of commerce or merchant
association, or 501(c)(10) (fraternal societies operating as lodges) of the
Internal Revenue Code, when the vending activities are conducted by the
individual vendor for a period not exceeding a cumulative total of six (6) days
and constitute the vendor's only business activity within the city, and as a
condition to participation in the event, the individual vendor pays a lump sum
or a portion of the gross revenues to the nonprofit organization.
   I.   Garage sales conducted on residential premises in compliance with this
code.
   J.   Public utility companies.
   K.   Any business which is owned and operated by a person under the age of
eighteen (18) years, and which does not generate a net income of more than one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year. This provision is intended
to exempt such activities engaged in by minors such as baby-sitting, newspaper
delivery, lawn mowing and similar types of business activities.
   L.   Businesses meeting all of the following criteria:
      1.   Having no employees performing work other than delivery within the
city;
      2.   Having no sales people soliciting sales within the city;
      3.   Having no installers or contractors working within the city;
      4.   Having no offices, warehouses or other physical location(s) within
the city; and
      5.   Having no inventory located within the city.
   M.   Any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds
of sales, or gross income of the business in the city is equal to or less than
four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) and who does not maintain a place of business
within the city shall be exempt from general business license requirements in
this chapter. The exemption does not apply to regulatory license requirements
or activities that require a specialized permit.
   N.   Beginning January 1, 2026, the threshold amount is four thousand
dollars ($4,000.00). The threshold amount will be adjusted every forty-eight
(48) months on January 1, by an amount equal to the increase in the Consumer
Price Index ("CPI") for "West Urban, All Urban Consumers" (CPI-U) for each
twelve (12) month period ending on June 30 as published by the United States
Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics or successor agency. To
calculate this adjustment, the current rate will be multiplied by one plus the
cumulative four (4) year (forty-eight (48) month) CPI increase using each
twelve (12) month period ending on June 30 of each prior year, and rounded to
the nearest one hundred dollars ($100.00). However, if any of the annual CPI
increases are more than five percent (5%), a five percent (5%) increase will be
used in computing the annual basis and if any of the annual CPI decreased
during the forty-eight (48) month period, a zero percent (0%) increase will be
used in computing the annual basis. (Ord. 1045, 8-18-2025)
4-1-4: DISCLAIMER OF CITY LIABILITY:
The city of Long Beach expressly finds and requires that responsibility for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter rests with license applicants
and their agents and that no action, inaction, or omission of the city or any
of its agents or employees shall serve to assume or shift responsibility for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter to any other party, including
the city. Furthermore, issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not
constitute the creation of a duty by the city to indemnify the licensee for any
wrongful acts against the public, or to guarantee the quality of goods,
services or expertise of a licensee. The issuance of a license does not shift
responsibility from the licensee to the city for proper training, conduct or
equipment of the licensee or their agents, employees or representatives, even
if specific regulations require standards of training, conduct or inspection.
(Ord. 1045, 8-18-2025)
4-1-5: FORFEITURE OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
Any person who operates their business in violation of the laws of the state or
the city shall forfeit his license and the privilege to do business in the
city. Notice to the accused violator shall be made by certified mail notifying
him of the charge upon which the forfeiture is based and the date of the public
hearing before the city council wherein the decision on license revocation
shall be made. (Ord. 812, 6-12-2006; amd. Ord. 1045, 8-18-2025)
4-1-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1  of this code. (Ord. 812, 6-12-2006; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 1045, 8-18-
2025)
CHAPTER 2
SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS 1
SECTION:
4-2-1: Duties Of Solicitors And Peddlers
4-2-2: Uninvited Soliciting A Nuisance
4-2-3: Notice Restricting Peddlers And Solicitors
4-2-4: Time Limit On Soliciting And Peddling
4-2-5: Constitutional Rights
4-2-6: Violation; Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 1 of this title.
4-2-1: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any property of
another in the city after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice
from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or to remain upon the
property of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to
depart.
   B.   A person shall be deemed to have received notice from the owner or
occupant within the meaning of this chapter if he has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such
entry has been conspicuously posted at the main entrance to said property or
the forbidden part thereof.
   C.   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant. (2007 Code)
4-2-2: UNINVITED SOLICITING A NUISANCE:
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by solicitors,
peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise not
having been requested or invited so to do by the owners or occupants of the
private residences for the purposes of soliciting orders for the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise and/or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or
hawking the same is declared to be a nuisance. (1988 Code § 5.12.010)
4-2-3: NOTICE RESTRICTING PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS:
The owner or occupant of any residence who desires to forbid trespasses by
solicitors or peddlers may attach or exhibit upon or near the main front door,
and the main rear or side door (if any and if to be protected), a card or
plaque stating the following in letters at least one-third inch (1/3") in
height:
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS NOT INVITED
(2007 Code)
4-2-4: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING AND PEDDLING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a
residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound
in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof
and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. (2007 Code)
4-2-5: CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or enforced to deprive any person
of any rights guaranteed under the constitution of the state of Washington or
of the United States. (2007 Code)
4-2-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of section
4-1-2 of this title or perpetrating a nuisance as described in section
4-2-2 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1988 Code § 5.12.030; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definition
4-3-2: License Required; Application
4-3-3: Register Required
4-3-4: Report To Chief Of Police
4-3-5: Prohibited Practices
4-3-6: Information Required
4-3-7: Redemption Of Pawned Goods
4-3-1: DEFINITION:
Any person, firm or corporation who loans money on deposit or pledge of any
kind of personal property, other than pledges evidenced by mortgages or
conditional sales contracts, or who deals in the purchase of any kind of
personal property on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated
price, or who makes a public display at his place of business of the sign
generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business: i.e., one or more gilt
or yellow balls, or who publicly exhibits a sign of "Money To Loan On Personal
Property Or Deposit Or Pledge", or who keeps any secondhand store or any other
place where money is loaned and any kind of personal property is received, held
or kept in the city, is a "pawnbroker". (1988 Code § 5.16.010)
4-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
   A.   License Required; Payment Of Fee: Any "pawnbroker", as defined in
section
4-3-1 of this chapter, shall, before engaging in the business of pawnbroker
within the city, apply for and secure a license, as provided in this chapter,
to engage in, conduct and transact such a business, the fee for which license
shall be set by the city council. (1988 Code § 5.16.020)
   B.   Application: The application for such license shall be accompanied by
the form of agreement to be signed by the persons seeking loans, and also a
copy of the certificate or ticket issued by the pawnbroker to persons accepting
loans, and by any state or federal license required, showing the name of such
person applying for license. (1988 Code § 5.16.030)
4-3-3: REGISTER REQUIRED:
Every person who engages in, operates or conducts a business as a pawnbroker
within the city shall keep a register in which shall be entered in legible
writing in ink, in the English language, at the time each loan or purchase is
made, an accurate account of each and every article, thing or goods pawned,
pledged, deposited or bought in the course of business during that day with the
amount paid for, advanced, or loaned upon the same, the year, month, day, and
hour of receiving or pledging the same, the name of the person or employee
conducting the transaction, the name, age, mailing and street address, and a
general description of the dress, complexion, color of hair and facial
appearance of the person with whom the transaction is made; the name and street
address of the owner of the property bought or received in pledge, the street
address of the place from which the property or goods bought or received in the
pledge was last removed, and the number of any pawn ticket or tickets issued
therefor; a description of the property bought or received in pledge, which in
the case of watches, shall contain a description of all letters and marks
inscribed thereon; provided, that when the article bought or received is
furniture or the contents of any house or room actually inspected on the
premises, the general record of the transaction shall be sufficient. No entry
in the book shall be erased, obliterated or defaced, and the book, as well as
every article or thing pawned, pledged, deposited or sold, shall at all
reasonable times be open to the inspection of the mayor, clerk-treasurer, chief
of police or any member of the police force of the city. (1988 Code § 5.16.040)
4-3-4: REPORT TO CHIEF OF POLICE:
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation mentioned in section
4-3-1 of this chapter, to make out and deliver to the chief of police, every
day before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, a legible and correct copy
from the book required to be kept in section
4-3-3 of this chapter, containing an accurate description of all personal
property, goods, articles or things received on deposit, pawn, or pledge, or
purchased during the preceding day, together with the hour the same were
received, pawned, pledged, deposited or purchased, and the same were pawned,
deposited, pledged or sold, if such be the case. (1988 Code § 5.16.050)
4-3-5: PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
   A.   Purchases From Certain Persons Prohibited: No person, firm or
corporation licensed as a pawnbroker as set out in this chapter shall take or
receive in pawn, pledge or deposit for money loaned, or purchase on condition
of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, any personal property,
bonds, notes, securities, articles or other valuable thing from any minor, or
the ownership of which in whole or in part is in, or which is claimed by any
minor, or from any person appearing to be intoxicated, or from any person known
to be a notorious thief or receiver of stolen property, or to have been
indicted or charged with larceny or burglary.
   B.   Report Of Previously Lost Or Stolen Property To Police: Every such
pawnbroker having good cause to believe that any property in his possession has
been previously lost or stolen shall forthwith report such fact to the chief of
police together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and the
name of the person from whom the same was received. (1988 Code § 5.16.060)
4-3-6: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation mentioned in section
4-3-1 of this chapter to receive or purchase in any manner any goods or
articles or make any advance or loan whatever on the same if the person
pawning, pledging, depositing or selling the same shall refuse to make known
his or its name, to submit to a general description, or shall refuse to make
known the name of the person for whom the same was pawned, pledged, deposited
or sold, as provided in section
4-3-3 of this chapter, or knowingly make any false entry of any matter or thing
required to be made in the book or cause or permit the same to be made. (1988
Code § 5.16.070)
4-3-7: REDEMPTION OF PAWNED GOODS:
No property bought or received in pledge by any pawnbroker shall be removed
from his place of business, except when redeemed by the owner thereof, within
four (4) days after receipt thereof shall have been reported to the chief of
police as provided in this chapter. (1988 Code § 5.16.080)
CHAPTER 4
GARAGE SALES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Permit Required
4-4-3: Regulations
4-4-4: Penalty
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
GARAGE SALE: The selling of used merchandise, belonging to the owners of not
more than three (3) households, to the public from premises owned by the
seller.
SELLER: A single person, married couple, or any organization. (Ord. 645, 9-7-
1993; amd. Ord. 915, 8-3-2015)
4-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct a garage sale in the city without first obtaining a
permit from the city clerk-treasurer, which permit shall be without cost to the
applicant. (Ord. 645, 9-7-1993)
4-4-3: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Number Of Sales Days Limited: No person shall be allowed more than six
(6) days to hold garage sales in the calendar year without first obtaining
permission from the city council for such additional sales, which permission
shall be given only upon good cause being shown that hardship will result if
such additional sales are not allowed.
   B.   Sales Restrictions: No person shall sell any new merchandise at a
garage sale, and the used merchandise being sold is limited to three (3)
households' contributions, none of which is being bought by the seller for
resale; except, that a charitable organization may sell such contributions it
receives from an unlimited number of persons, firms or organizations. (Ord.
645, 9-7-1993)
4-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction for failure to get a permit, if such failure is wilful,
shall be fined twenty five dollars ($25.00), and for conducting more than three
(3) sales in one calendar year without a permit, if wilful, shall be fined not
to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), and if convicted for selling new
merchandise, or merchandise purchased for resale, shall be fined not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 645, 9-7-1993)
CHAPTER 5
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose And Intent
4-5-2: Findings Of Fact
4-5-3: Applicability
4-5-4: Exemptions
4-5-5: Definitions
4-5-6: Licenses Required
4-5-7: License Application Requirements
4-5-8: Investigation Of Applicant
4-5-9: Issuance Of Licenses
4-5-10: License Fees; Term; Renewals; Nontransferable
4-5-11: Posting And Display Of License
4-5-12: License Suspension Or Revocation; Notice
4-5-13: Appeal And Hearing
4-5-14: Sexually Oriented Business Premises; Conduct And Operation
4-5-15: Adult Arcades; Conduct And Operation
4-5-16: Interior Configurations And Operation Of Adult Arcade Premises
4-5-17: Hours Of Operation
4-5-18: Underage Persons Prohibited
4-5-19: Inspections
4-5-20: Alcoholic Beverages And Controlled Substances Prohibited
4-5-21: Recordkeeping Requirements
4-5-22: Nuisance Conditions
4-5-23: Provisions Not Intended Towards Particular Group Or Class
4-5-24: Violation; Penalty; Additional Enforcement
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12, chapter 15 of this code.
4-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of the city council in enacting this chapter is to
maintain and protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, through
the regulation of the operations of sexually oriented business uses. The
regulations set forth herein are intended to prevent health and safety problems
and dangerous and unlawful conduct in and around such uses and premises. (Ord.
805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
Based upon a wide range of evidence presented to the Long Beach city council
and to other cities within the region and in other jurisdictions, nonprofit
organizations and other legislative bodies, the city council makes the
following findings:
   A.   Certain conduct occurring at sexually oriented businesses creates
secondary impacts that are detrimental to the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city, and therefore such conduct must be
regulated as provided herein.
   B.   Regulation of sexually oriented businesses is necessary, because in the
absence of such regulation significant criminal activity has historically and
regularly occurred. This history of criminal activity has included
prostitution, illegal employment of minors, narcotics trafficking and use,
alcoholic beverage law violations, assault, theft, breaches of the peace, tax
evasion, and the presence within the industry of individuals with outstanding
arrest warrants and past criminal behavior that may be indicative of intended
future conduct.
   C.   It is necessary to license entertainers in the adult entertainment
industry: to prevent the exploitation of minors; to ensure that each such
entertainer is an adult; and to ensure that such entertainers have not assumed
a false name, which would make regulation of the entertainer difficult or
impossible.
   D.   It is necessary to have a licensed manager on the premises of sexually
oriented businesses so that there will at all necessary times be an individual
responsible for the overall operation of the establishment, including the
actions of patrons, entertainers and other employees.
   E.   The license fees required herein are nominal fees imposed as necessary
cost measures designed to help defray the substantial expenses incurred by the
city in regulating sexually oriented businesses.
   F.   Sexually oriented businesses are increasingly associated with ongoing
prostitution, disruptive conduct and other criminal activity. Such businesses
constitute a threat to the public peace, health and safety. The hours of
operation of such businesses have a significant impact on the occurrence of
criminal activity.
   G.   Due to the information presented regarding the connection of
prostitution with adult entertainment, there is concern over sexually
transmitted diseases which is a legitimate health concern of the city and thus
requires regulation of sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the
health, safety and well being of the public.
   H.   The city may rely on the experiences and studies of other cities and
organizations in assessing the need for regulation of sexually oriented
business uses, operations and licensing.
   I.   Regulation of sexually oriented businesses is necessary to prevent
deterioration and/or degradation of the vitality of the community before the
problem exists, rather than in response to an existing problem.
   J.   Increased levels of criminal activities occur in the vicinity of
sexually oriented businesses.
   K.   Close physical proximity between entertainers and patrons during adult
entertainment performances facilitates illegal sexual contact, prostitution,
and related crimes. Concerns about crime and public sexual activity are
legitimate and compelling concerns of the city, which concerns require the
reasonable regulation of sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Long Beach.
   L.   The city council, therefore, finds that the protection and the
preservation of the public health, safety and welfare requires establishment of
this chapter. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall constitute the exclusive means of licensing sexually
oriented businesses. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of other
regulations of the city and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-4: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:
   A.   Plays, operas, musicals or other dramatic works that are not obscene.
   B.   Classes, seminars and lectures held for serious scientific or
educational purposes that are not obscene.
   C.   Exhibitions, performances, expression or dances that are not obscene.
   D.   Massage facilities employing licensed massage therapists adjunct to
athletic clubs, health clubs, medical facilities, hotels, motels or beauty
salons; or massage enterprises licensed by the state and operating as approved
home occupations. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter and unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
ADULT ARCADE STATION OR BOOTH: Any enclosure where a patron, member or customer
would ordinarily be positioned while using an adult arcade device or viewing a
live show. An "adult arcade station or booth" shall also refer to the area in
which an adult arcade device is located and from which the adult arcade
picture, view, live show or graphic display is to be viewed. The words "adult
arcade station or booth" do not mean such enclosures that are private offices
used by owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for attending the
tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not held open to the patron,
members or the public for use, for hire or for a fee for the purpose of viewing
the entertainment provided by the arcade device or live show, and are not open
to any persons other than employees. For the purposes of this definition, the
words "open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to
persons in the adjacent public room" mean that there may be no door, curtain,
partition or other device extending from the floor to the top of the door
frame, or any portion thereof, with the exception of a door which is completely
transparent and constructed of safety glass as specified in the international
building code so that the activity and occupant inside the enclosure may be
clearly and easily viewed or seen by persons outside the enclosure from any
point in the adjacent public room.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition, performance, dance of any type, or other
performance, not exempt from this chapter, where such entertainment involves a
person appearing or performing (either live or recreated) who:
   A.   Is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to
view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or (without
regard to gender) any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks or genitals;
or
   B.   Touches, caresses or fondles the breasts, buttocks, anus, genitals or
pubic region of themselves or a patron, or permits the touching, caressing or
fondling of their own breasts, buttocks, anus, genitals or pubic region by a
patron, another employee or anyone else with the intent to sexually arouse or
excite.
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means any of the following:
Adult Arcade: An establishment containing any individual viewing areas or
booths where, for any form of consideration, including a membership fee, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, digital video disc
players, or similar machines, or other image producing machines are used to
show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital images, slides, or other
photographic reproductions of sexual conduct, specified anatomical areas, or
specific sexual activities.
Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, theater, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
presents adult entertainment.
Adult Motel: A hotel, motel, or similar establishment which:
   A.   Offers sleeping accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration and provides patrons with closed circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital video discs,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction of or description of sexual conduct, specified anatomical areas, or
specific sexual activities and are not rated G, PG, PG-13, NC-13, NC-17, or R
by the Motion Picture Association of America; or
   B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
ten (10) hours; or
   C.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment or drive-in theater
where at least twenty five percent (25%) of the films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, digital video discs, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction of or description of sexual conduct,
specified anatomical areas, or specific sexual activities and are not rated G,
PG, PG-13, NC-13, NC-17, or R by the Motion Picture Association of America, and
are shown for any form of consideration.
Adult Retail Establishment: A business having at least twenty five percent
(25%) of its volume of trade, devoted to the display, barter, rental, and/or
sale of books, printed matter, video tapes, video discs, computer software,
audio or video cassettes, films, pictures, or other merchandise, material or
paraphernalia distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct, specified anatomical
areas, or specific sexual activities or adult entertainment. For the purpose of
this chapter "percent of its volume or trade" means that portion of the store's
display space devoted to such material, or that portion of its gross receipts
received from the sale of such material, whichever is greater.
Other Adult Entertainment Facility: Includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Any commercial establishment to which a patron is invited or admitted
and where adult entertainment is presented as a part of the premises activity,
including, but not limited to, escort agencies, seminude or nude modeling or
photography studios, lingerie modeling studios, and body painting studios; or
   B.   Any premises where specified sexual activities are performed or
recorded on film, tape, or other media for commercial purposes.
BODY PAINTING STUDIO: A commercial establishment where patrons are invited to
apply paint or to view the application of paint to a nude human body.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator of the city of Long Beach or his/her
designee.
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent
contractors providing adult entertainment service, who work in or at or render
any services directly related to the operation of an adult entertainment
premises.
ENTERTAINER: Any person who provides adult entertainment for an adult
entertainment premises as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is
charged or accepted for entertainment.
ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition or dance of any type, pantomime, modeling or any
other performance.
MANAGER: Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the
affairs and/or conduct of any sexually oriented business. The term "manager"
also includes any assistant working with or under the direction of a manager to
carry out such purposes.
MASSAGE AND MASSAGE THERAPY: A health care service involving the external
manipulation or pressure of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. Massage
therapy includes techniques such as tapping, compressions, friction, Swedish
gymnastics or movements, gliding, kneading, shaking, and facial or connective
tissue stretching, with or without the aid of superficial heat, cold, water,
lubricants, or salts. Massage therapy does not include diagnosis or attempts to
adjust or manipulate any articulations of the body or spine or mobilization of
these articulations by the use of a thrusting force, nor does it include
genital manipulation.
MASSAGE BUSINESS: The operation of a business where massages are given.
NUDITY: Unclothed, or the showing of the human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, vulva or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of
any part of the female breast below the top of the areola with less than a
fully opaque covering, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
OBSCENE: Means any matter:
   A.   That the average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; or
   B.   That explicitly depicts or describes patently offensive representations
or descriptions of:
1. Sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or
2. Masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, excretory functions, or
lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital areas; or
3. Violent or destructive sexual acts, including, but not limited to, human
and/or animal mutilation, dismemberment, rape and/or torture; or
4. A dominant theme that appeals to the prurient interests of minors in sex;
which is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community
standards relating to the description or representation of sexual matters or
sadomasochistic abuse; and
   C.   That, when considered as a whole, and in the context in which it is
used, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
OPERATOR: Any person operating, conducting or maintaining any sexually oriented
business.
OWNER: Any person who owns or has an ownership interest in any sexually
oriented business.
PANORAM OR PEEP SHOW: Any device which, for payment of a fee, membership fee or
other charge, is used to exhibit or display a picture, view, film, videotape,
videodisc or similar reproduction means, a live show or other graphic display
of specified anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or
unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental
entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any area generally visible to public view and includes but is not
limited to streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways,
parking lots and automobiles whether moving or not.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any adult oriented business or adult entertainment
business, adult or adult retail establishment, adult theater or adult arcade.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means the following:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1. Human genitals, pubic region;
      2. Human anus; or
      3. Female breast exposing any part below the top of the areola.
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means the following:
   A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
   B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or bestiality;
or
   C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
human anus or female breast.
STOCK IN TRADE: Means the following:
   A.   The wholesale dollar value of all merchandise, goods or services,
readily available for purchase, rental, viewing or use by patrons of the
establishment, excluding merchandise located in any storeroom, under the
counter or in any other portion of the premises not open to patrons; or
   B.   The total volume of shelf space and display area in those portions of
the establishment open to patrons.
THEATER: A place of public assembly intended and expressly designed for the
presentation of motion pictures, other than an adult theater. (Ord. 805, 10-5-
2005)
4-5-6: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   Sexually Oriented Businesses:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a sexually
oriented business in the city unless the owner, operator or lessee thereof has
obtained from the city administrator a license to do so, to be designated a
"sexually oriented business license".
      2.   It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly
work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment directly
related to the operation of, an unlicensed sexually oriented business.
   B.   Adult Arcade Premises And Devices:
      1.   It is unlawful to display, exhibit, expose or maintain upon any
premises to which members of the public are admitted any adult arcade device
without a valid and current license for both the device and the premises, to be
designated an "adult arcade device license", and a "sexually oriented business
license" respectively.
      2.   It is unlawful to own and exhibit or display for public use, or to
place with another, by lease or otherwise, for public use, exhibit or display,
any adult arcade device without a valid and current license to be designated an
"adult arcade device license".
   C.   Adult Entertainment Premises Or Adult Arcade Premises Managers And
Entertainers: It is unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer or
manager at an adult entertainment premises or adult arcade without having first
obtained from the city administrator a license to do so, to be designated as an
"adult entertainer's license", an "adult entertainment manager's license" or an
"adult arcade manager's license". (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-7: LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Sexually Oriented Business License: All applications for a sexually
oriented business license shall be submitted in the name of the person
proposing to conduct the operations of the business and shall be signed by such
person and notarized or certified as true and correct under penalty of perjury.
All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city, and shall
require the following information:
      1.   The name, residence address, home telephone number, date of birth,
and social security number of the applicant.
      2.   The business name, address and telephone number of the
establishment.
      3.   The names, residence addresses, residence telephone numbers, social
security numbers and dates of birth of any partners, corporate officers or
directors, of any entity holding ownership, or leasehold interest in the adult
business premises, and/or any adult arcade devices on the premises.
      4.   Such additional information as the city administrator may require
concerning the identity of corporate shareholders identified in subsection A3
of this section.
      5.   A description of the adult entertainment, arcade or similar business
history of the applicant, whether such person or entity, in previously
operating in this or another city, county or state, has had a business license
revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the activity or occupation
subjected to such action, suspension or revocation.
      6.   The name, address, telephone number, date of birth and social
security number of the manager or other persons responsible for the operation
of the premises and/or arcade devices.
      7.   A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant (or the
owners listed in subsection A3 of this section in any domestic or foreign
jurisdiction for or equivalent to: promoting prostitution; sexual violations
with minors; perjury; sales of controlled substances; violations involving
organized crime or crimes connected with another adult entertainment business
or premises.
      8.   The number of and description of each adult arcade device to be
located on the premises including make, model and serial number of all adult
arcade devices.
      9.   A sketch or drawing drawn to scale, sufficient to show the layout of
the premises containing any adult arcade devices, including all information
necessary to determine whether the premises comply with the provisions of this
chapter, and any state, local or federal regulations.
   B.   Adult Arcade Device License: Complete applications for an adult arcade
device license shall be submitted in the name of the device's owner, and shall
contain all of the information contained in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Manager's Or Entertainer's License: All complete applications for a
sexually oriented business manager's license or entertainer's license shall be
signed by the applicant and notarized or certified as true under penalty of
perjury. All applications shall be supplied by the city, and shall require the
following information:
      1.   The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and
place of birth, social security number, and any stage names or nicknames used
in entertaining, or alias.
      2.   The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends
to work as a manager or entertainer.
      3.   The name and address of each employer or individual or business for
whom the applicant was an employee or independent contractor for the three (3)
year period immediately prior to the date of the completed application,
including the period of employment.
      4.   A complete statement of all convictions, if any, of the applicant
(or the owners) for promoting prostitution; sexual violations with minors,
sexual abuse, rape, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors;
perjury; sales of controlled substances; violations involving organized crime
or crimes connected with another adult entertainment premises.
      5.   Supplemental information and/or identification deemed necessary by
the administrator to confirm any statements set forth in the application.
   D.   Additional Requirements: In addition to the above, each of the
applicants for licenses described in this section shall provide authorization
for the city, its agents and employees, to investigate and confirm any
statements set forth in the application.
   E.   Failure To Provide Information: Failure to provide information required
by this section will constitute an incomplete application and will not be
processed. The applicant shall be responsible for verifying any information in
the application to the city administrator's reasonable satisfaction.
   F.   Proof Of Age: All applicants for any license required herein, shall be
at least eighteen (18) years of age, and shall present appropriate
documentation of the same. Any of the following shall be accepted as
documentation of age:
      1.   A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state bearing the
applicant's photograph and date of birth.
      2.   A state issued identification card bearing the applicant's
photograph and date of birth.
      3.   An official passport issued by the United States of America.
      4.   An immigration card issued by the United States of America.
      5.   Any other picture identification issued by a governmental entity.
(Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-8: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
   A.   Investigation; Fingerprinting:
      1.   The original complete application shall be filed with the city
administrator.
      2.   In order to confirm identity, all applicants shall also at that time
provide, through the police department, a complete set of fingerprints. The
cost of obtaining such fingerprints shall be the responsibility of the
applicant, and shall be included in the application fee.
      3.   The name, location and type of business conducted shall be referred
to the planning, building, fire and other appropriate departments.
      4.   The departments shall review the completed application and inspect
the premises proposed to be operated as a sexually oriented business and shall
make written verification to the city administrator that such applicant and
premises comply with the provisions of the city zoning ordinance and other
applicable building and fire safety codes of the city. No license shall be
issued without such verification.
      5.   The completed application shall also be referred to the police
department for a criminal records check and verification of the information
provided by the applicant.
   B.   Criminal Records Review; Verify Statements In Application: The
investigation by the police department shall include a review of all criminal
records of the applicant. Further, the investigation shall consist of
investigation of the truth of the statements in the completed application, a
review of location and surroundings, and all other matters which might tend to
aid in the determination of compliance with the code and whether to grant the
license.
   C.   Results Of Investigation To Administrator: The departments shall inform
the city administrator as to the results of the investigation and the
recommendation as to the disposition of said application.
   D.   Regular Inspections: The devices licensed under this chapter and those
areas upon the premises which are accessible to the public shall be held open
for routine regulatory inspections by the city during normal business hours.
(Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-9: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
   A.   Conditions For Issuance: After review and approval of the completed
application by all of the appropriate city departments, the city administrator
shall issue the applicable license or licenses authorized by this chapter if
the city administrator finds:
      1.   That the business for which a license is required herein will be
conducted in a building, structure and location that complies with the
requirements and meets the standards of the applicable health, zoning,
building, fire and safety laws of the state, the ordinances of the city, as
well as the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable codes.
      2.   That the applicant, his or her employees, agents, partners,
directors, officers, stockholders or managers have not knowingly made any
false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application
for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city.
      3.   That the applicant, and all employees, agents, partners, directors,
officers or managers of the applicant have satisfactorily met all of the
requirements in this chapter to obtain such a license.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: If the requirements of this chapter are met for the
particular license, the city administrator shall issue such license applied for
in accordance with the provisions with this chapter; provided, however, that
the applicable license fee, together with any delinquent fees that may then be
due shall first be paid to the city.
   C.   Persons Not Licensable: No license shall be issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter to the following persons:
      1.   Any applicant, his or her employees, agent, partner, director,
officer or manager who knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for a license, or in any report
or record required to be filed with the city administrator.
      2.   Any person who is not eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the
application.
      3.   Any person who has had a similar license revoked within a period of
one year prior to the date of making application for a license hereunder.
      4.   Any applicant, his/her employees, agent, partner, director, officer,
manager or person holding an ownership interest in the business convicted of
any of the crimes listed in this chapter or crimes connected with organized
crime.
      5.   Any person who at the time of application is in default in the
payment of any sum due the city for any license, tax or assessment as a result
of the adult entertainment business.
      6.   Any person whose license is under suspension or revocation at the
time of application for a license.
      7.   Any partner, corporate officer or director who does not meet the
qualifications of this chapter.
   D.   Compliance With Standards And Requirements: No license shall be issued
unless the premises where the activity is to be conducted and individuals and
devices comply with the required standards of operation and conduct of this
code and any related state, city and federal regulations.
   E.   Rights Of Applicant Limited: The mere filing of an application for a
license shall not give the applicant any right to engage in the activity
covered thereby.
   F.   Time Limit Of City To Decide: The decision of the city administrator
regarding issuance of any license shall be rendered within forty five (45) days
of the date of filing of the completed application, unless an extension is
requested by the applicant or the city for good cause. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-10: LICENSE FEES; TERM; RENEWALS; NONTRANSFERABLE:
   A.   Term; Annual Fee: The license year shall be from January 1 to December
31 of each year and shall not be prorated. All licenses shall expire on
December 31 of each year. Except as hereinafter provided, all license fees
shall be established by resolution of the city council and be payable on an
annual basis. The fee for an initial application for any license shall be
higher than the annual renewal fee, in order to defray the city's expense in
required investigations.
   B.   Renewal: Complete applications for renewal of licenses issued under
this chapter shall be filed with and paid to the city administrator on or
before January 31 of the license year. There shall be assessed and collected by
the city administrator an additional charge, computed as a percentage of the
license fee, on renewal applications not made on or before the licensee
expiration date, as follows:
      1.   One to ten (10) days inclusive: No penalty.
      2.   Eleven (11) days to thirty (30) days inclusive: A penalty of ten
percent (10%) of the license fee.
      3.   Over thirty (30) days: Cancelled.
   C.   License Nontransferable: No license issued under this chapter shall be
transferable. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-11: POSTING AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
   A.   License Available For Inspection: The manager for any business where
adult entertainment takes place shall have a current and valid copy of the
license for every adult entertainer employed by the business. The manager shall
make these licenses available for inspection by city authorities immediately
upon request.
   B.   Posting License On Premises: Every person, corporation, partnership or
association licensed under this chapter as a sexually oriented business or
sexually oriented business manager shall post such license in a conspicuous
place and manner on the licensed premises.
   C.   Separate Licenses: A separate license is required for each adult arcade
device and the device license shall be attached to the device in a conspicuous
place. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; NOTICE:
After an investigation and upon the recommendations of the police department,
community development director, fire department or the Pacific County health
officer or other law enforcement or government agency, the city administrator
may, upon thirty days' notice, suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to
this chapter where one or more of the following conditions exist:
   A.   The license was procured by fraud or misrepresentation or that the
applicant, his or her agent, partner, director, officer or manager has
knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact
in the application for a license, or in any report or records required to be
filed with the administrator.
   B.   The licensee, his/her employee, agent, partner, director, officer or
manager have violated any provision of this title or knowingly allowed or
permitted in or upon the premises any violations of this chapter or acts made
unlawful under the same.
   C.   The building, structure, equipment or location of the business for
which the license was issued does not comply with the requirements or fails to
meet the standards of this chapter.
   D.   Any reason set forth in section
4-5-9 of this chapter as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-13: APPEAL AND HEARING:
   A.   Filing Notice Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the action of the city
administrator in issuing, refusing to issue or renew any license under this
chapter or in suspending or revoking any license issued under this chapter
shall have the right to appeal such action to the municipal court, by filing a
notice of appeal with the court within ten (10) calendar days after receiving
notice of the action from which appeal is taken.
   B.   Action Of Court: The municipal court, upon receipt of a timely notice
of appeal, shall set a date for a hearing of such appeal within twenty (20)
calendar days from receipt. The court shall hear testimony, take evidence, and
may hear oral argument and receive written briefs. The filing of such appeal
shall stay the action of the city administrator, pending the decision of the
municipal court.
   C.   Basis For Court Decision: The decision of the municipal court on an
appeal from a decision of the city administrator shall be based upon a
preponderance of the evidence. The burden of proof shall be on the city.
   D.   Appeal To Superior Court: The decision of the municipal court shall be
final, unless appealed by the filing of an appropriate action to the superior
court within twenty (20) days of the date the decision is entered. Appellant
shall pay the cost of reproduction of the record transcript. (Ord. 805, 10-5-
2005)
4-5-14: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS PREMISES; CONDUCT AND OPERATION:
   A.   Manager On Duty: A licensed manager shall be on duty at each sexually
oriented business premises at all times during which it is operating, and the
same shall not be an entertainer. The name of the manager on duty shall be
prominently posted during business hours.
   B.   Verify Adult Entertainer License: It shall be the responsibility of the
manager to verify that any person who provides adult entertainment within the
premises possesses a current and valid adult entertainer's license kept in the
manner required by this chapter.
   C.   Standards Of Conduct: The following standards of conduct must be
adhered to by employees and entertainers of any adult entertainment business:
      1.   No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in less than opaque
and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any of the
"specified anatomical areas" as defined in section
4-5-5 of this chapter, except upon a stage at least eighteen inches (18") above
the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet (6') from the nearest
patron.
      2.   No employee or entertainer shall perform acts of or acts which
simulate:
         a.   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any specified sexual activities which are
prohibited by law;
         b.   The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks or
genitals; or
         c.   The displaying of the specified anatomical areas; except as
provided for in subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   No entertainer or employee shall mingle with the patrons, and be
unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing as
described in subsection C1 of this section. No entertainer or employee shall
fondle or caress a patron or another person while on the premises.
      4.   No employee or entertainer shall knowingly permit any person upon
the premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, vulva or genitals of themselves or of any other person.
      5.   No employee or entertainer shall wear or use any device or covering
exposed to view that simulates the specified anatomical areas.
      6.   No employee or entertainer shall use artificial devices or inanimate
objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this section.
      7.   The conduct of any employee or entertainer (as described in
subsection C2 of this section) of any adult entertainment premises shall not be
visible from any public place outside the adult entertainment premises during
the hours of its operation. No employee or entertainer of an adult
entertainment premises in a state of dress or undress as described in
subsection C of this section shall be visible from any public place outside the
adult entertainment premises during the hours of operation.
      8.   No entertainer or employee shall solicit, demand or receive any
payment or gratuity from any patron, customer or member of the public other
than an admission charge taken at the entrance of the premises.
      9.   A sign with letters in thirty six (36) point type on a background of
contrasting color shall be conspicuously displayed in the common area of the
premises, and shall read as follows:
This adult entertainment establishment is regulated by the City of Long Beach.
Entertainers and employees are not permitted to:
   a. Engage in any type of sexual conduct, including fondling or caressing;
   b. Be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire, costume or
clothing so as to expose to view the nipple or areola of the female breast, any
portion of the pubic region, genitals or vulva and/or anus except upon a stage
at least eighteen inches from the immediate floor level and removed at least
six feet from the nearest patron; and
   c. Solicit, demand or receive any payment or gratuity from any patron,
customer or member of the public.
      10.   No manager, employee or entertainer shall perform or allow
performance to take place on the premises unless it is in the public area of
the premises.
   D.   Standards Of Operation: At any sexually oriented business, the
following standards of operation must be adhered to:
      1.   Neither the performance nor any photograph, drawing, sketch or other
pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying the female breast below
the top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic region, genitals, vulva,
buttocks or anus may be visible outside of the adult entertainment business.
      2.   With the exception of exit illumination, sufficient lighting shall
be provided in and about all parts of the premises that are open to and used by
the public and shall have an intensity of not less than one foot-candle at
floor level.
      3.   No person may operate or maintain any warning system or device, of
any kind, for the purpose of warning, aiding or abetting the warning of
patrons, members, customers, employees or any other persons located on the
premises that police officers or health, fire, building or other government
officials are approaching or have entered the premises.
      4.   All such adult entertainment businesses are required to have
"theater style" seating consisting only of ten (10) or more upright seats in a
row with no tables in between each, with each row of seating directly behind or
in front of the next row, with no more than forty eight inches (48") between
the back of one seat and the back of the seat directly behind and/or in front
of it. The front row of seating closest to the performance area shall not
violate the six foot (6') setback requirement. This seating shall resemble the
standard seating found in a movie theater or symphony hall. There shall be no
couches, lounge chairs or other similar type of seating located in any area
open to the public; there shall only be theater style seating. Couch dances or
the equivalent are prohibited. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-15: ADULT ARCADES; CONDUCT AND OPERATION:
It is the continuing duty of the owner, manager, operator, agent or employee
present in the premises to ensure compliance with this chapter at all times.
   A.   Employee On Duty: There must be at least one employee on duty and
situated in the public room adjacent to the adult arcade stations or booths at
all times that any patron, member or customer is present inside the premises.
   B.   Signs Required; Information:
      1.   There must be permanently posted and maintained in at least two (2)
conspicuous locations on the interior of every adult arcade premises a sign
stating substantially the following:
Occupancy of any station or booth is at all times limited to one person. There
may be no acts of lewd or obscene conduct in the stations or booths or on the
premises. Violators are subject to criminal prosecution.
      2.   Each sign must be conspicuously posted and not screened from the
patron's view. The letters must be on a contrasting background and shall be no
smaller than thirty six (36) point type in height.
   C.   Lighting Of Premises: While patrons, members or customers are permitted
within the premises, the premises must be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons,
members or customers are permitted access so that there is intensity of not
less than one foot-candle at floor level.
   D.   Doors Unlocked: Doors to areas on the premises which are available for
use by persons other than the owner, manager, operator or their agents or
employees shall not be locked during business hours.
   E.   Unobstructed View Into Booths, Stations: The unobstructed view into the
adult arcade booths or stations from the adjacent public room by direct line of
sight must remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks
or other materials at all times.
   F.   Prohibited Areas: No patron, member or customer is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons,
members or customers will not be permitted.
   G.   Single Person In Booth Or Station: No adult arcade booth or station may
be occupied by more than one person at any time.
   H.   Prohibited Conduct: The conduct between entertainers, employees and
patrons prohibited in adult entertainment premises in this chapter is also
prohibited in adult arcade premises.
   I.   Warning Customers Prohibited: No person may operate or maintain any
warning system or device, of any nature or kind, for the purpose of warning or
aiding and abetting the warning of patrons, members, customers or any other
persons occupying adult arcade stations or booths located on the premises that
police officers or city health, fire licensing or building inspectors are
approaching or have entered the premises. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-16: INTERIOR CONFIGURATIONS AND OPERATION OF ADULT ARCADE PREMISES:
The city administrator shall not issue an adult arcade premises or device
license unless the premises conform to the requirements of this section. In
addition, owners of adult arcade premises shall ensure that the premises comply
with the criteria set out in this section on a continuing basis.
   A.   Premises: Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment.
There shall be separate restrooms for customers and employees.
   B.   Steps/Risers: No steps or risers are allowed in any adult arcade booth
or station.
   C.   Seating: No adult arcade station or booth shall have more than one
stool type seat. In order to prevent obscuring the occupant of an adult arcade
station or booth from view, no stool for seating within an adult arcade station
or booth shall have any seat back or sides. The seat cannot be positioned
behind the doorway so that the occupant sits with his or her back to the door.
   D.   Ventilation And Other Holes: All ventilation devices between the adult
arcade booths must be covered by a permanently affixed ventilation cover.
Ventilation holes may only be located one foot (1') from the top of the booth
walls or one foot (1') from the bottom of the booth walls. There shall not be
any other holes or openings between the booths.
   E.   Adult Arcade Booth Or Station: All adult arcade stations or booths must
be open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible by direct
line of sight to persons in the adjacent public room. No adult arcade station,
booth or viewing area may be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other
nontransparent enclosure.
   F.   Viewing Areas: The viewing areas within the adult arcade premises shall
be visible from a continuous main aisle and shall not be obscured by any
curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. As used in this section, viewing area
means the area where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while
watching a film, video or other viewing device.
   G.   Doors Unlocked: The licensee shall not permit any doors to public areas
on the premises to be locked during business hours, in violation of the
applicable provision of the building code; international fire code, and
National Fire Protection Association code.
   H.   Illumination Of Premises: An adult arcade device manager must, at all
times when the premises are open or when any member of the public is permitted
to enter and remain there, maintain illumination to such a degree that the
intensity is not less than one foot-candle at floor level, and evenly
distributed in all parts of the premises available for use by the public.
   I.   Single Person In Station Or Booth: The licensee or manager shall not
permit more than one person to occupy an adult arcade station or booth at one
time, and public notices to this effect shall at all times be conspicuously
posted and maintained on the adult arcade premises. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-17: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It is unlawful for any adult entertainment or adult arcade business to be
conducted, operated, or otherwise open to the public between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-18: UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of
age to be in or upon any adult entertainment or adult arcade premises while the
same is being operated as a business for which a sexually oriented business
license is required.
   B.   It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or other person in
charge of a premises for which an adult entertainment or adult arcade premises
license is required, or employee of same, to knowingly permit or allow any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in or upon such premises
while it is being operated as an adult entertainment or adult arcade business.
(Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-19: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Books And Records: Pursuant to this chapter, all books and records
required to be kept shall be open to inspection by the police chief or designee
of the city during the hours when the licensed premises is open for business.
The purpose of such inspection shall be to determine if the books and records
meet the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Premises: The licensed premises shall be (as an implied condition of
receiving an adult entertainment license) open to inspection by the police
chief or designee during the hours when the adult entertainment premises is
open for business. The purpose of such inspection shall be to determine if the
licensed premises is operated in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-20: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED:
No adult entertainment premises or adult arcade business shall serve, sell,
distribute or allow the consumption or use of any alcoholic beverage or
controlled substance upon the premises, including the premises parking areas.
(Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-21: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Gross Receipts And Payments To Entertainers: No later than May 1 of
each year, each sexually oriented business licensee shall file with the police
chief a verified report showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid
to entertainers, if any, for the preceding calendar year.
   B.   Record Of Entertainers Employed: Each adult entertainment premises
licensee shall maintain, constantly update and retain for a period of at least
two (2) years after termination of employment, the names, addresses and ages of
all persons employed as entertainers by the licensee. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-22: NUISANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Public Nuisance: Any sexually oriented business operated, conducted or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any law of the city or
state shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance,
and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal
action hereunder, commence an action or actions, for the abatement, removal and
enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other
steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant
such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment business, and
restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an
adult entertainment business contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Moral Nuisance: Any sexually oriented business operated, conducted or
maintained contrary to the provisions of Revised Code Of Washington chapter
7.48A, "Moral Nuisance", shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and
a moral nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any
other remedies set forth herein, commence an action or actions, for the
abatement, removal and enjoinment therefor, or civil penalty, in the manner
provided by the moral nuisance statute. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-23: PROVISIONS NOT INTENDED TOWARDS PARTICULAR GROUP OR CLASS:
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the
health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or
otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who
will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this
chapter.
   B.   No provision nor any term used in this chapter is intended to impose
any duty whatsoever upon the city or any of its officers or employees, for whom
the implementation or enforcement of this chapter is discretionary and not
mandatory.
   C.   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be nor shall be
construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the
city, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting
from the failure of any owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of
said premises to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in
consequence of any inspection, notice, order, certificate, permission or
approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or
enforcement pursuant to this chapter, or by reason of any action or inaction on
the part of the city related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter
by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005)
4-5-24: VIOLATION; PENALTY; ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Penalty: Every person, including members of the public, owners,
operators, employees or agents, or independent contractors for the owner,
employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way directly
or indirectly who works in or operates a sexually oriented business, of any of
the services defined in this chapter without first obtaining a license or
permit, and paying a fee to do so, from the city, or violates any provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, such person
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any
violation of any provision of this chapter occurs or continues, shall be deemed
a separate and distinct offense.
   B.   Additional Enforcement: Notwithstanding the existence or use of any
other remedy, the city may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or
practices that constitute or will constitute a violation of other regulations
herein adopted. (Ord. 805, 10-5-2005; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 6
UTILITY BUSINESS LICENSES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Business License Required
4-6-1: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required: No person or entity shall engage in or carry on any
business, occupation, act, pursuit, or privilege for which a tax is imposed by
title 3, chapter 8 of this code without first having obtained, and being the
holder of, a valid and subsisting license so to do issued under the provisions
of this chapter as hereinafter provided, and without also paying the license
fee or tax imposed by title 3, chapter 8 of this code.
   B.   Application For Utility Business License: Applications for such
licenses shall be made to and issued by the city finance department upon
prescribed forms and giving such information as is deemed reasonably necessary
to enable the finance department to administer and enforce title 3, chapter 8
of this code. The fee or tax for a certificate shall be the tax imposed by
section
3-8-5 of this code. Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be personal and nontransferable, and shall be valid as long as the person
or entity to whom the same is issued continues in business and complies with
the provisions of this chapter and title 3, chapter 8 of this code. (Ord. 915,
8-3-2015)
CHAPTER 7
BUSKING
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: Permit
4-7-3: Designated Busking Areas
4-7-4: Performer Rules And Regulations
4-7-5: Penalty
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
 
BUSKER: English term for a street performer. (Ord. 971, 7-15-2019)
 
4-7-2: PERMIT:
   A.   Annual permit cost is fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
   B.   Permits expire December 31 of each year.
   C.   Permits for the following year will be available the first Monday in
January.
   D.   This permit allows for performers to perform once per day, for up to
four (4) hours. (Ord. 971, 7-15-2019)
4-7-3: DESIGNATED BUSKING AREAS:
Performers may entertain at the following public areas:
   Frying Pan Park;
   Lewis & Clark Park;
   Gazebo Park; and
   Marsh's Park. (Ord. 971, 7-15-2019)
4-7-4: PERFORMER RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Each performer that consents to the busking rules and regulations must agree to
the following:
   A.   I will display my permit any time I perform in the downtown Long Beach
area.
   B.   I will not play at one spot while in line at another (double marking).
   C.   I will monitor the volume of my performances and maintain a level
appropriate for the surroundings.
   D.   I will control my audience so as not to block traffic, sidewalks, or
access to merchants.
   E.   I will not perform under the influence of alcohol, marijuana, illegal
drugs or drugs that may alter my ability to perform in public settings.
   F.   I will follow the SummerFest busking rules regarding querying,
including lining up for the next available time slot only and monitoring my
progress line.
   G.   I will immediately comply with requests from the Events Coordinator and
Long Beach Police. (Ord. 971, 7-15-2019)
4-7-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 971, 7-15-2019)
TITLE 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
SEPA RULES
SECTION:
5-1-1: General Requirements
5-1-2: Categorical Exemptions And Threshold Determinations
5-1-3: Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
5-1-4: Commenting
5-1-5: Existing Environmental Document Use
5-1-6: SEPA And Agency Decisions
5-1-7: Definitions
5-1-8: Agency Compliance
5-1-9: Forms
5-1-10: Severability
5-1-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Authority:
      1.   The city adopts this chapter under the state environmental policy
act (SEPA), Revised Code Of Washington 43.21C.120, and the SEPA rules,
Washington administrative code 197-11-904.
      2.   This chapter contains the city's SEPA procedures and policies.
      3.   The SEPA rules, Washington administrative code chapter 197-11, must
be used in conjunction with this chapter.
   B.   Purpose Of Section; Adoption By Reference: This section contains the
basic requirements that apply to the SEPA process. The city adopts the
following sections of Washington administrative code chapter 197-11 by
reference:
WAC 197-11-040 Definitions
-050           Lead agency
-055           Timing of the SEPA process
-060           Content of environmental review
-070           Limitations on actions during SEPA process
-080           Incomplete or unavailable information
-090           Supporting documents
-100           Information required of applicants
 
   C.   Additional Definitions: In addition to those definitions contained
within Washington administrative code 197-11-700 through 197-11-799, when used
in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless
the context indicates otherwise:
    DEPARTMENT: Any division, subdivision or organizational unit of the city
established by ordinance, rule or order.
   EARLY NOTICE: The city's response to an applicant stating whether it
considers issuance of a determination of significance likely for the
applicant's proposal (mitigated determination of nonsignificance (DNS)
procedures).
   ORDINANCE: The ordinance, resolution or other procedure used by the city to
adopt regulatory requirements.
   SEPA RULES: Washington administrative code chapter 197-11 adopted by the
department of ecology.
   D.   Designation Of Responsible Official:
      1.   For those proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the
responsible official shall be the city administrator or such other person as
designated in writing by the mayor.
      2.   For all proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the
responsible official shall make the threshold determination, supervise scoping
and preparation of any required environmental impact statement (EIS) and
perform any other functions assigned to the "lead agency" or "responsible
official" by those sections of the SEPA rules that were adopted by reference.
      3.   The city shall retain all documents required by the SEPA rules
(Washington administrative code chapter 197-11) and make them available in
accordance with Revised Code Of Washington 42.56.100.
   E.   Lead Agency Determination And Responsibilities:
      1.   The department within the city receiving an application for or
initiating a proposal that involves a nonexempt action shall determine the lead
agency for that proposal under Washington administrative code 197-11-050 and
197-11-922 through 197-11-940, unless the lead agency has been previously
determined or the department or agency is in the process of determining the
lead agency.
      2.   When the city is the lead agency for a proposal, the department
receiving the application shall determine the responsible official who shall
supervise compliance with the threshold determination requirements, and if an
EIS is necessary, shall supervise preparation of the EIS.
      3.   When the city is not the lead agency for a proposal, all departments
of the city shall use and consider, as appropriate, either the DNS or the final
EIS of the lead agency in making decisions on the proposal. No city department
shall prepare or require preparation of a DNS or EIS in addition to that
prepared by the lead agency, unless required under Washington administrative
code 197-11-600. In some cases the city may conduct supplemental environmental
review under Washington administrative code 197-11-600.
      4.   If the city or any of its departments receives a lead agency
determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the
criteria of Washington administrative code 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it
may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency
originally making the determination and resolved within fifteen (15) days of
receipt of the determination or the city must petition the department of
ecology for a lead agency determination under Washington administrative code
197-11-946 within the fifteen (15) day time period.
      5.   Departments of the city are authorized to make agreements as to lead
agency status or shared lead agency duties for proposal under Washington
administrative code 197-11-942 and 197-11-944; provided, that the responsible
official and any department that will incur responsibilities as the result of
such agreement approve the agreement.
      6.   Any department making a lead agency determination for a private
project shall require sufficient information from the applicant to identify
other agencies with jurisdiction over the proposal. (That is: Which agencies
require nonexempt licenses?)
   F.   Transfer Of Lead Agency Status To State Agency: For any proposal for a
private project whether the city would be the lead agency and for which one or
more state agencies have jurisdiction, the city's responsible official may
elect to transfer the lead agency duties to a state agency. The state agency
with jurisdiction appearing first on the priority listing in Washington
administrative code 197-11-936 shall be the lead agency and the city shall be
the agency with jurisdiction. To transfer lead agency duties, the city's
responsible official must transmit a notice of the transfer together with any
relevant information available on the proposal to the appropriate state agency
with jurisdiction. The responsible official of the city shall also give notice
of the transfer to the private applicant and any other agencies with
jurisdiction over the proposal.
   G.   Time Limits (Washington Administrative Code 197-11-310): The time
limits (expressed in calendar dates) contained in this section shall apply when
the city processes licenses for all private projects and those governmental
proposals submitted to the city by other agencies. For the purpose of this
section, the word "day" shall mean a day upon which the city's administrative
offices are open for business. These time estimates shall not be construed to
be mandatory.
      1.   Categorical Exemptions: The city shall identify whether an action is
categorically exempt within seven (7) days of receiving a completed
application.
      2.   Threshold Determinations:
         a.   The city should complete threshold determinations that can be
based solely upon review of the environmental checklist for the proposal within
fifteen (15) days of the date an applicant's adequate application and completed
checklist are submitted.
         b.   When the responsible official requires further information from
the applicant or consultation with other agencies with jurisdiction:
            (1)   The city should request such further information within
fifteen (15) days of receiving an adequate application and completed
environmental checklist;
            (2)   The city shall wait no longer than thirty (30) days for a
consulted agency to respond;
            (3)   The applicant shall have one hundred eighty (180) days to
submit additional information requested before the permit application expires.
            (4)   The responsible official should complete the threshold
determination within fifteen (15) days of receiving the requested information
from the applicant or the consulted agency.
         c.   When the city must initiate further studies, including field
investigations, to obtain the information to make the threshold determination,
the city should complete the studies within thirty (30) days of receiving an
adequate application and a completed checklist.
         d.   The city shall complete threshold determinations on actions where
the applicant recommends in writing that an EIS be prepared, because of the
probable significant adverse environmental impact(s) described in the
application, within fifteen (15) days of receiving an adequate application and
completed checklist.
         e.   The city may extend the threshold determination to fifteen (15)
days after receipt of a changed or clarified proposal, environmental checklist,
and/or permit application.
   H.   Additional Timing Considerations:
      1.   For nonexempt proposals, the DNS or draft EIS for the proposal shall
accompany the city's staff recommendation to any appropriate advisory body,
such as the planning commission.
      2.   If the city's only action on a proposal is a decision on a building
permit or other license that requires detailed project plans and
specifications, the applicant may request in writing that the city conduct
environmental review prior to submission of the detailed plans and
specifications. (Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
5-1-2: CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS AND THRESHOLD DETERMINATIONS:
   A.   Purpose Of Section; Adoption By Reference: This section contains the
rules for deciding whether a proposal has a probable significant, adverse
environmental impact requiring an environmental impact statement (EIS) to be
prepared. This section also contains rules for evaluating the impacts of
proposals not requiring an EIS. The city adopts the following sections by
reference, as supplemented in this chapter:
WAC 197-11-300 Purpose of this part
WAC 197-11-300 Purpose of this part
-305           Categorical exemptions
-310           Threshold determination required
-315           Environmental checklist
-330           Threshold determination process
-335           Additional information
-340           Determination of nonsignificance (DNS)
-350           Mitigated DNS
-360           Determination of significance (DS/initiation of scoping)
-390           Effect of threshold determination
-800           Categorical exemptions
-880           Emergencies
-890           Petitioning DOE to change exemptions
 
   B.   Flexible Thresholds For Categorical Exemptions: The city establishes
the following exempt levels for minor new construction under Washington
administrative code 197-11-800 based on local conditions:
      1.   For residential dwelling units in Washington administrative code
197-11-800(1)(b)(i): Up to twenty (20) dwelling units;
      2.   For agricultural structures in Washington administrative code 197-
11-800(1)(b)(ii): Up to thirty thousand (30,000) square feet;
      3.   For office, school, commercial, recreational, service or storage
buildings in Washington administrative code 197-11-800(1)(b)(iii): Up to twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet and up to forty (40) parking spaces;
      4.   For parking lots in Washington administrative code 197-11-800(1)(b)
(iv): Up to forty (40) parking spaces;
      5.   For landfills and excavations in Washington administrative code 197-
11-800(1)(b)(v): Up to five hundred (500) cubic yards.
   C.   Exemption Use:
      1.   When the city receives an application for a license or, in the case
of governmental proposals, a department initiates a proposal, the responsible
official shall determine if the application and/or proposal is exempt. The
department's determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final and not
subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the
procedural requirements of this chapter apply to the proposal. The city shall
not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal.
      2.   In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the responsible
official shall make certain the proposal is properly defined and shall identify
the governmental licenses required (Washington administrative code 197-11-060).
If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt action, the department shall
determine the lead agency, even if the license application that triggers the
department's consideration is exempt.
      3.   If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the city
may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural
requirements of this chapter, except that:
         a.   The city shall not give authorization for:
            (1)   Any nonexempt action,
            (2)   Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact,
            (3)   Any action that would limit the choice of alternatives;
         b.   A department may withhold approval of an exempt action that would
lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would
serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved; and
         c.   A department may withhold approval of exempt actions that would
lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the
expenditures would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved.
   D.   Environmental Checklist: A completed environmental checklist in the
form provided in Washington administrative code 197-11-960 shall be filed at
the same time as an application for a permit, license, certificate, or other
approval not specifically exempted in this chapter; except, a checklist is not
needed if the city and applicant agree an EIS is required, SEPA compliance has
been completed, or SEPA compliance has been initiated by another agency. The
city shall use the environmental checklist to determine the lead agency and, if
the city is the lead agency, for determining the responsible official and for
making the threshold determination.
   E.   Mitigated DNS:
      1.   As provided in this section and Washington administrative code 197-
11-350, the responsible official may issue a DNS based on conditions attached
to the proposal by the responsible official or on changes to, or clarification
of, the proposal made by the applicant.
      2.   An applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a DS is
likely under Washington administrative code 197-11-350. The request must:
         a.   Follow submission of a permit application and environmental
checklist for a nonexempt proposal for which the department is lead agency; and
         b.   Precede the city's actual threshold determination for the
proposal.
      3.   The responsible official should respond to the request for early
notice within seven (7) working days. The response shall:
         a.   Be written;
         b.   State whether the city currently considers issuance of a DS
likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific area(s) of concern that is/
are leading the city to consider a DS; and
         c.   State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to
mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or
permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarification.
      4.   As much as possible, the city should assist the applicant with
identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation
measures.
      5.   When an applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal, along
with a revised or amended environmental checklist, the city shall base its
threshold determination on the changed or clarified proposal and should make
the determination within fifteen (15) days of receiving the changed or
clarified proposal:
         a.   If the city indicated specific mitigation measures in its
response to the request for early notice, and the applicant changed or
clarified the proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the city
shall issue and circulate a DNS under Washington administrative code 197-11-340
(2).
         b.   If the city indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate
specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a DNS, the city shall
make the threshold determination, issuing a DNS or DS as appropriate.
         c.   The applicant's proposed mitigation measures (clarifications,
changes or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example,
proposals to "control noise" or "prevent stormwater runoff" are inadequate,
whereas proposals to "muffle machinery to X decibel" or construct two hundred
foot (200') stormwater retention pond at Y location are adequate.
         d.   Mitigation measures which justify issuance of a mitigated DNS may
be incorporated in the DNS by reference to agency staff reports, studies or
other documents.
      6.   The mitigated DNS issued under Washington administrative code 197-
11-340(2) requires a fifteen (15) day comment period and public notice.
      7.   Mitigation measures incorporated in the mitigated DNS shall be
deemed conditions of approval of the permit decision and may be enforced in the
same manner as any term or condition of the permit, or enforced in any manner
specifically prescribed by the city.
      8.   If the city's tentative decision on a permit or approval does not
include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated DNS for the
proposal, the city should evaluate the threshold determination to assure
consistency with Washington administrative code 197-11-340(3)(a) (withdrawal of
DNS).
      9.   The city's written response under subsection E2 of this section
shall not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition,
preliminary discussion of clarifications or changes to a proposal, as opposed
to a written request for early notice, shall not bind the city to consider the
clarifications or changes in its threshold determination. (Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
5-1-3: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS):
   A.   Purpose Of Section; Adoption By Reference: This section contains the
rules for preparing environmental impact statements. The city adopts the
following sections by reference, as supplemented by this section:
WAC 197-11-400 Purpose of EIS
WAC 197-11-400 Purpose of EIS
-402           General requirements
-405           EIS types
-406           EIS timing
-408           Scoping
-410           Expanded scoping (optional)
-420           EIS preparation
-425           Style and size
-430           Format
-435           Cover letter or memo
-440           EIS contents
-442           Contents of EIS on nonproject proposals
-443           EIS contents when prior nonproject EIS
-444           Elements of the environment
-448           Relationship of EIS to other considerations
-450           Cost-benefit analysis
-455           Issuance of DEIS
-460           Issuance of FEIS
 
   B.   EIS Preparation; Additional Considerations:
      1.   Preparation of draft and final EISs (DEIS and FEIS) and draft and
final supplemental EISs (SEIS) is the responsibility of the city administrator.
Before the city issues an EIS, the responsible official shall be satisfied that
it complies with this chapter and Washington administrative code chapter 197-
11.
      2.   The DEIS and FEIS or draft and final SEIS shall be prepared by city
staff, the applicant, or by a consultant selected by the city or the applicant.
If the responsible official requires an EIS for a proposal and determines that
someone other than the city will prepare the EIS, the responsible official
shall notify the applicant of the city's procedure for EIS preparation,
including approval of the DEIS and FEIS prior to distribution.
      3.   The city may require an applicant to provide information the city
does not possess, including specific investigations. However, the applicant is
not required to supply information that is not required under this chapter or
that is being requested from another agency. (Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
5-1-4: COMMENTING:
   A.   Purpose Of Section; Adoption By Reference: This section contains rules
for consulting, commenting and responding on all environmental documents under
SEPA, including the rules for public notice and hearings. The city adopts the
following sections by reference, as supplemented in this chapter:
WAC 197-11-500 Purpose of this part
WAC 197-11-500 Purpose of this part
-502           Inviting comment
-504           Availability and cost of environmental documents
-508           SEPA register
-535           Public hearings and meetings
-545           Effect of no comment
-550           Specificity of comments
-560           FEIS response to comments
-570           Consulted agency costs to assist lead agency
 
   B.   Public Notice: Whenever the city issues a DNS under Washington
administrative code 197-11-340(2) or a DS under Washington administrative code
197-11-360(3), the city shall give public notice as follows:
      1.   If public notice is required for a nonexempt license, the notice
shall state whether a DS or DNS has been issued and when comments are due.
      2.   If public notice is required for the permit or approval, the city
shall give notice of the DNS or DS by:
         a.   Posting the property, for site specific proposals;
         b.   Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county, city or general area where the proposal is located.
      3.   Whenever the city issues a DS under Washington administrative code
197-11-360(3), the city shall state the scoping procedure for the proposal in
the DS as required in Washington administrative code 197-11-620, notice of the
availability of those documents shall be given by:
         a.   Indicating the availability of the DEIS in any public notice
required for a nonexempt license; and
         b.   Posting the property, for site specific proposals;
         c.   Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county, city or general area where the proposal is located.
      4.   Whenever possible, the city shall integrate the public notice
required under this subsection with existing notice procedures for the city's
nonexempt permit(s) or approval(s) required for the proposal.
      5.   The city may require an applicant to complete the public notice
requirements for the applicant's proposal at his or her expense.
      6.   Documents which are required to be sent to the department of ecology
under chapter 197-11 Washington administrative code will be published in the
SEPA register, which will also constitute a form of public notice. However,
publication in the SEPA register shall not, in itself, meet compliance with
this section.
   C.   Consulted Agency Responsibilities:
      1.   The city administrator shall be responsible for preparation of
written comments for the city in response to a consultation request prior to a
threshold determination, participation in scoping, and reviewing a DEIS.
      2.   The city administrator shall be responsible for the city's
compliance with Washington administrative code 197-11-550 whenever the city is
a consulted agency and is authorized to develop operating procedures that will
ensure that responses to consultation requests are prepared in a timely fashion
and include data from all appropriate departments of the city. (Ord. 916, 8-3-
2015)
5-1-5: EXISTING ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENT USE:
   A.   Purpose Of Section; Adoption By Reference: This section contains rules
for using and supplementing existing environmental documents prepared under
SEPA or national environmental policy act (NEPA) for the city's own
environmental compliance. The city adopts the following sections by reference:
 
WAC 197-11-600 When to use existing environmental documents
-610           Use of NEPA documents
-620           Supplemental environmental impact statement-- procedures
-625           Addenda--procedures
-630           Adoption--procedures
-635           Incorporation by reference--procedures
-640           Combining documents
 
(Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
5-1-6: SEPA AND AGENCY DECISIONS:
   A.   Purpose Of Section; Adoption By Reference: This section contains rules
(and policies) for SEPA's substantive authority, such as decisions to mitigate
or reject proposals as a result of SEPA. This subsection also contains
procedures for appealing SEPA determinations to agencies or the courts. The
city adopts the following sections by reference:
 
WAC 197-11-650 Purpose of this part
-655           Implementation
-660           Substantive authority and mitigation
-680           Appeals
 
   B.   Substantive Authority:
      1.   The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary
to those in the existing authorization of the city.
      2.   The city may attach conditions to a permit or approval for a
proposal so long as:
         a.   Such conditions are necessary to mitigate specific probable
adverse environmental impacts identified in environmental documents prepared
pursuant to this chapter; and
         b.   Such conditions are in writing; and
         c.   The mitigation measures included in such conditions are
reasonable and capable of being accomplished; and
         d.   The city has considered whether other local, state or federal
mitigation measures applied to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the
identified impacts; and
         e.   Such conditions are based on one or more policies in subsection
B4 of this section and cited in the license or other decision document.
      3.   The city may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis
of SEPA so long as:
         a.   A finding is made that approving the proposal would result in
probable significant adverse environmental impacts that are identified in an
FEIS or final SEIS prepared pursuant to this chapter; and
         b.   A finding is made that there are no reasonable mitigation
measures capable of being accomplished that are sufficient to mitigate the
identified impact; and
         c.   The denial is based on one or more policies identified in
subsection B4 of this section and identified in writing in the decision
document.
      4.   The city designates and adopts by reference the following policies
as the basis for the city exercise of authority pursuant to this subsection:
         a.   The city shall use all practicable means, consistent with other
essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans,
functions, programs and resources to the end that the state and its citizens
may:
            (1)   Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of
the environment for succeeding generations;
            (2)   Assure for all people of Washington safe, healthful,
productive, and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;
            (3)   Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment
without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and
unintended consequences;
            (4)   Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of
our national heritage;
            (5)   Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports
diversity and variety of individual choice;
            (6)   Achieve a balance between population and resource use which
will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life's amenities;
and
            (7)   Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the
maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.
         b.   The city recognizes that each person has a fundamental and
inalienable right to a healthful environment and that each person has a
responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the
environment.
   C.   Appeal To Local Legislative Body: No appeal to the local legislative
body shall be allowed. (Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
5-1-7: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Purpose Of Section; Adoption By Reference: This section contains
uniform usage and definitions of terms under SEPA. The city adopts the
following sections by reference, as supplemented by Washington administrative
code 173-802-040:
WAC 197-11-700 Definitions
-702           Act
-704           Action
-706           Addendum
-708           Adoption
-710           Affected tribe
-712           Affecting
-714           Agency
-716           Applicant
-718           Built environment
-720           Categorical exemption
-721           Closed record appeal
-722           Consolidated appeal
-724           Consulted agency
-726           Cost-benefit analysis
-728           County/city
-730           Decision maker
-732           Department
-734           Determination of nonsignificance (DNS)
-736           Determination of significance (DS)
-738           EIS
-740           Environment
-742           Environmental checklist
-744           Environmental document
-746           Environmental review
-750           Expanded scoping
-752           Impacts
-754           Incorporation by reference
-756           Lands covered by water
-758           Lead agency
-760           License
-762           Local agency
-764           Major action
-766           Mitigated DNS
-768           Mitigation
-770           Natural environment
-772           NEPA
-774           Nonproject
-776           Phased review
-778           Preparation
-780           Private project
-782           Probable
-784           Proposal
-786           Reasonable alternative
-788           Responsible official
-790           SEPA
-792           Scope
-793           Scoping
-794           Significant
-796           State agency
-797           Threshold determination
-799           Underlying governmental action
 
(Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
5-1-8: AGENCY COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Purpose Of Section; Adoption By Reference: This subsection contains
rules for agency compliance with SEPA, including rules for charging fees under
the SEPA process, designating environmentally sensitive areas, listing agencies
with environmental expertise, selecting the lead agency, and applying these
rules to current agency activities. The city adopts the following sections by
reference, as supplemented by Washington administrative code 173-806-045
through 173-806-043 and this section:
WAC 197-11-900 Purpose of this part
-902           Agency SEPA policies
-916           Application to ongoing actions
-920           Agencies with environmental expertise
-922           Lead agency rules
-924           Determining the lead agency
-926           Lead agency for governmental proposals
-928           Lead agency for public and private proposals
-930           Lead agency for private projects with one agency with
               jurisdiction
-932           Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more
               than one agency, when one of the agencies is a county/city
-934           Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local
               agency, not a county/city, and one or more state agencies
-936           Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more
               than one state agency
-938           Lead agencies for specific proposals
-940           Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency
-942           Agreements of lead agency status
-944           Agreements on division of lead agency duties
-946           DOE resolution of lead agency disputes
-948           Assumption of lead agency status
 
   B.   Fees: The city shall require the following fees for its activities in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   Threshold Determination: For every environmental checklist, the city
shall collect a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) from the proponent of the
proposal prior to undertaking the threshold determination. The time periods
provided by this chapter for making a threshold determination shall not begin
to run until payment of the fee.
      2.   Environmental Impact Statement:
         a.   When the city is the lead agency for a proposal requiring an EIS
and the responsible official determines that the EIS shall be prepared by
employees of the city, the city may charge and collect a reasonable fee from
any applicant to cover costs incurred by the city in preparing the EIS. The
responsible official shall advise the applicant(s) of the projected costs for
the EIS prior to actual preparation; the applicant shall post bond or otherwise
ensure payment of such costs.
         b.   The responsible official may determine that the city will
contract directly with a consultant for preparation of an EIS, or a portion of
the EIS, for activities initiated by some person or entity other than the city
and may bill such costs and expenses directly to the applicant. The city may
require the applicant to post bond or otherwise ensure payment of such costs.
Such consultants shall be selected by mutual agreement of the city and
applicant after a call for proposals.
         c.   If a proposal is modified so that an EIS is no longer required,
the responsible official shall refund any fees collected under subsection B2a
or B2b of this section which remain after incurred costs are paid.
      3.   Public Notice Requirements: The city may collect a reasonable fee
from an applicant to cover the cost of meeting the public notice requirements
of this chapter relating to the applicant's proposal.
      4.   Copies And Mailing: The city may charge any person for copies of any
document prepared under this chapter, and for mailing the document, in a manner
provided by Revised Code Of Washington 42.56.100. (Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
5-1-9: FORMS:
   A.   Adoption By Reference (Washington Administrative Code 173-806-230): The
city adopts the following forms and sections by reference:
 
WAC 197-11-960 Environmental checklist
-965           Adoption notice
-970           Determination of nonsignificance (DNS)
-980           Determination of significance and scoping notice (DS)
-985           Notice of assumption of lead agency status
-990           Notice of action
 
(Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
5-1-10: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter, or the application
of the provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected.
(Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Purpose And Intent
5-2-2: Definitions
5-2-3: Public Nuisance Declared And Defined
5-2-4: Specific Nuisances Enumerated
5-2-5: Penalty For Violation
5-2-6: Emergency Actions
5-2-7: Liability For Continuing Nuisance
5-2-8: Additional Relief
5-2-9: Conflicts; Controlling Provisions
5-2-10: Special City Responsibility Not Created
5-2-11: Severability
5-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to exercise the city's police power in
order to provide for protection of public health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the city of Long Beach and to promote economic development of the
city by proscribing those nuisances which equally affect the rights of an
entire community.
   B.   It is also the purpose of this chapter to prevent and prohibit those
conditions which reduce the value of private property; interfere with the
enjoyment of public and private property; create and constitute fire and other
safety and health hazards; generally create a menace to the health and welfare
of the public; degrade the character of neighborhoods; and depreciate property
values.
   C.   It is necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare to regulate,
prevent, and prohibit conditions that may constitute disorderly, disturbing,
unsafe, unsanitary, vermin producing or harboring, and/or disease causing
places, conditions, or objects.
   D.   It is also necessary for the public social and economic welfare to
regulate, prevent, and prohibit conditions which degrade the city's scenic
attractiveness, livability, and economic development.
   E.   The presence of litter, overgrown and/or uncultivated vegetation, and
other forms of waste or various hazards require an emphasis on measures to
correct those conditions, which are injurious to the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
   F.   It is the intent of the city to establish efficient administrative
procedures to enforce the regulations of the city, to provide a prompt process
to address alleged violations, and to establish standards to be used by the
city to abate public nuisances.
   G.   This chapter further serves to establish procedures, as authorized by
Revised Code Of Washington 35.22.280 and other laws, both state and city,
providing for the enforcement of the provisions herein. (Ord. 887, 2-4-2013)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions for certain terms, phrases,
words, and their derivatives that are included within this section shall apply,
unless otherwise specified or unless the context or meaning clearly indicates
otherwise. Terms, phrases, and words used in the singular also include the
plural and the plural the singular. Where terms, phrases, and words are not
defined within this chapter, they shall have their ordinary, accepted meaning
within the context in which they are used.
ABATE: To remedy a condition which constitutes a civil violation or an unsafe
condition by such means, in such a manner, and to such an extent as the city
official determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety,
and welfare of the community.
ACT: Do or perform something; anything done, being done, or to be done;
performance; deed.
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE: Any object or condition which can reasonably constitute a
hazard or danger and which is accessible to unauthorized persons.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern
property or conduct that occurs on a property.
HEARING EXAMINER: The individual selected by the mayor as provided in section
1-8-1 of this code.
LITTER: Includes, but is not limited to, debris in the form of cans, bottles,
glass, paper, ashes, plastic materials, garbage, wastepaper, packing material,
scrap iron, wire, metal articles, discarded furniture and appliances, junk,
broken stone or cement, scrap wood, pallets, tires, discarded building
materials, inoperable vehicles, inoperable bicycles, or bicycle parts, rags,
boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, tree and vegetation
trimmings, and all other waste, discarded or abandoned material, or trash,
which are a menace to the public health, safety, or welfare.
NUISANCE: See section
5-2-3 of this chapter.
OWNER: Any person with interest in or dominion over real estate as indicated in
the records of the Pacific County tax assessor, or who establishes under this
chapter his or her ownership interest therein.
PERSON: Any individual or any entity, whether public or private.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE: The person responsible for abating a nuisance, which
normally shall be the owner. Also termed "responsible party".
PREMISES (PROPERTY): Used interchangeably herein, any building, lot, tax
parcel, dwelling, rental unit, real estate, or land, or portion thereof,
whether improved or unimproved, including, but not limited to, property used as
residential or commercial property and may include the adjacent "public right
of way" as defined herein, and adjacent sidewalks or parking strip.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: See section
5-2-3 of this chapter, and includes a condition that affects equally the rights
of a community or neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be
unequal.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL: For purposes of this chapter, the mayor or any designated
alternate empowered by ordinance or by the mayor to enforce a city of Long
Beach ordinance or regulation, including, but not limited to, the city
administrator, police chief, fire chief, fire marshal, building official,
community development director, or their respective designees.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area of land, the right of passage of which is secured
by the city for public purposes and includes the traveled portion of public
streets and alleys, as well as the border area, which includes, but is not
limited to, any sidewalks, driveway approaches, planting strips, traffic
circles, parkways or medians, or that area between the sidewalk and the curb
line.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person required by the applicable regulation to comply
therewith, normally the owner(s) of the property where a civil violation may
occur, is occurring, or did occur. Also termed "person responsible".
SCREENING: For the purposes of this chapter, shall include, but not be limited
to, solid wood fencing, chainlink fencing with slats, and/or solid landscaping
capable of concealing something from public view by standing individuals at or
near the property lines.
VEHICLE: Except as otherwise specifically defined herein, shall include, but
not be limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, motorized recreational
vehicles, campers, travel trailers, boats on or off trailers, or utility
trailers. (Ord. 887, 2-4-2013)
5-2-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED AND DEFINED:
   A.   Declaration; Abatement: Each of the conditions listed in this section,
unless otherwise permitted by law, is declared to constitute a public nuisance,
and whenever a public official determines that any of these conditions exist
upon any premises, the official may require or provide for the abatement
thereof pursuant to this chapter and title 14 of this code.
   B.   Nuisance Defined: Unless the context or the use of the term in a
particular section or the specific language of this chapter otherwise provides
or requires, for purposes of this chapter, a "nuisance" or "public nuisance"
consists of an occupation, use of property, thing, unlawfully doing an act,
doing an unlawful act, omitting to perform a duty, or permitting an action or
condition to occur or exist which:
      1.   Unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, or safety of the public or others; or
      2.   Unreasonably offends decency; or
      3.   Is unreasonably offensive to the senses; or
      4.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage or use any lake, stream, canal, or basin, or any
public park, square, street, alley, highway, or right of way in the city; or
      5.   Unlawfully interferes with, damages, or pollutes designated habitat
areas, critical areas or their buffers, open spaces, restoration sites, or
tributaries, and similar areas thereto; or
      6.   In any way renders other persons unreasonably insecure in life or
the use of property; or
      7.   Unreasonably obstructs the free use of property so as to essentially
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property; or
      8.   Results in an attractive nuisance; or
      9.   Creates or permits the existence or continuance of any of the
specific nuisances identified in this chapter. (Ord. 887, 2-4-2013)
   C.   Code Violation As Nuisance: Notwithstanding any other definition of
nuisance in this chapter, a violation of any of the following titles of this
code shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be subject to the provisions
of title 14 of this code and to abatement as provided by law: title 10,
"Building Regulations"; 11, "Unified Development"; 12, "Zoning Regulations"; or
13, "Critical Areas Regulations", of this code. (Ord. 916, 8-3-2015)
5-2-4: SPECIFIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   The construction, maintaining, using, placing, depositing, causing,
allowing, leaving, or permitting to be or remain, whether in or upon any
private or public lot, building, structure, or premises, or on, in, or upon any
right of way, street, avenue, alley, park, parkway, or other public or private
place in the city, any one or more of the following places, conditions, things,
or acts is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance:
      1.   Accumulations Of Solid Waste, Manure: Accumulations of manure,
rubbish or other solid waste, whether on land or in a vehicle; provided, that a
compost pile so covered or concealed as not to affect the health, safety, or
value of adjacent property shall not be so deemed.
      2.   Water Pollution:
         a.   Pollution of a body of water, spring, stream, or drainage ditch
by sewage, industrial wastes, or other substances that cause harmful material
to pollute the water.
         b.   Ponds or pools of stagnant water, except those areas of wetlands
as designated by city, federal, or state laws, rules, or regulations.
         c.   Violation of Revised Code Of Washington (RCW) 90.48, water
pollution control, specifically Revised Code Of Washington 90.48.080, discharge
of polluting matter in waters prohibited.
      3.   Tree Limbs Overhanging Street Or Sidewalk: All limbs or trees
overhanging a public sidewalk or alley which are less than nine feet (9') above
the surface of said sidewalk or overhanging a city street which are less than
fourteen feet (14') above the surface of said street; any foliage which
obstructs to any degree any stop sign, speed sign, or other traffic control
device.
      4.   Offensive Premises:
         a.   Premises or residences that are in such a state of decay as to
cause an offensive odor, extending beyond the property line; or
         b.   Premises or residences that are in an unsanitary condition; or
         c.   Premises or residences that create or constitute an unreasonable
risk of fire or public safety hazard for adjoining property owners, whether
public or private.
      5.   Privies, Cesspools: Privies, vaults, cesspools, sumps, or like
places that are not securely protected from flies and/or rats, or that are foul
or malodorous.
      6.   Abandoned Refrigerators, Iceboxes: Unused, abandoned, or discarded
refrigerators, iceboxes, bathtubs, other appliances, or like containers that
are left in any place exposed or accessible to children, whether such a place
is outside any building or dwelling or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, dwelling, or other structure, or violation of Revised Code Of
Washington 9.03, abandoned refrigeration equipment.
      7.   Junkyards, Dumping Grounds; Fencing: All places not properly fenced
which are used or maintained as junkyards or dumping grounds, or for the
wrecking, disassembling, repair, or rebuilding of vehicles, tractors, trailers,
boats, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn out,
wrecked, or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind
or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery
or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which said
places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others.
      8.   Open Pits Or Swimming Pools: An open pit, hole, quarry, cistern,
swimming pool, or other excavation without safeguards or barriers to prevent
such places from being accessed or used by children. This subsection shall not
apply to authorized construction projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent
injury or death, especially to children.
      9.   Depositing Or Burning Rubbish: The depositing or burning of, or
causing to be deposited or burned in any street, alley, sidewalk, park,
parkway, or other public place open to travel, any hay, straw, grass, grass
clippings, papers, wood, boards, boxes, leaves, manure, or other rubbish or
material, except by permission of the fire marshal, or violation of Revised
Code Of Washington 70.94, Washington clean air act, specifically Revised Code
Of Washington 70.94.040, causing or permitting air pollution unlawful -
exception. The use of trash burners, such as a burn barrel, to burn household
trash on private property is prohibited.
      10.   Dead, Diseased, Or Substantially Damaged Trees: The existence of
any dead, diseased, infested, broken, or dying tree that may constitute a
danger to property or persons. No tree, bush, or shrub on property that abuts
upon a street or public sidewalk shall interfere, in any manner, with street or
sidewalk traffic.
      11.   Shrubs Constituting Fire Hazard: All shrubs, bushes, trees, or
vegetation that are in such a condition, whether as the result of size,
flammability, or state of decay, so as to constitute a fire hazard.
      12.   Cans, Bottles, Trash; Containers Required: Any tin cans, bottles,
glass, cans, ashes, wire, pipe, metal pieces or articles, plaster, and all
other trash or abandoned material, unless the same is kept in covered bins or
metal receptacles approved by the city administrator. This provision does not
apply to recyclables kept in approved containers.
      13.   Barrels, Boxes, Crates; Neat Piles Required: Any trash, litter,
rags, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses,
bedding accessories, packing hay, straw, or other packing material, pipe, or
metal, that is not neatly piled.
      14.   Lumber, Roofing And Siding Materials: Lumber, roofing, or siding
materials, logs, or pilings not so stacked, piled, or arranged as to be free
from being dangerous to and/or accessible to children.
      15.   Items Or Conditions Not Secured From Public Access: Any of the
following not properly secured from access by the public:
         a.   Any unsightly or dangerous building, billboard, or other
structure; or
         b.   Any abandoned, or partially destroyed building or structure; or
         c.   Any building or structure commenced and left unfinished for a
period of more than six (6) months from the date of the last completed work
pursuant to the authority of an applicable valid building permit; or
         d.   Storage of vehicles, materials, tools, or other objects contrary
to the provision of any applicable section of this code.
      16.   Vehicle Repair On Street: Repairing upon the public rights of way,
streets, alleys, or other public property of the city, any automobile, truck,
or other motor vehicle or any other device required to possess a license issued
by the department of motor vehicle/licenses of this state or the state of its
registration, except for any emergency repairs not to exceed forty eight (48)
hours in any seven (7) day period and only so long as it is located: a) so as
to not constitute a hazard or unreasonable interference to pedestrian or motor
vehicle travel, and b) so that the placement or storage upon these sites of
vehicles, materials, or other objects during the allowable period for repair is
not contrary to the provision of any applicable section of this code.
      17.   Unwholesome Meat, Dead Animals; Offensive Substances: Any putrid,
unsound, or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins, skeletons, or other whole or
part of any dead animal, fish, or fowl; butcher's trimmings and offal; or any
waste, vegetable, or animal matter, in any quantity; garbage; human excreta; or
other offensive substance. Provided, however, that nothing contained in this
chapter shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in the
manner approved by the city administrator or the local disposal company.
      18.   Burning Refuse Prohibited; Smoke, Fumes: Except to the extent
allowed by the lawful terms of a permit issued by the governmental authority
having jurisdiction thereof, burning or disposal of refuse, sawdust, or other
material in such a manner as to cause or permit ashes, sawdust, soot, or
cinders to be cast upon the streets or alleys of the city, or to cause or
permit dense smoke, noxious fumes, ashes, soot, or gases arising from such
burning to become annoying or injurious to the health, comfort, or repose of
the general public.
      19.   Plants Interfering: The existence of any shrubs, vines, or other
plants growing into or over any street, sidewalk, public hydrant, pole, or
electrolier; or the existence of any shrubs, vines, or other plants growing on,
around, or in front of any hydrant, standpipe, sprinkler system connection, or
any other appliance or facility provided for fire protection purposes, in such
a way as to obscure the view thereof or impair the access thereto, or as to
obstruct or interfere with the proper diffusion of light from any streetlamp,
or as to obstruct the vision or visibility of vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
      20.   Poisonous Substances: Any poisonous or harmful substance which is
reasonably accessible to persons or to animals.
      21.   Dilapidated Fence Or Structure Fronting On A Public Way: The
existence of any screening, fence, or other structure or thing on private
property abutting or fronting upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, or place
which is in a sagging, leaning, falling, fallen, decayed, or other dilapidated
or unsafe condition.
      22.   Poultry: Poultry that creates a nuisance, through noise, odor,
unsightliness, or through unsanitary conditions.
      23.   Disposal Of Animals: To dump or abandon living animals or dispose
of dead animals within the city.
      24.   Obstructions To Clear View: All trees, hedges, billboards, fences,
or other obstructions which prevent pedestrians or drivers from having a clear
view of traffic approaching an intersection or which prevent drivers from
having a clear view of pedestrians or other traffic in sufficient time to bring
a motor vehicle driven at a reasonable speed to a full stop before the
intersection is reached. Pursuant to the definition of "vision clearance
triangle" found at section
12-2-1 of this code (zoning, definitions), nothing located within twenty feet
(20') of the surveyed property corner may exceed forty two inches (42") in
height.
      25.   Explosives, Flammable Liquids, Hazardous Substances: All
explosives, flammable liquids, and other hazardous substances stored in any
manner or in any amount other than that provided by ordinance.
      26.   Obstructing Flow Of Transit Vehicles: For any person to obstruct or
encroach upon public highways, streets, private ways, alleys, and ways open to
the public, including cemeteries, or to unlawfully obstruct or impede the flow
of municipal transit vehicles, as defined in Revised Code Of Washington
46.04.355, as now existing or hereafter amended or succeeded, or passenger
traffic, or to otherwise interfere with the provision or use of public
transportation services, or to obstruct or impede a municipal transit driver,
operator, employee, or supervisor in the performance of that individual's
duties.
      27.   Offensive Businesses: For any person to erect, continue, or use any
building or other structure or place for the exercise of any trade, activity,
employment, or manufacture that is offensive or dangerous to the health of
individuals or the public, by occasioning obnoxious, hazardous, or toxic
exhausts or emissions, offensive smells, or otherwise.
      28.   Impeding Flows Of Stream, Body Of Water, Drainage Ditch: Any person
without legal authority to cause or to allow the obstruction or impeding of the
passage or flow of any stream, canal, drainage ditch, or body of water.
      29.   Places Where Liquor, Cigarettes, Or Controlled Substances Are
Unlawfully Stored, Used, Or Sold: Any place wherein intoxicating liquors,
cigarettes, or controlled substances are kept for unlawful use, sale, or
distribution.
      30.   Weeds, Trash, Offensive Matter: Any weeds, trash, dirt, filth, the
carcass of any animal, waste, shrubs, an accumulation of lawn or yard trimmings
in excess of one cubic yard or other offensive matter.
      31.   Materials Endangering Property: Any accumulation of materials or
objects in a location when the same endangers property or safety or constitutes
a fire hazard.
      32.   Sidewalks Out Of Repair: The existence of a sidewalk or a portion
of a sidewalk adjacent to any premises that is out of repair and is either in a
condition that endangers persons or property or is in a condition that
interferes with the public convenience in the use of such sidewalk.
      33.   Unlawful Obstruction To Public Ways: The existence of any
obstruction to a street, alley, crossing, or sidewalk, where the obstruction is
by ordinance prohibited or where the obstruction is made without lawful
permission, or where the obstruction, having been originally made by lawful
permission, is kept and maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the
purpose thereof has been accomplished.
      34.   Maintaining Building Or Premises In Disorderly Or Unsanitary
Condition: The erecting, maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving, or
permitting to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure, or
premises, or in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway or other
public or private place in the city, including inside a vehicle, any one or
more of the following disorderly, disturbing, unsanitary, vermin producing or
harboring, disease causing places, conditions, or things:
         a.   Any putrid, unhealthy, or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins,
the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish, or fowl, or waste parts of
fish, vegetable, animal matter in any quantity, or household garbage; but
nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in approved
covered receptacles.
         b.   Any filthy, littered, or trash covered dwellings, cellars, house
yards, barnyards, stable yards, factory yards, vacant areas in the rear of
stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises.
         c.   Any animal manure in any quantity that is not securely protected
from flies or weather conditions or that is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the city.
         d.   Any poison oak, poison ivy, Russian thistle, or other noxious
weeds, and any of those plants listed by a state or federal agency as noxious
or prohibited, such as those plants listed on Washington's noxious weed list
such as, but not limited to, gorse and Scotch broom. This applies whether the
plant is growing or otherwise; but nothing herein shall prevent the temporary
retention of such plants in approved covered receptacles.
         e.   Any bamboo that is not contained within a barrier. The barrier
can be plastic, metal, or concrete, but it must completely contain the bamboo.
Preexisting inground plantings that are not left untended are exempt from this
provision, except that the person responsible must take all reasonable action
to prevent the plant from invading the property of another, and bamboo growth
that crosses the property line of another is a nuisance that must be abated.
         f.   The use of a tarp, plastic sheeting, canvas, or other temporary
material(s) on any roof, wall, fence, or any portion thereof for more than six
(6) months from the date of its first use.
         g.   Any structure that is damaged more than fifty percent (50%) of
its value that is either not demolished within six (6) months of its initially
being damaged or whose reconstruction has not begun in six (6) months and been
completed in two (2) years of its initially being damaged.
         h.   Any exterior portion of a structure (roof, wall, deck, porch,
accessory structure) or any portion thereof damaged more than fifty percent
(50%) that is not repaired within six (6) months of its initially being
damaged.
         i.   Any bottles, cans, glass, ashes, pieces of scrap metal, wire,
metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken
glass, broken plaster, and all such trash, or abandoned material, unless such
is kept in approved covered receptacles.
         j.   Any trash, litter, rags, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes,
crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or
other packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal
not neatly piled, or anything whatsoever in which flies or rats may breed or
multiply, or which may be a fire hazard.
         k.   Any dune grass in excess of three feet (3') in height or any
domestic landscaping grass or sod in excess of one foot (1') in height.
         l.   Any violation of Pacific County health ordinance 1.
      35.   Storage Of Unhealthful Items: Storing outside a completely enclosed
building, items that constitute a threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare, including, but not limited to, the following: scrap rope, rags,
batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, tires, waste, used lumber or salvaged
wood, machinery or appliances or parts of such machinery, tools, vehicular
component parts, iron, steel, household goods or hardware, medications, medical
supplies, or medical devices.
      36.   Unfinished Or Unauthorized Construction: Any building or structure
where construction was commenced and the building or structure was left
unfinished for more than six (6) months from the date building commenced or any
building or structure that has been constructed or modified without permits
pursuant to section
10-2-4, "Building Permits And Fees", of this code. This shall include any
unauthorized work or noncompliant work taking place on private property or in
the public right of way, with or without a permit, or which is otherwise in
violation of any city ordinance.
      37.   Drainage Over Sidewalks: The existence of any drainage onto or over
any sidewalk or public pedestrianway. (Ord. 887, 2-4-2013)
5-2-5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter has committed a civil
violation and shall be subject to the provisions herein and the provisions of
title 14, "Enforcement Procedures", of this code. The person responsible for
any violation of this chapter at all residential dwellings, commercial
establishments, and/or real estate shall be responsible for compliance with
this chapter and liable for any damages or costs incurred and awarded under
this chapter and title 14 of this code. (Ord. 887, 2-4-2013)
5-2-6: EMERGENCY ACTIONS:
If the public official determines that a nuisance exists which is an imminent
and emergent threat to public health, safety, or welfare, and constitutes an
emergency requiring immediate abatement, the city may perform any emergency
action necessary to abate the nuisance with or without prior notice. (Ord. 887,
2-4-2013)
5-2-7: LIABILITY FOR CONTINUING NUISANCE:
Every successive person responsible who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance
upon or in the use of a property caused by a former person responsible is
liable therefor in the same manner as the former person(s) responsible. (Ord.
887, 2-4-2013)
5-2-8: ADDITIONAL RELIEF:
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from seeking any other relief,
as authorized in other provisions of this code. Enforcement of this chapter is
supplemental to all other laws adopted by the city. (Ord. 887, 2-4-2013)
5-2-9: CONFLICTS; CONTROLLING PROVISIONS:
In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other provisions of
this code or other ordinance providing a civil penalty, this chapter shall
control. (Ord. 887, 2-4-2013)
5-2-10: SPECIAL CITY RESPONSIBILITY NOT CREATED:
This chapter shall not be construed to create any special responsibility of the
city. No person shall rely on the city to know if any condition constitutes a
public nuisance, nor shall any person rely on the city to abate a public
nuisance known or unknown. It is solely the right of the city to make the
decision to expend city resources to issue a notice of violation or a notice of
violation and abatement, as provided in title 14 of this code, or to abate or
not abate a public nuisance. (Ord. 887, 2-4-2013)
5-2-11: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or section of this chapter shall be held to be void or
unconstitutional, all other parts, provisions, and sections of this chapter not
expressly so held shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 887, 2-4-2013)
ARTICLE A. JUNK VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-2A-1: Nuisance Declared
5-2A-2: Junk Vehicle Defined
5-2A-3: Inspection And Certification
5-2A-4: Removal Notice; Hearing
5-2A-5: Designated Disposal Site
5-2A-6: Removal Of Junk Vehicle Or Parts
5-2A-7: Abatement And Removal; Costs; Exception
5-2A-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
An unauthorized "junk vehicle" as defined in section 3-2A-2 of this article, or
parts thereof, located on private property is declared to be a nuisance
affecting public peace, safety and welfare. (Ord. 747, 8-8-2000)
5-2A-2: JUNK VEHICLE DEFINED:
"Junk Vehicle" means a vehicle certified under Revised Code of Washington
46.55.230 as meeting at least three (3) of the following requirements:
   A.   Is three (3) years old or older;
   B.   Is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to, any
of the following: a broken window or windshield or missing wheels, tires, motor
or transmission;
   C.   Is apparently inoperable;
   D.   Has an approximated fair market value equal only to the approximate
value of the scrap in it. (Ord. 747, 8-8-2000)
5-2A-3: INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION:
The police department may inspect and certify that a vehicle meets the
requirement of a junk vehicle. The officer making the certification shall
record the make and vehicle identification number or license number of the
vehicle if available, and shall also describe in detail the damaged or missing
equipment to verify that the value of the junk vehicle is equivalent only to
the value of the scrap in it. (Ord. 747, 8-8-2000)
5-2A-4: REMOVAL NOTICE; HEARING:
   A.   Notify Owner; Request For Hearing: Upon certification by the police
department that a vehicle is a junk vehicle, notice as provided in subsection
5-2-5A of this title shall be provided to the last registered owner of the
vehicle and to the property owner of record that the vehicle has been certified
to be a junk vehicle and that it will be removed and disposed of as a junk
vehicle within fourteen (14) days of receipt of said notice unless the owner of
the vehicle or the property owner requests a hearing to contest the abatement
and removal of the vehicle or part thereof. Such hearing, if requested, shall
be heard by the municipal court as provided in subsection 5-2-5B of this title.
   B.   Notify Others: If a timely request for a hearing is received by the
city, the city shall mail by certified mail, with a five (5) day return receipt
requested and by regular mail to: 1) the owner of the land, as shown on the
last equalized assessment roll; 2) the person requesting the hearing; and 3)
the last registered and legal owner of record, unless the vehicle is in such
condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership,
notice of the time, location and date of the hearing on the question of
abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance.
   C.   Appearance Or Written Statement; Decision: The owner of the land on
which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a
written statement in time for consideration at the hearing and deny
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land with his reasons for
the denial. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on
the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently
acquiesced to its presence, then neither the landowner nor the property owner
shall be assessed the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle, or the
monetary penalty provided in section
5-2-5 of this title. (Ord. 747, 8-8-2000)
5-2A-5: DESIGNATED DISPOSAL SITE:
Tow truck operators with a letter of appointment from the city shall, upon
request of the city police department, remove junk vehicles to a disposal site
designated for junk vehicles or parts thereof. Costs of such removal shall be
recovered by the tow truck operators in accordance with Revised Code of
Washington 46.55.130 as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 747, 8-8-2000)
5-2A-6: REMOVAL OF JUNK VEHICLE OR PARTS:
After notice as provided herein has been given of the intent of the city to
dispose of a junk vehicle and after a hearing, if requested, has been held, the
police department shall make arrangements with a tow truck operator to remove
said vehicle or part to a disposal site. The police department shall notify the
Washington state patrol and department of licensing that said vehicle has been
wrecked. (Ord. 747, 8-8-2000)
5-2A-7: ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL; COSTS; EXCEPTION:
   A.   Costs: Costs of abatement and removal and the monetary penalty herein
may be assessed against the last registered owner of the vehicle or parts
thereof if the identity of the owner can be determined, unless the owner, in
the transfer of ownership of the vehicle, has complied with Revised Code of
Washington 46.12.101, or the costs and penalties may be assessed against the
owner of the property on which the vehicle is stored.
   B.   Exception: The abatement and removal of junk vehicles shall not apply
to a vehicle or part thereof that is completely enclosed within a building in a
lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or
licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced according to Revised Code of Washington
46.80.130. (Ord. 747, 8-8-2000)
CHAPTER 3
LITTER CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Waste Reduction, Recycling And Model Litter Control Act
5-3-1: WASTE REDUCTION, RECYCLING AND MODEL LITTER CONTROL ACT:
The city adopts by reference Revised Code of Washington chapter 70.93 and all
amendments thereto as the waste reduction, recycling and model litter control
act for the city, with three (3) copies of such statute being on file with the
city clerk- treasurer for use and examination by the public. (1988 Code §
8.12.010; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
NOXIOUS VEGETATION
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definition
5-4-2: Nuisance Declaration
5-4-3: Prohibited On Property
5-4-4: Abatement
5-4-5: Billing And Lien Procedures
5-4-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "noxious vegetation" means:
   A.   Gorse, wild scotchbroom and wild blackberries.
   B.   Any vegetation that is:
      1.   A health hazard.
      2.   A fire hazard.
      3.   A traffic hazard because it impairs the view of a public street or
otherwise makes use of the street hazardous. (1988 Code § 8.16.010)
5-4-2: NUISANCE DECLARATION:
The city council finds, declares and determines that the existence of noxious
vegetation upon any lot or parcel of land is a detriment or menace to
neighboring property and to the health, safety and welfare of the residents in
the vicinity and as such, a public nuisance and shall be abated in the amount
provided by this chapter. (1988 Code § 8.16.020)
5-4-3: PROHIBITED ON PROPERTY:
No owner or person in charge of property in the city shall allow noxious
vegetation to be on the property or in the right of way of a street abutting on
the property. Violation of this section is an infraction. (1988 Code §
8.16.030)
5-4-4: ABATEMENT:
   A.   Notice:
      1.   The city clerk-treasurer shall cause to be published twice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city a copy of this chapter as a notice
to all owners and persons in charge of property of their duty to keep their
property free of noxious vegetation.
      2.   The notice shall state that the city is willing to abate such a
nuisance on any particular parcel of property at the request of the owner or
person in charge of the property, for a fee sufficient to cover the city's
costs of the abatement. The notice shall also state that, in the absence of
such requests, the city shall abate all such nuisances ten (10) or more days
after the final publication of the notice, and to charge the cost of doing so
on any particular parcel or property to the owner thereof, the person in charge
thereof, or the property itself.
      3.   The notice may also direct the removal of fallen trees, tree limbs,
tree trunks or other debris existing on the property found necessary to be
removed and abated to effectively carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(1988 Code § 8.16.040)
   B.   Private Abatement:
      1.   Within ten (10) days after the final publication of the notice for
which this chapter provides, or as soon thereafter as a nuisance as defined in
section
5-4-1 of this chapter occurs, the owner or person in charge of the property
where such a nuisance occurs shall abate the nuisance, except as subsection B2
of this section provides to the contrary.
      2.   The owner or person in charge of property who is apprehensive that
vegetation on the property is likely to be allegedly in violation of this
chapter, or who denies that a nuisance as defined in this chapter exists on the
property, may file with the council a written protest denying that such a
nuisance exists on the property. The council shall then determine whether the
nuisance does so exist. That determination shall be final. If it is
affirmative, the owner or person in charge shall cause the nuisance to be
abated within ten (10) days after the determination. (1988 Code § 8.16.050)
   C.   Abatement By City:
      1.   If any person shall fail or neglect to cut or remove or destroy the
noxious vegetation within ten (10) days after the notice provided for in this
chapter, the city utility crew may go upon such lots or parcels with such
assistance as necessary, cut and remove or destroy such noxious vegetation in
such manner as shall be most effective in his judgment.
      2.   The person authorized to cause, or retained to do the abating may
enter upon the property at reasonable times for purposes of investigating and
abating the nuisance. (1988 Code § 8.16.060)
5-4-5: BILLING AND LIEN PROCEDURES:
   A.   Statement Of Cost; Notice To Owner: Upon completion of the work under
this chapter, the city clerk-treasurer will file an itemized statement of the
costs thereof, which includes the cost of receiving complaints, mapping,
staking, mowing, travel time and inspection, plus ten percent (10%) to cover
overhead, enforcement of this chapter and publication of notice required by it;
but the minimum charge for any lot or parcel of land shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00). The clerk-treasurer shall notify by mail each property owner
affected thereby of the sum of money due to the city. If the costs are not paid
within thirty (30) days of the billing date, the clerk-treasurer shall
thereafter file with the council the aforesaid itemized statement of cost
including the ten percent (10%) overhead, plus an additional charge of five
percent (5%) to cover assessment procedure expense. (1988 Code § 8.16.070; amd.
2007 Code)
   B.   Opportunity For Hearing; Declaration Of Lien: After a reasonable
opportunity to be heard in objection thereto, the council shall then declare
the correctness of such statement and declare the same to be a lien upon the
property involved, to be entered in the minor lien docket and enforced against
the property. (1988 Code § 8.16.070)
CHAPTER 5
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
5-5-1: Title
5-5-2: Policy And Purpose
5-5-3: Definitions
5-5-4: Nuisance Noise Disturbance
5-5-5: Exemptions
5-5-6: Claim Of Exemption; Burden Of Proof
5-5-7: Enforcement
5-5-8: Violation As Infraction
5-5-9: Violation As Misdemeanor
5-5-10: Nonappearance After Written Promise
5-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the LONG BEACH CITY NUISANCE
NOISE CODE. (Ord. 633, 8-3-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
5-5-2: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to minimize exposure of
citizens to excessive noise and to protect, promote, and preserve the public
health, safety and welfare. It is the express purpose of the city to control
the level of noise in a manner that promotes the use, value, and enjoyment of
property; sleep and repose; commerce and environmental quality. (Ord. 633, 8-3-
1992)
5-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be
defined as follows:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The Long Beach City chief of police or his designee.
CONSTRUCTION: Any activity necessary or incidental to the erection, demolition,
assembling, altering, installing, repairing or equipping of buildings, roadways
or utilities, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof regularly used for residential
occupancy.
DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE: A device, commonly called "jake brake", used primarily
on trucks and buses to convert the motor from an internal combustion engine to
an air compressor for the purpose of vehicle braking without the use of wheel
brakes.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any land vehicle that is or is designed to be self-propelled
and/or that is designed or used for transporting persons or property.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: A. Any sound that is plainly audible within any dwelling
unit or sleeping unit not the source of the sound, and that: 1) injures or
endangers the safety and health of humans; 2) reasonably tends to annoy or
disturb one or more persons; or 3) endangers or injures personal or real
property. Whether any particular sound constitutes a noise disturbance is to be
determined in light of all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited
to: the loudness of the sound as heard outside of the property or location
where the sound originates; the time of day the sound is heard; and the
duration of the sound.
   B.   "Noise disturbance" also means any sound that is plainly audible twenty
five feet (25') from any motor vehicle within the city limits of Long Beach,
irrespective of whether it is plainly audible within any dwelling or sleeping
unit.
OFF ROAD VEHICLE: Any vehicle, including motor vehicles, used off public rights
of way for recreation purposes, including racing vehicles.
PERSON: Individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental body,
state or other entity whatsoever.
PROPERTY: Anything of value, whether tangible or intangible, real or personal.
(Ord. 633, 8-3-1992)
5-5-4: NUISANCE NOISE DISTURBANCE:
It is unlawful for any person to cause or any person in possession of property
to allow to originate from the property any noise disturbance that:
   A.   Emanates from any device or property used for sound production or
reproduction, including, but not limited to, radios, televisions, musical
instruments, phonographs, loudspeakers; or
   B.   Emanates from mechanized equipment such as, but not limited to, dynamic
braking system, motor vehicle, motorcycle, off road vehicle, or recreation
vehicle, except as provided in section
5-5-5 of this chapter; or
   C.   Emanates from an instrument used in propulsion of shot, shell or
bullets by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or from fireworks,
except as provided in section
5-5-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 633, 8-3-1992)
5-5-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Sounds created by fire alarms.
   B.   Sounds created by emergency equipment and emergency work necessary for
law enforcement or the health, safety and welfare of the community.
   C.   Sounds created by the discharge of firearms: 1) in the course of
recreational activities during the time of year and time of day prescribed by
state law for said activity, and if no time period is prescribed by law for
such activity, then the time of day shall begin one-half (1/2) hour after
sunrise and end one- half (1/2) hour after sunset; 2) on authorized shooting
ranges; and 3) in the course of protecting life, limb or property. However,
there shall be no exemption for any discharge of firearms that is in violation
of any other provisions of law.
   D.   Sounds originating from forest land management activities or
agriculture activities.
   E.   Sounds created by equipment or motor vehicles used for road and
drainage maintenance.
   F.   Sounds created by off road vehicles; provided, that all such vehicles
are operated with noise suppression equipment. For purposes of this section,
"noise suppression equipment" means either: 1) factory equipped and installed
noise suppression devices; or 2) the equivalent thereof.
   G.   Sounds created by warning devices not operated continuously for more
than thirty (30) minutes.
   H.   Sounds created by the operation of equipment or facilities of surface
carriers engaged in commerce by railroad.
   I.   Sounds that originate from public works projects. (Ord. 633, 8-3-1992)
   J.   Other than public works projects, sounds created by construction within
an enclosed structure between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M.; and for framing and external construction, between seven thirty o'clock
(7:30) A.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. weekdays and between nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on weekends. (Ord. 743, 4-3-
2000)
   K.   Sounds created by refuse removal equipment.
   L.   Sounds originating from officially approved parades and other public
events.
   M.   Sounds originating from fireworks authorized pursuant to Revised Code
of Washington chapter 70.77.
   N.   Sounds originating from ordinary maintenance of real or personal
property during daylight hours. Such activities include, but are not limited
to: landscape maintenance, house painting, firewood cutting, gardening. (Ord.
633, 8-3-1992)
   O.   Sounds originating from normal travel on roads. However, this exemption
does not apply to the operation of any motor vehicle in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) pounds' gross combined weight rating within two hundred feet (200') of
any residence and with a dynamic braking device engaged. (Ord. 633, 8-3-1992;
amd. 2007 Code)
   P.   Sound originating from commercial or industrial activities, provided
such activities are conducted in conformance with Revised Code of Washington
chapter 70.107 and any regulations thereunder. (Ord. 633, 8-3-1992)
5-5-6: CLAIM OF EXEMPTION; BURDEN OF PROOF:
Any person charged with a violation of this chapter who relies on any
exemptions contained in section
5-5-5 of this chapter in order to avoid liability hereunder has the burden of
proving by a preponderance of evidence that the exemption applies to them and
the circumstances surrounding the charge. (Ord. 633, 8-3-1992)
5-5-7: ENFORCEMENT:
The authority and responsibility for enforcing this chapter are vested in the
chief of police, who may take such enforcement measures as he deems
appropriate. Such measures may include, but are not limited to, the issuance of
verbal or written warnings, the issuance of notices of infraction, and the
citation of violations as misdemeanors when allowed under this chapter. The
chief of police may refer possible misdemeanor violations to the city attorney.
(Ord. 633, 8-3-1992)
5-5-8: VIOLATION AS INFRACTION:
   A.   Infraction Classification; Exceptions: Violations of this chapter shall
be classified as infractions, except as otherwise provided. Infractions are
noncriminal offenses.
   B.   Notice Of Infraction; Contents:
      1.   A notice of infraction represents a determination that an infraction
has been committed. The determination will be final unless contested as
provided in this chapter.
      2.   The form for the notice of infraction shall include the following:
         a.   A statement that the notice represents a determination that a
nuisance noise infraction has been committed by the person named in the notice
and that the determination shall be final unless contested as provided in this
chapter.
         b.   A statement that a nuisance noise infraction is a noncriminal
offense for which imprisonment may not be imposed as a sanction.
         c.   A statement of the specific nuisance noise infraction for which
the notice was issued.
         d.   A statement of the monetary penalty established for the
particular infraction.
         e.   A statement of the options provided in this chapter for
responding to the notice and the procedures necessary to exercise these
options.
         f.   A statement that at any hearing to contest the determination, the
city has the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
infraction was committed; and that the person may subpoena witnesses including
the officer who issued the notice of infraction.
         g.   A statement that at any hearing requested for the purpose of
explaining mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of the
infraction, the person will be deemed to have committed the infraction and may
not subpoena witnesses.
         h.   A statement that the person must respond to the notice as
provided in this chapter within fifteen (15) days.
         i.   A statement, which the person shall sign, that the person
promises to respond to the notice of infraction in one of the ways provided in
this chapter.
         j.   A statement that failure to respond to a notice of infraction as
promised is a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine or imprisonment in
jail, or both.
   C.   Response To Notice; Contesting Determination; Hearing:
      1.   Any person who receives a notice of infraction shall respond to such
notice as provided in this section within fifteen (15) days of the date of the
notice.
      2.   If the person determined to have committed the infraction does not
contest the determination, the person responds by completing the appropriate
portion of the notice of infraction and submitting it, either by mail or in
person, to the municipal court. A check or money order in the amount of the
penalty prescribed for the infraction must be submitted with the response. When
a response which does not contest the determination is received, an appropriate
order shall be entered in the court records.
      3.   If the person determined to have committed the infraction wishes to
contest the determination, the person shall respond by completing the portion
of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing and submitting it, either by
mail or in person, to the municipal court. The court shall notify the person in
writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing, and that date shall not be
sooner than seven (7) days from the date of the notice, except by agreement.
      4.   If the person determined to have committed the infraction does not
contest the determination but wishes to explain the mitigating circumstances
surrounding the infraction, the person shall respond by completing the portion
of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing for that purpose and
submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the municipal court. The court
shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing.
      5.   If any person issued a notice of infraction:
         a.   Fails to respond to the notice of infraction within fifteen (15)
days as required by this section; or
         b.   Fails to appear at a hearing requested pursuant to subsection C3
or C4 of this section, the court shall enter an appropriate order assessing the
monetary penalty prescribed for the infraction.
   D.   Hearings; Rules Of Procedure; Counsel:
      1.   Infractions under this chapter shall be heard and determined by the
municipal court.
      2.   Procedures in the municipal court for infractions under this chapter
shall conform generally to those followed for traffic infractions under Revised
Code of Washington chapter 46.63. The justice court traffic infraction rules
(JTIR) shall, to the extent they are not inconsistent with this chapter, apply
to cases under this chapter, subject to the following: a) all nomenclature in
the JTIR that refers specifically to traffic infractions; and b) references in
the JTIR to provisions of Revised Code of Washington chapter 46.63 or other
statutes shall be understood as references to the analogous provisions of this
chapter; c) provisions in the JTIR relating to the department of licensing are
deleted; and d) the following portions of the JTIR are deleted: rules 2.1(a),
4.1, 4.2, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4 and 6.5.
      3.   Any person subject to proceedings under this chapter may be
represented by counsel.
      4.   Any attorney representing the city may, but is not required to,
appear at any infraction proceedings under this chapter.
   E.   Contesting Determination; Appeal:
      1.   A hearing held for the purpose of contesting the determination that
an infraction has been committed shall be without a jury.
      2.   The court may consider the notice of infraction and any other
written report made under oath submitted by the officer who issued the notice
or whose written statement was the basis for the issuance of the notice in lieu
of the officer's personal appearance at the hearing. The person named in the
notice may subpoena witnesses, including the officer, and has the right to
present evidence and examine witnesses present in court.
      3.   The burden of proof is upon the city to establish the commission of
the infraction by a preponderance of the evidence.
      4.   After consideration of the evidence and argument, the court shall
determine whether the infraction was committed. Where it has not been
established that the infraction was committed, an order dismissing the notice
shall be entered in the court records. Where it has been established that the
infraction was committed, an appropriate order shall be entered in the court
records.
   F.   Explanation Of Mitigating Circumstances:
      1.   A hearing held for the purpose of allowing a person to explain
mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of an infraction shall be
an informal proceeding. The person may not subpoena witnesses. The
determination that an infraction has been committed may not be contested at a
hearing held for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances.
      2.   After the court has heard the explanation of the circumstances
surrounding the commission of the infraction, an appropriate order shall be
entered in the court records.
      3.   There may be no appeal from the court's determination or order.
(Ord. 633, 8-3-1992)
   G.   Monetary Penalties For Infractions:
      1.   A person found to have committed an infraction shall be assessed a
monetary penalty not to exceed the following amounts:
 
First infraction                 $75.00
Second infraction                150.00
Third and subsequent infractions 300.00
 
      2.   Whenever a monetary penalty is imposed by the court under this
chapter, it is immediately payable. Failure to pay the penalty shall be a
misdemeanor and may be punishable by a fine or imprisonment in jail, or both,
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 633, 8-3-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
5-5-9: VIOLATION AS MISDEMEANOR:
   A.   Determination Of Charge: Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, any violation of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor instead
of being processed as an infraction. In determining whether to charge a
violation as a misdemeanor, the city attorney should consider the number of
nuisance noise infractions committed by the defendant during the previous
twelve (12) months; the duration, loudness, and intensity of the noise; the
number of persons disturbed by the noise; and other relevant factors. (Ord.
633, 8-3-1992)
   B.   Penalty For Misdemeanor: Any person found guilty of a misdemeanor under
this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 633, 8-3-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
5-5-10: NONAPPEARANCE AFTER WRITTEN PROMISE:
Any person wilfully violating a written and signed promise to respond to a
notice of infraction pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
regardless of the disposition of the notice of infraction; provided, that a
written promise to appear in court or to respond to a notice of infraction may
be complied with by an appearance by counsel. (Ord. 633, 8-3-1992)
CHAPTER 6
VEHICLE USE ON DUNES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Pedestrian Use
5-6-3: Exemptions
5-6-4: Penalty
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
DRIVABLE BEACH: That area of the ocean beaches lying between the upper or
landward limit of the hard sand area and the clam beds.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY DUNES: The dry sand, and grass on the landward side of
the driveable beach, on the west side of the 1980 seashore conservation line.
(Ord. 625, 9-16-1991)
5-6-2: PEDESTRIAN USE:
The primary and secondary dunes shall be reserved for pedestrian use only.
(Ord. 625, 9-16-1991)
5-6-3: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to city, county, state, and emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 625, 9-16-1991)
5-6-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 625, 9-16-1991; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 7
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
5-7-1: Clean Indoor Air Act Adopted
5-7-1: CLEAN INDOOR AIR ACT ADOPTED:
The Washington state clean indoor air act, Revised Code of Washington chapter
70.160, is hereby adopted by reference as the law governing and regulating
cigarette smoking in bars, taverns, bowling alleys, tobacco shops, or
restaurants within the city. (2007 Code)
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Civil Service Statutes Adopted
6-1-2: Positions Designated
6-1-3: Civil Service Commission
6-1-4: Candidate Lists
6-1-5: Police Vehicles - Markings
6-1-6: Community Service Officers
6-1-1: CIVIL SERVICE STATUTES ADOPTED:
The City hereby adopts and incorporates into this Code all of the provisions of
Revised Code of Washington chapter 41.12 as now constituted or as in the future
amended except, the residency requirements for new commissions are that they
have resided in the City of Long Beach for at least one year immediately prior
to their appointment and that they be an elector of Pacific County. (Ord. 953,
5-21-2018)
6-1-2: POSITIONS DESIGNATED:
The City places under civil service the following positions: Police Chief,
Deputy Chief, and 6 (six) patrol officers. (1988 Code § 2.20.020; amd. 2007
Code; Ord. 979, 3-2-2020)
6-1-3: CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION:
   A.   Creation; Terms: There is created a Civil Service Commission for the
City Police Department, the membership of which shall consist of three (3)
citizens of the City, being residents of the City for three (3) years or longer
and being registered electors, with each term of office being six (6) years;
provided, that from the original commission being appointed, position no. 1
shall be for six (6) years; position no. 2 shall be for four (4) years; and
position no. 3 shall be for two (2) years.
   B.   Appointment; Qualifications: The commission members shall be appointed
by the Mayor subject to ratification and approval of the City Council, and the
commission members shall be qualified and serve under the provisions of Revised
Code of Washington 41.12.030 and 41.12.040. (1988 Code § 2.20.030)
6-1-4: CANDIDATE LISTS:
   A.   Makeup Of Lists: The City shall compile and keep two (2) lists of
candidates for hiring police officers for the City. One list shall be made up
of people passing the civil service examination, and the other list shall be
made up of law enforcement officers presently employed by a recognized law
enforcement agency within the State, other than the City.
   B.   Selection Preference: The City shall select from either list; however,
at the option of the Chief of Police and with the concurrence of the Mayor, the
list comprised of employees of the other recognized law enforcement agencies
shall have preference. (1988 Code § 2.20.040)
6-1-5: POLICE VEHICLES - MARKINGS:
The marking requirements for vehicles owned or controlled by local government
agencies provided in RCW 46.08.065 shall not apply to vehicles used by the Long
Beach Police Department for general undercover or confidential investigative
purposes. Vehicles used for traffic control shall be exempt from the marking
requirements at the discretion of the Chief of Long Beach Police Department.
(Ord. 979, 3-2-2020)
6-1-6: COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICERS:
The Chief of Police may issue limited commissions to community service officers
with limited enforcement authority investigating and issuing infractions in
areas such as, but not limited to, animal control, building, zoning,
sanitation, nuisance, parking and camping. These limited commissions will
specifically state the ordinances which the holder may enforce. The Chief of
Police will develop standards for the selection and training of those being
granted a limited commission, which will be consistently applied. The limited
commission may be revoked at any time by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1025, 9-18-
2023)
CHAPTER 2
POLICE RESERVE FORCE
SECTION:
6-2-1: Creation; Membership
6-2-2: Qualifications; Selection
6-2-3: Supervision
6-2-4: Employment And Compensation
6-2-5: Identification; Badge
6-2-6: Termination Or Resignation
6-2-7: Duties And Powers
6-2-8: Use Of Firearms
6-2-1: CREATION; MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Creation: There is created and established a police reserve force with
a membership not to exceed five (5) members.
   B.   Control: Overall control of the police reserve is ultimately in the
hands of the mayor through the city council.
   C.   Supervision: The police reserve force shall function under the day to
day supervision of the chief of police of the city. (1988 Code § 2.24.010; amd.
2007 Code)
6-2-2: QUALIFICATIONS; SELECTION:
   A.   Test For Eligibility: All members of the police reserve force shall
pass a written and oral test for eligibility on the police reserve list.
Members on the eligibility list shall be selected by the chief of police or
mayor, subject to the approval of the city council. (1988 Code § 2.24.020; amd.
2007 Code)
   B.   Application; Minimum Requirements: Each applicant must file a written
application with the chief of police, be willing to serve a minimum of eight
(8) hours per month in his duties or training, and meet the following minimum
qualifications and requirements:
      1.   United States citizen.
      2.   Residency within the county of Pacific.
      3.   Good moral character.
      4.   An applicant must not have been convicted of a felony or gross
misdemeanor or of any offense involving moral turpitude.
      5.   High school diploma or GED.
      6.   At least twenty one (21) years of age.
   C.   Training Programs: Applicants must further complete any training
programs prescribed by the chief of police before and after their appointment
and, at the time of appointment, subscribe to the oath of office substantially
the same as that required by members of the police department. (1988 Code §
2.24.020)
6-2-3: SUPERVISION:
   A.   Commanding Officer, Duties Generally: The chief of police shall be the
commanding officer of the police reserve force. He shall have the authority to
establish a training program, promulgate rules and regulations for the conduct
of the police reserve force and its members, prescribe the proper uniform and
supervise the performance of the duties of the police reserve force. (1988 Code
§ 2.24.060)
   B.   Delegate Authority: The chief of police shall further have the
authority to delegate supervisory authority over the police reserve to officers
of the regular city police department, and to designate supervisory officers
within the reserve, with concurrence and approval of the mayor.
   C.   Approval Of Rules And Regulations: All rules and regulations governing
the police reserve force must be approved by the mayor and city council. (1988
Code § 2.24.060; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-4: EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION:
   A.   Restrictions: Except for limited purposes stated in this chapter, no
member of the police reserve force shall be deemed a city employee, nor within
the scope of effect of civil service ordinances or regulations of the city, nor
entitled to any benefits under police pension laws or any other benefits or
retirement plans for city employees.
   B.   Compensation: Members of the police reserve force shall serve without
compensation, unless employed as part time help; and provided, that the city
council in its discretion may provide all or part of the cost of holiday relief
duties, uniforms, equipment and/or insurance. (1988 Code § 2.24.090)
6-2-5: IDENTIFICATION; BADGE:
The chief of police is authorized to furnish each member of the police reserve
force with a membership identification card and police badge. The
identification card is to be carried by the member at all times. The police
badge shall be worn only when the police reserve member is authorized to wear
the prescribed uniform. (1988 Code § 2.24.030)
6-2-6: TERMINATION OR RESIGNATION:
   A.   Termination: The membership of any person in the reserve police force
may be terminated with or without cause at any time by the chief of police or
the mayor. (1988 Code § 2.24.040; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Resignation: Any member may resign by giving written notice to the
chief of police.
   C.   Return Of Equipment To City: Upon termination of membership, all
equipment of the member shall be returned to the chief of police within five
(5) days. (1988 Code § 2.24.040)
6-2-7: DUTIES AND POWERS:
   A.   Duties:
      1.   The duties of the police reserve force are to supplement the regular
police force in the event of a major disaster affecting citizens of the city,
to aid in the control of traffic and maintenance of order at parades, and
general policing of large assemblies of people; and in case of the declared
emergency, to assist the regular police in the protection of life, property and
preservation of peace and order.
      2.   Reserve officers will not be allowed to drive patrol vehicles unless
so authorized by the chief of police. (1988 Code § 2.24.050)
   B.   Powers:
      1.   Members of the police reserve force shall have such power and
authority as may be vested in them by the chief of police, in no event to
exceed the powers of regular members of the city police department.
      2.   Members of the reserve force shall have no power or authority as
police officers except while in the performance of duties ordered by the chief
of police or his authorized representative. (1988 Code § 2.24.070)
      3.   Under no circumstances will the reserve be placed in a position of
jeopardy until their qualifications as an officer have been approved by the
mayor and city council. (1988 Code § 2.24.070; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-8: USE OF FIREARMS:
No member of the police reserve force shall carry a firearm until they have met
all qualifications in the use of weapons and are engaged in duties which, by
authorization of the chief of police, shall require the possession of a
firearm. (1988 Code § 2.24.080)
CHAPTER 3
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-3-1: Organization; Membership
6-3-2: Administration
6-3-3: Bylaws
6-3-4: Pension Membership
6-3-5: Contracts With Other Districts
6-3-6: Compensation For Attending Training Meetings
6-3-7: Response To Fire Required
6-3-8: Uniforms And Equipment
6-3-9: Operation Outside City Limits
6-3-1: ORGANIZATION; MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   The citizens of the city may and are given the power to organize a fire
department for the city.
   B.   Any resident of the city may become a member of the fire department
upon complying with the regulations adopted by the fire department. (1988 Code
§ 2.28.010)
6-3-2: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Appointment Of Chief, Officers: The members of the fire department
shall select from their members a chief of the fire department who shall be
fire marshal of the city, three (3) assistant chiefs who shall be assistant
fire marshals of the city, a secretary and a treasurer.
   B.   Fire Marshal: There is created the office of fire marshal for the city.
The chief of the fire department shall be the fire marshal and the assistant
chiefs shall be assistant fire marshals. (1988 Code § 2.28.020)
6-3-3: BYLAWS:
   A.   Adoption: The fire department shall adopt bylaws for the fire
department and submit the same to the mayor and the city council, and, upon the
approval of such bylaws by the city council, the same shall be binding and
obligatory on the fire department and its members. (1988 Code § 2.28.050)
   B.   Consideration By Council: The bylaws of the fire department shall be
submitted to the city council and the mayor who shall then give public notice
by proclamation at a regular meeting of the council that the bylaws will be
considered at a meeting of the city council at such time as the mayor shall
designate; and, upon approval of such bylaws by the council, the same shall be
binding on the fire department and its members. (1988 Code § 2.28.060)
6-3-4: PENSION MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Enrollment Under Statutes:
      1.   Every member of the fire department shall be enrolled under the
relief and compensation provisions of the volunteer fire fighters' and reserve
officers' relief and pension act of the state 1 .
      2.   Any member of the fire department who so elects shall be enrolled
under the pension provisions of the volunteer fire fighters' and reserve
officers' relief and pension act of the state.
   B.   Payment Of Fee: Any fee to be paid by the city under the provisions of
this section shall be paid from funds budgeted for the fire department. (1988
Code § 2.28.070; amd. 2007 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 41.24.
6-3-5: CONTRACTS WITH OTHER DISTRICTS:
   A.   The city, before serving any fire protection district, shall enter into
a contract with the district or districts. The mayor and clerk-treasurer shall
be given the authority and are authorized to sign any and all contracts with
any fire protective districts, when the council so orders. (1988 Code §
2.28.080)
   B.   This section accepts all of that part of Revised Code of Washington
chapter 52.04 in the part that applies to cities of the fourth class, in regard
to making contracts with fire protective districts, and such contractual
relations shall be deemed for all purposes to be within the governmental power
of the city. Any contract made as specified in this section shall be binding
upon the city. (1988 Code § 2.28.080; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3-6: COMPENSATION FOR ATTENDING TRAINING MEETINGS:
   A.   Compensation Allowed: Firefighters who volunteer to the fire department
shall be compensated ten dollars ($10.00) per training meeting attended.
   B.   Exclusions: Firefighters paid a regular salary will be excluded from
the compensation as provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 791, 1-19-
2005)
6-3-7: RESPONSE TO FIRE REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of all members of the fire department to respond on the
occasion of any fire within or threatening the city. (1988 Code § 2.28.040;
amd. 2007 Code)
6-3-8: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT:
The fire department may provide for the uniforms of the firefighters and
equipment for the department subject to the consent and approval of the city
council. (1988 Code § 2.28.030; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3-9: OPERATION OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
   A.   Council Authority: The city council gives the volunteer department, its
equipment, its personnel operating the same the authority to go outside the
corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of extinguishing or aiding in
extinguishing, or control of fires; provided, that any use made of such
equipment or personnel under the authority of this section shall be deemed an
exercise of a governmental function of this municipal corporation.
   B.   Duties Outside City Considered Same As Within City: Whenever any
firefighter engages in any duty outside the territorial limits of this city, as
provided in this section, such duty shall be considered as part of his duty as
a firefighter for this city; and any firefighter who is injured while engaged
in such duties outside the corporate limits of this city shall be entitled to
the same benefits that he or his family would be entitled to receive should he
have been injured while on duty within the corporate limits of this city. (1988
Code § 2.28.090)
   C.   Compliance With State Law: This section adopts by implication and
accepts all of Revised Code Of Washington 35.84.040 in its entirety. (1988 Code
§ 2.28.090; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND OTHER PET ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-4A-1: Definitions
6-4A-2: Prohibited Activities
6-4A-3: Dogs On Public Grounds
6-4A-4: Reserved
6-4A-5: Animal Waste
6-4A-6: Impoundment And Redemption
6-4A-7: Animal Care
6-4A-8: Allowing Vicious Animal At Large
6-4A-9: State Provisions Adopted By Reference
6-4A-10: Animal Cruelty In The Second Degree - Elements
6-4A-11: Nonliability
6-4A-12: Severability
6-4A-13: Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Dogs; Other Dangerous Pet Animals
6-4A-14: Violation; Penalties
6-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
ABANDONED ANIMAL: Means an animal which is either dropped off, left in the
street, road, highway, or on any other public or private property; or an animal
which is placed in the custody of a veterinarian, boarding kennel owner, or any
person for treatment, board or care; and
   A.   Having been placed in such custody for an unspecified period of time
the animal is not removed within fifteen (15) days after notice to remove the
animal has been given to the person who placed the animal in such custody or
having been so notified the person depositing the animal refuses or fails to
pay agreed-upon or reasonable charges for the treatment, board, or care of such
animal; or
   B.   Having been placed in such custody for a specified period of time the
animal is not removed at the end of such specified period or the person
depositing the animal refuses to pay agreed upon or reasonable charges for the
treatment, board, or care of such animal.
ADULT DOG: Any dog over four (4) months of age.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: All police officers and any other person, persons or
association appointed or authorized by the Mayor or designee and/or the Chief
of Police to enforce the provisions of this chapter. All animal control
officers shall report to and follow the orders of the Mayor or designee and/or
Police Chief.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Means any animal control facility operated by contracted
association designated and/or authorized to impound and care for animals held
under the authority of this article and/or State law. Presently the "South
Pacific County Humane Society", a non-governmental non-profit animal shelter is
the authorized shelter for Long Beach.
DANGEROUS DOG: Means any dog that:
   A.   Without provocation, has inflicted severe injury on a human being on
public or private property; or
   B.   Without provocation, has killed a domestic animal, or other animal
protected by Federal, State, or local rules, while off the owner's or keeper's
property; or
   C.   Having been previously found to be potentially dangerous, and the owner
having received notice of such, the dog again, without provocation,
aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans, domestic
animals, or other animals.
DOG: Any mammal of the canine family (Canis lupus familiaris).
DOG NUISANCE: A dog is a public nuisance if it:
   A.   Bites a person.
   B.   Chases vehicles, persons or bike riders or other animals.
   C.   Damages or destroys property of persons other than the owner of such
dog.
   D.   Scatters garbage.
   E.   Trespasses on private property of other than the owner of the dog.
   F.   Disturbs persons by frequent or prolonged barking.
   G.   Is a female in heat and running at large.
DOG RUNNING AT LARGE: A dog off or outside the premises of the owner, not
restrained by a rope, line, leash, chain or similar means. If such dog is not
restrained by a tether of some kind, then that dog shall be deemed "at large".
Furthermore, such tether shall not exceed ten feet (10') in length from the
owner's hand to the collar of the dog.
EXOTIC ANIMAL: Means an animal of foreign origin and that is not native by
birth to this community or not normally tamed and bred for the companionship of
humans.
HARBOR: Means to have an animal which remains on one's premises, and/or the
presumption of ownership of an animal by an occupant of any premises on which
the animal remains or to which it customarily returns daily for food and care.
IMPOUNDMENT: Taking physical control of such dog. The moment an animal control
officer/police officer is in physical control of a dog at large, such dog is
considered impounded, and subject to impoundment fees.
KENNEL: Means an establishment wherein a person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, training dogs and/or cats for a fee.
LIVESTOCK: Means horses, bovine animals, sheep, goats, swine, reindeer,
donkeys, mules, and any other farm-type animals.
NUISANCE: Means, without provocation, excessive barking or other oral noises
which unreasonably disturb person(s) or a neighborhood; chasing vehicles;
depositing excretory matter on property other than that of the owners; damaging
property; running at large; and any potentially dangerous dog.
OWNER: Any person who keeps, has custody of, possesses, harbors or exercises
control over a dog with the exception of veterinary hospitals or City's shelter
or designated shelter.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Means any dog which, without provocation:
   A.   Inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal or other animal protected
by Federal, State, or local rules; or
   B.   Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
   C.   Causes injury or otherwise threatens the safety of humans or domestic
animals or other animals protected by Federal, State, or local rules, while off
the owner's property.
POULTRY: Means domesticated birds kept and raised for eggs and/or meat.
PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A DANGEROUS DOG: Means that while on the owner's property,
a dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed
and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children or
their being able to put in any portion of their anatomy so as to expose it to
risk of attack by the dog. It is also to be designed to prevent the animal from
escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and
shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.
PROVOCATION: Includes but is not limited to taunting, teasing, and wilfully
causing undue pain, and/or unlawful entry upon or into the property of the
owner or keeper.
SEVERE INJURY: Means any physical injury, including but not limited to broken
bones, punctures, bites, and/or lacerations causing scarring, and/or requiring
sutures or cosmetic surgery.
VICIOUS: Deliberately cruel or violent.
WILD: Means an animal that generally lives in its original natural state and is
not normally domesticated. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-2: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Allowing Dog To Run At Large: It is unlawful for any owner of a dog to
allow such dog to run at large. Certified Police Department dogs (K-9s) shall
be exempted from this provision when under the control and supervision of their
handlers.
   B.   Allowing Public Nuisance: No owner or person having the care, custody
or control of an animal shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his/
her animal to prevent it from becoming a nuisance as defined in section
6-4A-1 of this article.
   C.   Number Of Dogs Limited: It is unlawful for any person to keep within
the corporate limits of the City more than four (4) adult dogs. This provision
shall not apply to:
      1.   Licensed kennels;
      2.   Licensed veterinary clinics;
      3.   Licensed pet stores; or
      4.   Animal shelter which is a facility authorized to impound and care
for animals held under the authority of this article and/or State law.
Presently the "South Pacific County Humane Society" is the authorized shelter
for Long Beach.
   D.   Wild Or Exotic Animals: No person shall have, keep, or maintain in any
area of the City a live monkey (nonhuman primate), lion, tiger, bear, mountain
lion (a.k.a., cougar), fox, lynx, poisonous reptile or serpent, or any other
dangerous, carnivorous, wild, exotic animal, fish, reptile or any hybrid
thereof. Any such animal, fish, reptile, or any hybrid thereof may be
immediately and permanently impounded.
   E.   Rabies Quarantine:
      1.   In addition to and notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, whenever any person has been bitten by any owned or harbored animal
and there is no reason to suspect that the animal is rabid, at the discretion
of the local Health Officer or animal control officer, the animal involved may
be restricted for ten (10) days of observation in such manner as to prevent
contact with other animals or persons except for the caretaker.
      2.   The Department of Health or animal control authority may, if there
is reason to believe the animal may be rabid, order the animal surrendered to
an animal shelter or veterinary hospital. The cost of any such confinement
shall be paid by the owner or person having custody of that animal.
      3.   No person shall knowingly allow an animal confined under the
provisions of this subsection E to escape, to be sold, to be given away, or
otherwise to allow disposal of such animal before the expiration of the
quarantine period. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-3: DOGS ON PUBLIC GROUNDS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow any dog to stray and/or
enter with or without a leash or other means of restraint upon any school
ground or playfield.
   B.   Notwithstanding the restrictions set forth in subsection A of this
section, dogs accompanied by their owners may be walked or exercised while on
leash in the grass areas outside the playfields at Culbertson Park, in the area
commonly used for overflow parking.
   C.   All dogs permitted in the areas designated in subsection B of this
section shall be on a leash.
   D.   Posting of notices to exclude animals will be the responsibility of the
Parks Supervisor.
   E.   The regulations under section
6-4A-5 of this article relating to animal waste and the removal and proper
disposal of said waste will be strictly enforced. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-5: ANIMAL WASTE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having charge of any
animal to permit, either wilfully or by failure to exercise due care, such
animal to commit a public nuisance by defecating in any area of the City other
than the premises of the owner or person having charge or control of the
animal, unless said owner or person having charge takes immediate steps to
remove and properly dispose of said feces.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having charge of any
animal to take said animal off of the private property of said person without
having in the possession of the owner or person having charge of the animal a
proper means of disposal for the feces of the animal.
   C.   "Disposal" is defined, for the purposes of this section, as the removal
of feces by means of a bag, scoop or other device and an eventual disposal in a
trash receptacle, or by other means of lawful disposal. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-6: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION:
   A.   Impoundment Authorized; Retrieval; Payment Of Fine:
      1.   Dogs Running At Large: It shall be the duty of all police officers
and any person or persons designated as animal control officers to impound all
dogs caught running at large anywhere within City limits.
      2.   Measures To Redeem Animal: It shall be the entire responsibility of
the owner to ascertain that the animal has been impounded, and to take measures
as needed to redeem said animal. If the animal is properly identified an
attempt to contact the owner will be made within twenty four (24) hours of
impoundment.
      3.   Right To Fine Dog Owners: The animal control officer/police officer
is empowered with the right to fine dog owners for violating any portion of
this article.
      4.   Citation For Specific Violation: The animal control officer/police
officer shall present the owner with a citation for the specific violation of
such dog. Furthermore, the animal control officer/police officer shall require
positive identification of the person claiming such dog and record such
person's name and address along with a brief description of such dog and any
tags it may possess.
   B.   Redemption Of Animals: If at any time before adoption the owner of the
animal so impounded shall claim the same, he shall be entitled to possession
thereof upon compliance with the following conditions:
      1.   Payment of an impound fee set by the "South Pacific County Humane
Society" which is the authorized shelter for the City of Long Beach;
      2.   Acceptance of any citation issued for violation of the provisions of
this article; provided, that acceptance of the citation shall not be deemed an
admission of guilt by the cited party.
      3.   The impounded animal must be redeemed by the owner within five (5)
days after impoundment. If not redeemed the South Pacific County Humane Society
may place the animal up for adoption per the society's rules and regulations.
      4.   The animal owner must pay all outstanding medical bills prior to the
animal's release.
   C.   Killing Of Dangerous Dog: Any dangerous dog found at large and which
cannot be safely taken up and impounded may be slain by an animal control
officer/police officer.
   D.   Adoption Procedures - Fees: Animals held for the period prescribed in
this section and not redeemed by the owner will become the property of the
impounding facility. If, in the discretion of the impounding authority, the
animal is adoptable, the authority will carry out the process under their
rules, regulations and fees. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-7: ANIMAL CARE:
   A.   Dogs or cats kept outdoors for more than three (3) hours at one time
must be provided with a moisture-proof, wind-proof shelter, the size of which
allows the animal to turn around freely, and to easily sit, stand and lie down
in a normal position and which keeps the animal clean, dry and comfortable.
   B.   Every owner shall provide his or her animal with sufficient good and
wholesome food, water, and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering,
and with humane care and treatment.
   C.   Any person who, while operating a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner, if
known, and contact the animal control officer or Police Department.
   D.   No person shall allow any animal to ride in the back of any moving
open-bed vehicle unless that animal is properly secured in a crate or tied in a
manner so that it cannot jump or fall out of the vehicle.
   E.   No person shall abandon any domestic animal by dropping off or leaving
the animal in the street, road, or highway, or on any other public or private
property. Puppies or kittens brought in as abandoned shall immediately become
property of the City and, at the discretion of the animal control authority,
may be made available for adoption.
   F.   No person shall wilfully provoke, tease, molest, mistreat, or injure
any animal.
   G.   No animal shall be confined in or on a motor vehicle at any location
under such conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal,
including but not limited to extreme temperatures, lack of food, water, and
adequate ventilation. Any animal control officer or peace officer is authorized
to remove any animal from a motor vehicle at any location, when he/she
reasonably believes it is confined in the conditions described above. Any such
animal shall be impounded and delivered to the animal shelter after the officer
leaves written notice of such removal and delivery, including the officer's
name, in a conspicuous, secure location on or within the vehicle.
   H.   No owner of any animal shall keep the same on any undeveloped lot
within the corporate limits of the City, even if the lot belongs to the owner
of that animal, provided the animal is not on that lot temporarily with an
owner/camper.
   I.   Any unwanted dog or cat may be taken to South Pacific County Humane
Shelter by the owner. The owner shall sign a custody release form giving the
shelter full custody of the animal. The shelter will then place the animal for
adoption or other appropriate care.
   J.   Violations of subsection A, B, D, E, F, or G of this section shall be
an offense pursuant to section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-8: ALLOWING VICIOUS ANIMAL AT LARGE:
   A.   Every person having the care or custody of any animal which he knows or
should know possesses any vicious or dangerous tendencies, who shall allow the
same to escape or run at large in any place or manner liable to endanger the
safety of any person, shall be guilty of an offense under subsection B of this
section.
   B.   Allowing a vicious animal to run at large is a Class 3 offense.
   C.   Any person may lawfully kill or destroy any vicious animal when
reasonably necessary to protect the person's family, home, animals, property,
any other person, or the public safety. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-9: STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Chapter 16.52 Revised Code of Washington, Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, is
hereby adopted by reference to augment this chapter, with the exception of
Revised Code of Washington 16.52.207, "animal cruelty in the second degree". In
the event there is any conflict between chapter 16.52 Revised Code of
Washington and this Code, this Code shall control. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-10: ANIMAL CRUELTY IN THE SECOND DEGREE - ELEMENTS:
   A.   A person is guilty of animal cruelty in the second degree if, under
circumstances not amounting to animal cruelty in the first degree, that person
knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence inflicts unnecessary
suffering or pain upon an animal.
   B.   An owner of an animal is guilty of animal cruelty in the second degree
if, under circumstances not amounting to first degree animal cruelty, the owner
knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence:
      1.   Fails to provide the animal with the necessary shelter, rest,
sanitation, space or medical attention and the animal suffers unnecessary or
unjustifiable physical pain as a result of the failure; or
      2.   Abandons the animal.
   C.   Animal cruelty in the second degree is a civil infraction and
punishable under section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-11: NONLIABILITY:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to be, nor shall be, construed to create or
form the basis for any liability on the part of the City, its officers,
employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of any
person to comply with the terms of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence
of any omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this
chapter on the part of the City by its officers, employees or agents. The
provisions of this chapter are intended for the benefit of the public in
general and not for any particular individual or individuals. (Ord. 956, 9-4-
2018)
6-4A-12: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or legal
entity or circumstances is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this chapter, or the application of the provisions to other
persons or legal entities or circumstances, shall not be affected. (Ord. 956,
9-4-2018)
6-4A-13: DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS; OTHER DANGEROUS PET ANIMALS:
   A.   Definitions: Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section.
    DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that, according to the records of the appropriate
authority: 1) has inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation
on public or private property; 2) has killed a domestic animal without
provocation while off the owner's property; or 3) has been previously found to
be potentially dangerous, the owner having received notice of such and the dog
again aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or domestic
animals.
   OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing,
harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having control or custody of, an
animal.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that, when unprovoked: 1) inflicts bites
on a human or a domestic animal either on public or private property; or 2)
chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public
grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or any dog with a
known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause
injury, or otherwise to threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals.
   PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A DANGEROUS DOG: While on the owner's property, a
dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have
secure sides and a secure top, and shall also provide protection from the
elements for the dog.
   SEVERE INJURY: Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
   B.   Classification: The Chief of Police or designee shall have authority to
classify "potentially dangerous dogs" and "dangerous dogs". The Chief of Police
may find and declare an animal potentially dangerous or dangerous if there is
probable cause to believe that the animal's action falls within the
descriptions that follow. The finding must be in writing and based upon
personal observations and testimony that the dog has acted in a manner which
may cause it to be classified as a "dangerous dog" or a "potentially dangerous
dog".
      1.   Potentially Dangerous Dog: A dog shall be declared potentially
dangerous if, unprovoked, it:
         a.   Inflicts bites on a person or a pet or domestic animal either on
public or private property;
         b.   Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
         c.   Has a known propensity to attack unprovoked, or to cause injury,
or otherwise to threaten the safety of humans or pets or domestic animals.
      2.   Dangerous Dog: A dog shall be declared dangerous when, according to
the records of the City, the dog has:
         a.   Inflicted severe injury on a person without provocation on public
or private property;
         b.   Killed a pet or domestic animal without provocation while off the
owner's or keeper's property; or
         c.   Aggressively bitten, attacked or endangered the safety of humans
or pets or domestic animals after previously having been found to be
potentially dangerous, and the owner or keeper has received written warning.
      3.   Defense Against Classification: A dog shall not be declared
potentially dangerous or dangerous if:
         a.   The threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at
the time, was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the property
occupied by the owner of the dog;
         b.   The person was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or has,
in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted
the dog;
         c.   The person was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
         d.   Another pet animal or domestic animal had entered the property of
the owner of the dog without invitation; or
         e.   The dog, when on a leash, was responding to attack by another pet
or domestic animal, whether on or off the owner's property.
   C.   Declaration Of Potentially Dangerous Dogs:
      1.   The declaration of potentially dangerous dog shall be in writing and
shall be served on the owner in one of the following methods:
         a.   Certified mail to the owner's last known address;
         b.   Personally; or
         c.   If the owner cannot be located by one of the first two (2)
methods, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
      2.   The declaration shall state:
         a.   The description of the dog;
         b.   The name and address of the owner of the dog;
         c.   The location of the dog if it is not in the custody of the owner;
         d.   The facts upon which the declaration of potentially dangerous dog
is based and how to avoid the animal being declared dangerous;
         e.   The restrictions placed on the dog as a result of the declaration
of potentially dangerous dog; and
         f.   Penalties for violation of the restriction, including the
possibility of destruction of the dog.
      3.   Within fourteen (14) days of the City serving a potentially
dangerous dog declaration, the owner may request a hearing. The hearing shall
be held within fourteen (14) days of the receipt for request for hearing,
unless it is continued for good cause. The City shall notify the owner of the
date, time and place for the hearing. The Chief of Police shall hold a hearing
to receive information on the declaration and shall issue an order within five
(5) days from the date of hearing. For the purpose of conducting the hearing
set forth in this section, the City designates the Chief of Police. The
decision of the Chief of Police may be appealed to the City of Long Beach
Municipal Court. Such appeal must be in writing, state the name of the person
appealing, state that date of the decision appealed from, state briefly the
reason for the appeal and state the nature of the relief sought. The notice of
appeal must be signed.
      4.   Any appeal must be filed in writing with the Clerk of the Municipal
Court of the City of Long Beach within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing
and the Clerk of the Court shall forthwith schedule a hearing on the appeal.
   D.   Control And Confinement Of Potentially Dangerous Dog:
      1.   The dog must be securely leashed and under the control of a person
physically able to control the animal when away from the property of the owner;
or
      2.   While on the property of the owner the dog must be securely
restrained by means of a physical device or structure such as a tether, trolley
system or other physical control device to humanely confine the dog in a manner
which prevents escape from the property.
   E.   Declaration Of Dangerous Dog:
      1.   The declaration of a dangerous dog shall be in writing and served on
the owner as set forth in subsection C1 of this section. The declaration (or
notice) shall state: a) the alleged violation; b) the reasons the City
considers the animal dangerous; c) a statement that the dog is subject to
registration and controls as set forth in subsection F of this section; and d)
an explanation to the owner of the rights and procedure for appealing the
dangerous dog decision.
         a.   The notice shall inform the owner that there is an opportunity to
meet with the City where the owner may provide orally or in writing reasons or
information why the dog should not be declared dangerous. The notice shall
state the date, time and location of the meeting with the City which shall be
held prior to the expiration of fifteen (15) days following delivery of the
notice to the owner. The owner may propose an alternative meeting, date and
time, provided the meeting is scheduled within the fifteen (15) day time
period.
         b.   After a meeting between the owner and the City, the City must
issue its final determination, in the form of a written order, within fifteen
(15) calendar days from the date of the meeting. In the event the City declares
a dog to be dangerous, the order shall include a recital of the authority for
the action, a brief statement of the facts that support the dangerous dog
determination and the signature of the person who made the determination. The
order shall be sent by regular and certified mail, return receipt requested, or
delivered in person to the owner at the owner's last known address. For
purposes of providing notice, holding a meeting and issuing orders on dangerous
dogs, the City hereby appoints the Police Chief.
      2.   A dangerous dog determination may be appealed administratively to
the City Administrator. An appeal must be made within twenty (20) days of
receiving the final dangerous dog determination from the City. During the
pendency of the appeal, the City may order that the dog be confined and
controlled by requiring that the dog be restrained in a proper enclosure,
unless, when outside an enclosure, the dog is muzzled and restrained by a
substantial chain or leash and under the physical restraint of a responsible
person. If, during the pendency of the appeal, the dog is confined by the City
or its agent, the owner must pay all costs of confinement.
Before the City Administrator, the records of the City and any supplemental
material shall be admissible to prove the dog is a dangerous dog; the owner or
keeper of the dog may present evidence and examine witnesses with the City
having the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the dog is
dangerous. The City Administrator shall issue a final decision based upon the
record and evidence, including an order to register the dog as dangerous.
      3.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Administrator may
file an appeal with the City of Long Beach Municipal Court within ten (10) days
of the date of the Administrator's decision. Such appeal must be in writing,
state the name of the person appealing, state that date of the decision
appealed from, state briefly the reason for the appeal and state the nature of
the relief sought. The notice of appeal must be signed.
   F.   Certificate Of Registration As Dangerous Dog: The Chief of Police shall
issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog. This
certificate shall state the conditions under which the dangerous dog may be
kept, to include:
      1.   Dangerous dogs must be securely muzzled and leashed and under the
control of a person physically able to control the dog if the dog is away from
the property of the owner;
      2.   While on the property of the owner, the dog must be securely
confined inside a locked building, kennel, pen or other structure having secure
sides, bottom, and top, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
designed to prevent the animal from escaping;
      3.   The posting of the property with a clearly visible warning sign that
there is a dangerous dog on the property;
      4.   A surety bond issued by a surety insurer qualified under Revised
Code of Washington chapter 48.28, in a form acceptable to the Chief of Police
in the sum of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00),
payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog, or a policy of liability
insurance issued by an insurer qualified under Revised Code of Washington title
48 in the amount of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00),
insuring the owner for any injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog;
      5.   Such other identifying information as may be required by the Chief
of Police;
      6.   Certification that the owner is aware of and understands the nature
of the dog and the provisions of the law which apply to it; and
      7.   Payment of an annual registration fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) which fee may be modified by City Council resolution.
   G.   Dangerous Dog Confiscation: Any dangerous dog shall be immediately
confiscated by the Chief of Police of the City of Long Beach if the: 1) dog is
not registered under this section; 2) owner fails to obtain or keep in force
the bond and liability insurance required under this section; or 3) dog is not
maintained in accordance with the certificate issued by the City. The owner
shall pay all costs of confinement and control. Upon confiscation by the City,
a notice shall be served upon the dog owner in person or by regular and
certified mail, return receipt requested, specifying the reason for
confiscation of the dangerous dog including that the owner is: 1) responsible
for payment of the cost of confinement and control; and 2) that the dog will be
destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner if the deficiencies for which the
dog was confiscated are not corrected within twenty (20) days. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police may file an appeal with the
City of Long Beach Municipal Court within ten (10) days of the date of the
Chief of Police's decision. Such appeal must be in writing, state the name of
the person appealing, state that date of the decision appealed from, state
briefly the reason for the appeal and state the nature of the relief sought.
The notice of appeal must be signed. The Clerk of the Court shall forthwith set
a date for the hearing and provide notice to the parties.
   H.   Gross Misdemeanor: In addition, the owner is guilty of a gross
misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Revised Code of Washington 9A.20.021.
   I.   Other Dangerous Pet Animals: The Chief of Police or designee shall have
authority to classify other pet animals as dangerous under the same criteria as
used in this section for dogs. Such designation will be based on specific
actions by the animal such as those noted in subsection B of this section, and
the Chief of Police or designee shall have authority to require the owner or
keeper of such pet animal to take certain actions to control or confine the pet
animal. Once a pet animal has been declared potentially dangerous or dangerous,
any violations of the provisions of this section will be handled in the same
manner as other violations under this section.
   J.   Permanent Removal From City: Under special circumstances and subject to
the restrictions of Revised Code of Washington chapter 16.08, the owner may be
required to permanently remove the dog from the City. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
6-4A-14: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations Generally: The owner of any dog taken up at large and/or
creating a nuisance shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
first offense, not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second
offense, and not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for any further
offenses. The maximum fine shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
   B.   Kennel Operation: Any owner in violation of any part of this article,
which pertains to kennel licensing, shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   C.   Jurisdiction: Long Beach City Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction
to adjudicate infractions and criminal citations issued pursuant to this
article.
   D.   Failure To Pay: Any person who wilfully fails to pay the amount of any
citation within thirty (30) days from the date of issuance or thirty (30) days
after the adjudication in the City of Long Beach Municipal Court shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by not more than ninety (90) days
in jail and by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or both
such incarceration and fine. (Ord. 956, 9-4-2018)
ARTICLE B. LIVESTOCK AND OTHER ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-4B-1: Keeping Certain Animals; Permit Required
6-4B-2: Horse For Hire Stable Prohibited
6-4B-3: Horse Riding Or Leading Restricted
6-4B-1: KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Domestic Or Wild Animals; Permit: It is prohibited for any person to
have, keep, pasture, display or maintain within the corporate limits of the
city any domestic or wild animals without first acquiring a permit from the
city council to so do.
   B.   Conditions For Keeping; Permit Fee:
      1.   Any permit to keep such animals shall be granted only upon good
cause shown, with appropriate provision for sanitation, care and odor control.
      2.   Any such permit application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of
ten dollars ($10.00).
   C.   Exclusions: This section shall not apply to domestic cats and dogs, and
other animals customarily kept as domestic pets which weigh less than three (3)
pounds. (1988 Code § 6.08.020)
6-4B-2: HORSE FOR HIRE STABLE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
maintain, stable or keep any horses, mules, donkeys or ponies within the
corporate limits of the city with the purpose of offering the horses, mules,
donkeys or ponies for hire to the general public.
   B.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1988 Code § 6.08.010; amd. 2007 Code)
6-4B-3: HORSE RIDING OR LEADING RESTRICTED:
   A.   Restriction: It is prohibited to ride or lead a horse on Pacific
Avenue, including sidewalks, between the north right of way of Sid Snyder Drive
and the south right of way of Bolstad Avenue in the city, unless participating
in a city sanctioned event.
   B.   Penalty: Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code; provided, a warning citation shall issue before a violation
citation is issued. (1988 Code § 6.08.030; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 5
CRIMINAL CODE; MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Preliminary Statement
6-5-2: Purposes; Principles Of Construction
6-5-3: City Criminal Jurisdiction
6-5-4: Classes Of Crimes
6-5-5: Punishment And Restitution
6-5-6: Limitation Of Action
6-5-7: Proof Beyond Reasonable Doubt
6-5-8: Statutes Adopted By Reference
6-5-9: Sitting, Kneeling, Standing On Public Structures
6-5-10: Throwing Water Balloons And Eggs
6-5-11:    Controlled Substance Use In A Public Place
6-5-12:    Drug-Free Zones - Violations
6-5-13:    Obstructing A Public Employee
6-5-1: PRELIMINARY STATEMENT:
   A.   This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the Long Beach
criminal code.
   B.   The provisions of this criminal code shall apply to any offense
committed on or after the date of adoption of this code. (Ord. 917, 8-3-2015)
   C.   The provisions of this criminal code do not apply to, nor govern the
construction of and punishment for any offense committed prior to            
on            , nor to the construction and application of any defense to a
prosecution for such an offense. Such an offense must be construed and punished
according to the provisions of the law existing in the city at the time of the
commission thereof, in the same manner as if this criminal code had not been
enacted.
   D.   The sections of the Revised Code Of Washington (RCW), now in effect and
as subsequently amended, specifically enumerated in this chapter are adopted by
reference into this criminal code.
   E.   Section captions are for organizational purposes only and shall not be
construed as part of this criminal code. (2007 Code)
6-5-2: PURPOSES; PRINCIPLES OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   The general purposes of the provisions governing the definition of
offenses are:
      1.   To forbid and prevent conduct that inflicts or threatens substantial
harm to individual or public interests;
      2.   To safeguard conduct that is without culpability from condemnation
as criminal;
      3.   To give fair warning of the nature of the conduct declared to
constitute an offense; and
      4.   To differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious and minor
offenses, and to prescribe proportionate penalties for each.
   B.   The provisions of this criminal code shall be construed according to
the fair import of their terms, and when the language is susceptible to
differing constructions, it shall be interpreted to further the general
purposes stated in this criminal code.
   C.   In adopting state statutes by reference, only those crimes and offenses
under the jurisdiction of a municipality are intended to be adopted and, in
those sections adopted which define both misdemeanors and felonies, only the
language applicable to misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors is to be applied.
(2007 Code)
6-5-3: CITY CRIMINAL JURISDICTION:
Any person who commits any offense defined by this criminal code, in whole or
in part, within the corporate limits of the city, is liable to arrest,
prosecution and punishment. (2007 Code)
6-5-4: CLASSES OF CRIMES:
Any offense defined by this criminal code for which a sentence of imprisonment
is authorized constitutes a violation of city ordinance and is a crime. Crimes
are classified as gross misdemeanors or misdemeanors as provided in this code
or in each statute adopted by reference. (Ord. 917, 8-3-2015)
6-5-5: PUNISHMENT AND RESTITUTION:
   A.   Unless specifically provided otherwise, every person convicted of a
gross misdemeanor, or a crime not otherwise classified, shall be punished by
imprisonment in jail for a maximum term of not more than one year, or by a fine
in an amount of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or by both
such imprisonment and fine.
   B.   Unless specifically provided otherwise, every person convicted of a
misdemeanor shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term of not
more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both such imprisonment and fine.
   C.   A person who is convicted of a misdemeanor violation of any provision
of Revised Code Of Washington chapter 69.50 adopted by reference shall be
punished by imprisonment for not less than twenty four (24) consecutive hours,
and by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). On a second
or subsequent conviction, the fine shall not be less than five hundred dollars
($500.00). These fines shall be in addition to any other fine or penalty
imposed. Unless the court finds that the imposition of the minimum imprisonment
will pose a substantial risk to the defendant's physical or mental well being
or that local jail facilities are in an overcrowded condition, the term of
imprisonment shall not be suspended or deferred. If the court finds such risk
or overcrowding exists, it shall sentence the defendant to a minimum of forty
(40) hours of community service. If a minimum term of imprisonment is suspended
or deferred, the court shall state in writing the reason for granting the
suspension or deferral and the facts upon which the suspension or deferral is
based. Unless the court finds the person to be indigent, the minimum fine shall
not be suspended or deferred.
   D.   Every person found to have committed a civil infraction shall pay a
fine of seventy one dollars ($71.00), unless otherwise provided for within this
criminal code or under the infraction rules for courts of limited jurisdiction
(IRLJ) 6.2.
   E.   The court may impose restitution as provided in Revised Code Of
Washington 9A.20.030.
   F.   In the event there is a conflict in the penalties which can be imposed
upon conviction for a specific offense between the provisions of the Long Beach
criminal code and the Revised Code Of Washington, the penalty provisions of the
Revised Code Of Washington shall apply. (2007 Code)
6-5-6: LIMITATION OF ACTION:
   A.   A gross misdemeanor, or a crime not otherwise classified, may not be
prosecuted more than two (2) years after its commission. A misdemeanor may not
be prosecuted more than one year after its commission.
   B.   Periods of limitation toll for any period of time the person charged is
not usually and publicly resident within this state, or for any other reason
authorized by law or court rule.
   C.   If a complaint or information filed before the end of a period of
limitation is thereafter set aside, then the period is extended by a period
equal to the length of time from the filing to the setting aside. (2007 Code)
6-5-7: PROOF BEYOND REASONABLE DOUBT:
   A.   Every person charged with an offense is presumed innocent unless proven
guilty by competent evidence establishing each element of the offense beyond a
reasonable doubt.
   B.   When an offense has been proven against a person but a reasonable doubt
exists as to the degree of the crime, a conviction shall be entered only as to
the lowest degree. (2007 Code)
6-5-8: STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The following provisions of the Revised Code Of Washington as presently
constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:
Offense/RCW Subject
Offense/RCW Subject
Abandoned Refrigeration Equipment
9.03.010    Abandoning, discarding refrigeration equipment
9.03.020    Permitting unused equipment to remain on premises
9.03.040    Keeping or storing equipment for sale
Abandonment Of Dependent Person In The Third Degree
9A.42.010   Definitions
9A.42.080   Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree - Exception
9A.42.090   Abandonment of a dependent person - Defense
Advertising, Crimes Relating To
9.04.010    False advertising
9.04.040    Advertising cures of lost sexual potency - Evidence
9.04.090    Advertising fuel prices by service station
Animals, Crimes Relating To
9.08.030    False certificate of registration of animals - False representation
            as to breed
9.08.070    Pet animals - Taking, concealing, injuring, killing, etc. - Penalty
Anticipatory Offenses
9A.28.020   Criminal attempt
9A.28.030   Criminal solicitation
9A.28.040   Criminal conspiracy
Assault And Other Crimes Relating To Person
9A.36.041   Assault in the fourth degree
9A.36.050   Reckless endangerment
9A.36.070   Coercion
Competitive Bidding
9.18.120    Suppression of competitive bidding
9.18.130    Collusion to prevent competitive bidding - Penalty
Corporations, Crimes Relating To
9.24.010    Fraud in stock subscription
Custodial Interference
9A.40.010   Definitions
9A.40.070   Custodial interference in the second degree
9A.40.080   Custodial interference - Assessment of costs - Defense - Consent
            defense, restricted
Defenses
9A.12.010   Insanity
9A.16.010   Definitions
9A.16.020   Use of force - When lawful
9A.16.060   Duress
9A.16.070   Entrapment
9A.16.080   Action for being detained on mercantile establishment premises for
            investigation - "Reasonable grounds" as defense
9A.16.090   Intoxication
9A.16.100   Use of force on children - Policy - Actions presumed unreasonable
Domestic Violence Protection
9A.36.150   Interfering with the reporting of domestic violence
False Representations
9.38.010    False representation concerning credit
9.38.020    False representation concerning title
False Swearing And Tampering
9A.72.010   Definitions
9A.72.040   False swearing
9A.72.050   Perjury and false swearing - Inconsistent statements - Degree of
            crime
9A.72.060   Perjury and false swearing - Retraction
9A.72.070   Perjury and false swearing - Irregularities no defense
9A.72.080   Statement of what one does not know to be true
9A.72.140   Jury tampering
9A.72.150   Tampering with physical evidence
Fire Alarms - Crimes Relating To
9.40.040    Operating engine or boiler without spark arrester
9.40.100    Tampering with fire alarm or fire fighting equipment - False alarm
            - Penalties
Firearms And Dangerous Weapons
9.41.010    Terms defined
9.41.050    Carrying firearms
9.41.060    Exceptions to restrictions on carrying firearms
9.41.070    Concealed pistol license - Application - Fee - Renewal
9.41.075    Concealed pistol license - Revocation
9.41.080    Delivery to ineligible persons
9.41.090    Dealer deliveries regulated - Hold on delivery
9.41.0975   Officials and agencies - Immunity, writ of mandamus
9.41.098    Forfeiture of firearms - Disposition - Confiscation
9.41.100    Dealer licensing and registration required
            Dealer's license, by whom granted, conditions, fees - Employees,
9.41.110    fingerprinting and background checks - Wholesale sales excepted -
            Permits prohibited
9.41.120    Firearms as loan security
9.41.140    Alteration of identifying marks - Exceptions
9.41.170    Alien's license to carry firearms - Exceptions
9.41.230    Aiming or discharging firearms, dangerous weapons
9.41.240    Possession of pistol by person from eighteen to twenty-one
9.41.250    Dangerous weapons - Penalty
9.41.260    Dangerous exhibitions
9.41.270    Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm - Unlawful
            carrying or handling - Penalty - Exceptions
9.41.280    Possessing dangerous weapons on school facilities - Penalty -
            Exceptions
9.41.300    Weapons prohibited in certain places - Local laws and ordinances -
            Exceptions - Penalty
9.41.810    Penalty
Fraud
9.26A.110   Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service - Penalty
9.45.060    Encumbered, leased, or rented personal property - Construction
9.45.070    Mock auctions
9.45.080    Fraudulent removal of property
9.45.090    Knowingly receiving fraudulent conveyance
9.45.100    Fraud in assignment for benefit of creditors
9A.56.096   Theft of rental, leased, or lease-purchased property
9A.60.010   Definitions
9A.60.040   Criminal impersonation
9A.60.050   False certification
9A.61.010   Definitions
9A.61.020   Defrauding a public utility
9A.61.050   Defrauding a public utility in the third degree
9A.61.060   Restitution and costs
Gambling Offenses
9.46.190    Violations relating to fraud or deceit
9.46.193    Cities and towns - Ordinance adopting certain sections of chapter -
            jurisdiction of courts
9.46.195    Obstruction of public servant - Penalty
9.46.196    Cheating
9.46.198    Working in gambling activity without license as violation - Penalty
9.46.210    Enforcement - Commission as a law enforcement agency
9.46.215    Ownership or interest in gambling device - Penalty - Exceptions
9.46.217    Gambling records - Penalty - Exceptions
9.46.222    Professional gambling in the third degree
9.46.231    Gambling devices, real and personal property - Seizure and
            forfeiture
9.46.235    Slot machines, antique - Defenses concerning - Presumption created
9.46.240    Gambling information, transmitting or receiving
9.46.250    Gambling property or premises - Common nuisances, abatement -
            Termination of interests, licenses - Enforcement
9.46.260    Proof of possession as evidence of knowledge of its character
General Provisions
9A.04.050   People capable of committing crimes - Culpability of children
9A.04.060   Common law to supplement statutes
9A.04.070   Who amenable to criminal statutes
9A.04.090   Application of general provisions of code
9A.04.110   Definitions
9.01.055    Citizen immunity if aiding officer, scope - When
9.01.110    Omission, when not punishable
9.01.130    Sending letter, when complete
Harassment
9A.46.010   Legislative finding
9A.46.020   Definition - Penalties
9A.46.030   Place where committed
9A.46.040   Court-ordered requirements upon person charged with crime -
            Violation
9A.46.050   Arraignment - No-contact order
9A.46.060   Crimes included in harassment
9A.46.070   Enforcement of orders restricting contact
9A.46.080   Order restricting contact - Violation
9A.46.090   Nonliability of peace officer
9A.46.100   "Convicted", time when
9A.46.110   Stalking
9.61.230    Telephone harassment
9.61.240    Telephone harassment - Permitting telephone to be used
9.61.250    Telephone harassment - Offense, where deemed committed
Inhaling Toxic Fumes
9.47A.010   Definition
9.47A.020   Unlawful inhalation - Exception
9.47A.030   Possession of certain substances prohibited, when
9.47A.040   Sale of certain substances prohibited, when
9.47A.050   Penalty
Interference With Health Care Facility
9A.50.020   Interference with health care facility
Juries, Crimes Relating To
9.51.010    Misconduct of officer drawing jury
9.51.020    Soliciting jury duty
9.51.030    Misconduct of officer in charge of jury
Miscellaneous Crimes
9.91.010    Denial of civil rights - Terms defined
9.91.025    Unlawful bus conduct
9.91.060    Leaving children unattended in parked automobile
9.91.110    Metal buyers - Records of purchases - Penalty
9.91.130    Disposal of trash in charity donation receptacle
Misconduct In Signing Petition
9.44.080    Misconduct in signing a petition
Obstructing Governmental Operation
9A.76.010   Definitions
9A.76.020   Obstructing a law enforcement officer
9A.76.030   Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer
9A.76.040   Resisting arrest
9A.76.050   Rendering criminal assistance - Definition of term
9A.76.060   Relative defined
9A.76.070   Rendering criminal assistance in the first degree
9A.76.080   Rendering criminal assistance in the second degree
9A.76.090   Rendering criminal assistance in the third degree
9A.76.100   Compounding
9A.76.130   Escape in the third degree
9A.76.160   Introducing contraband in the third degree
9A.76.170   Bail jumping
9A.76.175   Making a false or misleading statement to a public servant
9A.76.180   Intimidating a public servant
9.31.090    Escaped prisoner recaptured
9.62.010    Malicious prosecution
9.62.020    Instituting suit in name of another
Principles Of Liability
9A.08.010   General requirements of culpability
9A.08.020   Liability for conduct of another - Complicity
9A.08.030   Criminal liability of corporations and persons acting or under a
            duty to act in their behalf
Public Disturbance
9A.84.010   Riot
9A.84.020   Failure to disperse
9A.84.040   False reporting
9.27.015    Interference, obstruction of any court, building or residence -
            Violations
Reckless Burning And Malicious Mischief
9A.48.010   Definitions
9A.48.050   Reckless burning in the second degree
9A.48.060   Reckless burning - Defense
9A.48.090   Malicious mischief in the third degree
9A.48.100   Malicious mischief - "Physical damage" defined
Sexual Offenses, Unlawful Acts Of Prostitution Or Pandering
9A.88.010   Indecent exposure
Special Offenses Relative To Minors
9.68A.011   Definitions
9.68A.080   Possession of depictions of minors engaged in sexually explicit
            conduct - Report required
9.68A.090   Communication with minor for immoral purposes
9.68A.120   Seizure and forfeiture of property
9.68A.150   Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance - Definitions
            - Penalty
9.69.100    Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense -
            Penalty
9A.44.096   Sexual misconduct with a minor in the second degree
Telephone Credit Cards
9.26A.090   Telephone company credit cards - Prohibited acts
9.26A.100   Definitions
9.26A.110   Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service - Penalty
9.26A.120   Fraud in operating coin-box telephone or other receptacle
9.26A.130   Penalty for manufacture or sale of slugs to be used for coin
Theft And Possession Of Stolen Property
9A.56.010   Definitions
9A.56.020   Theft - Definition, defense
9A.56.050   Theft in the third degree
9A.56.060   Unlawful issuance of checks or drafts
9A.56.100   Theft and larceny equated
9A.56.140   Possessing stolen property - Definition - Presumption
9A.56.170   Possessing stolen property in the third degree
9A.56.180   Obscuring the identity of a machine
9A.56.220   Theft of subscription television services
9A.56.230   Unlawful sale of subscription television services
9A.56.240   Forfeiture and disposal of device used to commit violation
9A.56.260   Connection of channel converter
9A.56.270   Shopping cart theft
Trademarks And Other Marks
9.16.030    Counterfeit mark - Intellectual property
9.16.035    Counterfeiting - Penalties
9.16.040    Displaying goods with false trademark
9.16.050    When deemed affixed
9.16.060    Fraudulent registration of trademark
9.16.070    Form and similitude defined
9.16.080    Petroleum products improperly labeled or graded
9.16.100    Use of the words "sterling silver", etc
9.16.110    Use of the words "coin silver", etc
9.16.120    Use of the word "sterling", on mounting
9.16.130    Use of the words "coin silver", on mounting
9.16.140    Unlawfully marking article made of gold
9.16.150    "Marked, stamped or branded", defined
Trespass And Prowling
9A.52.010   Definitions
9A.52.060   Making or having burglar tools
9A.52.070   Criminal trespass in the first degree
9A.52.080   Criminal trespass in the second degree
9A.52.090   Criminal trespass - Defenses
9A.52.100   Vehicle prowling in the second degree
9A.52.120   Computer trespass in the second degree
9A.52.130   Computer trespass - Commission of other crime
Violating Right Of Privacy
9.73.010    Divulging telegram
9.73.020    Opening sealed letter
9.73.030    Intercepting, recording or divulging private communication -
            Consent required - Exceptions
9.73.070    Persons and activities excepted from chapter
9.73.090    Certain emergency response personnel exempted from RCW 9.73.030
            through 9.73.080 - Standards - Court authorizations - Admissibility
9.73.100    Recordings available to defense counsel
 
(2007 Code)
6-5-9: SITTING, KNEELING, STANDING ON PUBLIC STRUCTURES:
   A.   Prohibition: No person shall sit, kneel, stand, lay or be upon, in any
manner, the city structures listed and identified as follows:
      1.   Cement Planters, Streetlight Foundations: The description is as
follows: approximately one-half (1/2) circle of cement, approximately four feet
(4') high, containing a streetlight, water fountain, and/or planters.
      2.   Wood Carvings:
         a.   Description: Octopus, mermaid, seahorse, Lewis and Clark statue,
clam, sea lion, seals, dolphins.
         b.   Locations: Pacific Highway at Third Street South - southwest
corner; Third Street South - southeast corner; Fifth Street South - southwest
corner; Fifth Street South - southeast corner; Fifth Street South - northwest
corner. (Ord. 679, 6-19-1995)
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 679, 6-19-1995; amd. 2007 Code)
6-5-10: THROWING WATER BALLOONS AND EGGS:
   A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful to throw or explode any type of water
balloon or any other balloon containing a liquid substance, or eggs, at any
time, within one hundred feet (100') of either side of Pacific Avenue from the
southern right of way of Tenth Street South to the northern right of way of
Bolstad Avenue.
   B.   Violation; Penalty: Any person who violates this section has committed
an infraction and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. If the violator is under the age of eighteen (18), the
parents and/or guardian shall be held liable. (Ord. 917, 8-3-2015)
6-5-11: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE USE IN A PUBLIC PLACE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly use any controlled substance
in a public place, unless the substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant
to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course
of his or her professional practice, or as otherwise authorized under Federal
or State law.
   B.   "Use" means to inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a
controlled substance into the human body.
   C.   "Controlled substance" means a drug, substance, or immediate precursor
included in Schedules I, II, III, and IV as set forth in federal or state laws,
or federal or commission rules, but does not include cannabis, cannabis
concentrates, cannabis products, or cannabis-infused products as those terms
are defined in RCW 69.50.101.
   D.   "Public place" means an area generally visible to public view, and
includes any place to which the public has a right of access, including
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not), transit vehicles, transit stations, and
buildings open to the public, as well as doorways, windows, drive-up windows,
and entrances to buildings or dwellings that are visible to public view.
   E.   "Practitioner" shall have the same meaning as in RCW 69.50.101 as
currently enacted or later amended.
   F.   When a police officer has probable cause that a person has violated
this section, the officer may, but is not required to, refer that person to
services, a jail alternative program, and/or a diversion program in lieu of
jail booking, citation, or referral to the prosecutor for the criminal offense.
   G.   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a gross misdemeanor,
except if the Washington State Legislature enacts any provision consistent with
subsection (A) - (E) of this section, the penalty for a violation of this
section shall be the same as that prescribed by state law. (Ord. 1018, 6-5-
2023)
6-5-12: DRUG-FREE ZONES - VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any person who violates, LBMC 10.35.011, LBMC 10.35.12, LBMC 10.35.020,
LBMC 10.35.030, LBMC 10.35.060, LBMC 10.36.020 and the violation occurs in a
school, on a school bus, within one thousand feet (1,000') of a school bus
route stop designated by the school district, within one thousand feet of the
perimeter of the school grounds, in a public park, in a public housing project
designated as a drug-free zone, on a public transit vehicle or in a public
transit stop shelter may be punished by a fine of up to twice the fine
otherwise authorized by this chapter, or by imprisonment of up to twice the
imprisonment otherwise authorized by this chapter, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The provisions of this section shall not operate to more than
double the fine or imprisonment otherwise authorized by this chapter for an
offense.
   B.   It is not a defense to a prosecution for a violation of this section
that the person was unaware that the prohibited conduct took place while in a
school or school bus or within one thousand feet of the school or school bus
route stop, in a public park, in a public housing project designated as a drug-
free zone, on a public transit vehicle, or in a public transit stop shelter.
   C.   It is not a defense to a prosecution for a violation of this section or
any other prosecution under this chapter that persons under the age of eighteen
were not present in the school, the school bus, the public park, the public
housing project designated as a drug-free zone, or the public transit vehicle,
or at the school bus route stop or the public transit vehicle stop shelter at
the time of the offense or that school was not in session.
   D.   It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution for a violation of this
section that the prohibited conduct took place entirely within a private
residence, that no person under eighteen years of age or younger was present in
such private residence at any time during the commission of the offense, and
that the prohibited conduct did not involve delivering, manufacturing, selling
or possessing with the intent to manufacture, sell or deliver any controlled
substance for profit. The affirmative defense established in this section shall
be proved by the defendant by a preponderance of the evidence. This section
shall not be construed to establish an affirmative defense with respect to a
prosecution for an offense defined in any other section of this chapter.
   E.   In a prosecution under this section, a map produced or reproduced by
any municipal, school district, transit authority engineer, or public housing
authority for the purpose of depicting the location and boundaries of the area
on or within one thousand feet of any property used for a school, school bus
route stop, public park, public housing project designated as a drug-free zone,
or public transit vehicle stop shelter, or a true copy of such a map, shall
under proper authentication, be admissible and shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the location and boundaries of those areas if the governing body of
the municipality, school district or transit authority has adopted a resolution
or ordinance approving the map as the official location and record of the
location and boundaries of the area on or within one thousand feet of the
school, school bus route stop, public park, public housing project designated
as a drug-free zone, or public transit vehicle stop shelter. Any map approved
under this section or a true copy of the map shall be filed with the clerk of
the city, and shall be maintained as an official record of the city. This
section shall not be construed as precluding the prosecution from introducing
or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish any element of the
offense. This section shall not be construed as precluding the use or
admissibility of any map or diagram other than the one which has been approved
by the governing body of a municipality, school district, transit authority or
public housing authority if the map or diagram is otherwise admissible under
court rule.
   F.   As used in this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
      1.   "School" has the meaning under RCW 28A.150.010 or 28A.150.020. The
term "school" also includes a private school approved under RCW 28A.195.010;
      2.   "School bus" means a school bus as defined by the superintendent of
public instruction by rule which is owned and operated by any school district
and all school buses which are privately owned and operated under contract or
otherwise with any school district in the state for the transportation of
students. The term does not include buses operated by common carriers in the
urban transportation of students such as transportation of students through a
municipal transportation system;
      3.   "School bus route stop" means a school bus stop as designated by a
school district;
      4.   "Public park" means land, including any facilities or improvements
on the land, that is operated as a park by the state or a local government;
      5.   "Public transit vehicle" means any motor vehicle, street car, train,
trolley vehicle or any other device, vessel or vehicle which is owned or
operated by a transit authority and which is used for the purpose of carrying
passengers on a regular schedule;
      6.   "Transit authority" means a city, county or state transportation
system, transportation authority, public transportation benefit area, public
transit authority or metropolitan municipal corporation within the state that
operates public transit vehicles;
      7.   "Stop shelter" means a passenger shelter designated by a transit
authority;
      8.   "Public housing project" means the same as "housing project" as
defined in RCW 35.82.020. (Ord. 1018, 6-5-2023)
6-5-13: OBSTRUCTING A PUBLIC EMPLOYEE:
   A.   A person is guilty of obstructing a public employee if, with knowledge
that the person obstructed is a public employee, he or she:
      1.   Intentionally and physically interferes with a public employee; or
      2.   Intentionally hinders or delays a public employee by disobeying an
order to stop given by such employee; or
      3.   Intentionally refuses to cease an activity or behavior that creates
a risk of injury to any person when ordered to do so by a public employee; or
      4.   Intentionally refuses to leave the scene of a fire department
emergency response while it is in progress after being requested to leave by a
member of the fire department when the person's conduct or presence hinders,
delays, or compromises legitimate fire department actions or rescue efforts;
threatens the safety of fire department personnel or members of the public; or
attempts to incite others to violence by intentionally advocating or directing
imminent violence toward a specific person or group, when it is likely that
such advocacy or direction will imminently result in actual violence toward
that person or group.
   B.   No person shall be convicted of violating this section if the public
employee was not acting lawfully in a governmental fashion.
   C.   No person shall be convicted of violating this section if the person
was obstructing their own medical treatment, when such treatment was being
provided by fire department personnel.
   D.   For purposes of this section a "public employee" means those
individuals responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of the Long Beach
Municipal Code, including provisions related to fire, building, utilities,
zoning, and life and safety codes; those individuals responsible for the
enforcement of the federal or state criminal laws; or a firefighter or other
employee of a fire department who was performing his or her official duties at
the time of the obstruction.
   E.   Obstructing a public employee is a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 1020, 6-20-
2023)
CHAPTER 6
MINORS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definitions
6-6-2: Intoxication
6-6-3: Parental Responsibility
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Definitions:
               An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for
EMERGENCY:     immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural
               disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to
               prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
               Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public
ESTABLISHMENT: is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or
               entertainment.
EXTENDED       Grandparents, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsister, uncle, aunt or first
FAMILY         cousin who is not a minor and with whom the minor (child) has a relationship and
MEMBERS:       is comfortable with, and who is willing and available to care for the child.
               1.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor;
               or
GUARDIAN:      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court; or
               3.   A person at least eighteen (18) years of age who is authorized by a parent
               or legal guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
MINOR:         Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
               Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating,
OPERATOR:      managing, or conducting any establishment open during curfew hours. The term
               includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
               officers of the corporation.
PARENT:        A person who is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, foster parent, or
               stepparent of another person.
               1.   Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has
               access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, common areas,
               schools, hospitals, apartments, etc.
PUBLIC PLACE:  2.   An area generally visible to public view and includes, but is not limited
               to, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
               automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public
               including those which serve food or drink and provide entertainment, and the
               doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
               To: 1) linger or stay; or 2) fail to leave the premises or location when
REMAIN:        requested to do so by a police officer or the owner/operator or other person in
               control of a premises.
SERIOUS BODILY Bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death or causes death, serious
INJURY:        permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any
               bodily member or organ.
 
   B.   Age And Hour Restrictions; Offense Described: No minor under the age of
eighteen (18) shall be in or upon any public street, highway, alley, park,
vacant lot, or other public place in the "CBD" as defined in subsection A of
this section between the hours of one minute past eleven o'clock (11:01) P.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. Sunday through Thursday and eleven fifty nine
o'clock (11:59) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. Friday and Saturday.
      1.   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
      2.   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she
knowingly permits or, by insufficient lawful control, allows the minor to
remain in any place or on the premises of any establishment within the curfew
hours.
      3.   A parent or guardian commits an offense if he or she fails to appear
to take the minor into custody after contact by the police department pursuant
to the temporary custody procedures as provided for in subsection F of this
section.
      4.   A person or "operator" as defined in subsection A of this section
commits an offense if that person or operator encourages or affirmatively
facilitates a violation of this section by a minor.
   C.   Designation Of Other Curfew Areas: In addition to the CBD, the city
council may, by resolution, designate other areas of Long Beach to be curfew
areas.
      1.   No minor under the age of eighteen (18) shall be in or upon any
public street, highway, alley, park, vacant lot or other public place in a
posted curfew area between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M.
      2.   On the major streets of a curfew area, there shall be a posted sign
which shall read substantially as follows:
      CURFEW AREA
      NO MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 18,
      FROM 11:00 P.M. TO 5:00 A.M.
      CITY ORDINANCE NO. 678
      MAXIMUM PENALTY - $250.00
      3.   No area shall be designated or posted as a curfew area except upon
the passage of a resolution by the city council specifically mandating such
designation and posting for a particular area.
   D.   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      1.   At any time the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal
guardian, or other responsible person who is over the age of twenty one (21)
and approved by the minor's parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person
having custody or control of such minor to accompany said minor.
      2.   If the minor is on an errand as directed by his or her parent,
guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or control of such
minor.
      3.   If the minor is legally employed for the period one-half (1/2) hour
before to one-half (1/2) hour after work, or going directly between his or her
home and place of employment. This exception shall also apply if the minor is
in a public place during curfew hours in the course of his or her employment.
      4.   The minor is within one block of his or her residence.
      5.   If the minor is coming directly home from an adult organized/
supervised activity or a place of public entertainment such as a movie, play or
sporting event. This exception will apply for one-half (1/2) hour after the
completion of such event.
      6.   If the minor is on an emergency errand directed or permitted by his
parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or control of
such minor.
      7.   If a minor is traveling by direct route to or from an event
sponsored by an accredited educational institution.
      8.   If the minor is in a motor vehicle engaged in interstate travel with
the consent of a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having
custody or control of such minor through the state of Washington.
      9.   A minor who is married and thus has achieved the age of majority
pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 26.28.020 or has become emancipated in
accordance with Revised Code of Washington 13.64.060(2).
      10.   It is a defense to this section that the parent or guardian is
reasonably hindered to such a degree that he/she is unable to appear and take
custody of the minor after being requested to do so.
   E.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or take further action
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred, and that, based on any response or other circumstances, no defense
under subsection D of this section is present. No citation shall be issued
until attempts have been made to place the minor according to the temporary
custody procedure in subsection F of this section.
   F.   Temporary Custody Procedure:
      1.   A police officer who reasonably believes that a minor has violated
any of the provisions as described in subsection B of this section shall have
authority to take the minor into custody, shall inform the minor the reason(s)
for such custody, and may demand that the parent or guardian appear and take
custody of the minor.
      2.   Should the parent not appear, or should the officer otherwise deem
appropriate, the officer shall deliver or arrange to deliver as follows:
         a.   To the minor's parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person
having custody and control of such minor; the officer releasing a minor into
the custody of an adult person having custody and control shall inform the
adult of the reason or reasons for taking of the minor into custody and shall
inform the minor and the responsible adult of the nature and location of
appropriate services available in the community; or
         b.   The officer may take the minor to the home of an adult extended
family member after attempting to notify the parent, guardian or custodian.
         c.   In the event subsections F2a and F2b of this section are not
appropriate under the circumstances, the officer may deliver the minor to
either of the following:
            (1)   To the Long Beach police station or other facility operated
by the Long Beach police department until the parent appears to take
responsibility for the minor; or
            (2)   In the event the parent fails to appear, the minor is to be
referred to the department of social and health services for the state of
Washington for consideration of further intervention and/or placement services.
   G.   Violations; Civil Infraction:
      1.   A violation of any of the provisions of this section is designated a
civil infraction.
      2.   A person found to have committed an infraction under this section
may be assessed a monetary penalty. No penalty may exceed two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each offense including all statutory assessments and
costs. In lieu of payment for all or part of the monetary penalty, the court
may provide for the performance of community service.
   H.   Third Party Liability:
      1.   It is expressly the purpose of this section to provide for and
promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create
or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons
who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this
section.
      2.   It is the specific intent of this section that no provision or term
used in this section is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city or
any of its officers or employees for whom the implementation and enforcement of
this section shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
      3.   Nothing contained in this section is intended nor shall be construed
to create or form a basis of any liability on the part of the city or its
officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any
action or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the
enforcement of this section by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 678,
1995; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 991, 1-19-2021)
6-6-2: INTOXICATION:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
    ALCOHOL: That substance known as ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or
spirits of wine, which is commonly produced by the fermentation or distillation
of grain, starch, molasses or sugar, or other substances including all
dilutions and mixtures of this substance. "Alcohol" does not include an alcohol
in the possession of a manufacturer or distiller of alcohol fuel, as described
in RCW 66.12.130, which is intended to be denatured and used as a fuel for use
in motor vehicles, farm implements, and machines or implements of husbandry.
   BEER: Any "malt beverage" or "malt liquor" as these terms are defined in
Revised Code of Washington 66.04.010.
   LIQUOR: Means and includes the four (4) varieties of liquor defined in this
chapter (alcohol, spirits, wine and beer), and all fermented, spirituous,
vinous or malt liquor, or combination thereof, and mixed liquor, a part of
which is fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt liquor, or otherwise
intoxicating; and every liquid or solid or semisolid or other substances,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and all drinks and
drinkable liquids and all preparations or mixtures capable of human
consumption, and any liquid, semisolid, solid, or other substance, which
contains more than one percent (1%) of alcohol by weight shall be conclusively
deemed to be liquor. "Liquor" does not include confections or food products
that contain one percent (1%) or less of alcohol by weight.
   SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation,
including wines exceeding twenty four percent (24%) of alcohol by volume.
   WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of fruits (grapes,
berries, apples, etc.) or other agricultural product containing sugar, to which
any saccharine substances may have been added before, during, or after
fermentation, and containing not more than twenty four percent (24%) of alcohol
by volume, including sweet wines fortified with wine spirits, such as port,
sherry, muscatel and angelica, not exceeding twenty four percent (24%) of
alcohol by volume. (1988 Code § 9.16.010; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Offense Designated:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to appear on the public streets of the city, or in any public place within the
city or in any motor vehicle on a public street within the city after having
consumed liquor in violation of this section, regardless of where consumption
may have occurred; provided, that at the time of the appearance as aforesaid,
evidence exists as to the consumption of liquor.
      2.   For purposes of this section, the presence of the odor of liquor,
beer, or wine on the breath of any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years shall be prima facie evidence of consumption of liquor, in violation of
this section. This provision shall not be construed as limiting the
introduction of any other competent evidence of the consumption of liquor in
violation of this section. (1988 Code § 9.16.020; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Upon the first conviction for a violation of this
section, the court shall impose a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00); provided, however, that the court may suspend all or any portion of
such fine upon whatever terms and conditions may appear to the court to be
proper; provided further, that if any person convicted of or forfeited bail for
a violation of this section, the court shall impose a fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00), and in the event such conviction constitutes such
person's second or subsequent conviction for a violation of this section, no
portion of the fine shall be suspended. (1988 Code § 9.16.030)
6-6-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Offense Described: A person commits the offense of failing to supervise
a minor if the person is the parent, legal guardian, or person with legal
responsibility for the safety and welfare of a child under eighteen (18) years
of age and the child has been found on private property or premises open to the
public in violation of any city ordinance and/or any misdemeanor offense as
provided for by Washington state statutes.
   B.   Defense: It shall be a defense to the offense of failure to supervise a
minor if the child’s violation of the city ordinance occurred in the presence
of the person. It shall be a defense to the offense of failure to supervise a
minor if the violation occurred on private property of the person.
   C.   Court Ordered Restitution: In addition to any fine or penalty imposed
pursuant to this section, the court may order the person to pay any restitution
to a victim of the minor’s conduct. The amount of restitution ordered pursuant
to this section shall not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   D.   Issuance Of Citation; Penalties Imposed:
      1.   If a child in violation of subsection A of this section is eleven
(11) years of age or younger, any citation issued shall be issued to the
parent, legal guardian or person with legal responsibility for the safety and
welfare of the child for violation of this section, rather than to the child
for violation of any provision of any city ordinance and/or any misdemeanor
offense as provided for by Washington state statutes.
      2.   The first time a person is convicted of an offense described in
subsection A of this section, the person shall pay a fine not exceeding one
hundred and fifty dollars ($150). If the person successfully participates and
completes a parent effectiveness program to the satisfaction of the court, the
entire fine may be suspended for up to a period of one year.
      3.   The offense described in this section of failure to supervise a
minor is a civil infraction punishable by a maximum fine of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
      4.   The procedure for disposition of infractions issued under this
section shall be the same as utilized in Revised Code of Washington chapter
46.63, and infraction rules for courts of limited jurisdiction as adopted and
amended by the Washington supreme court.
      5.   Any police officer issuing a notice of infraction under this section
shall indicate the bail amount on such citation to be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), unless: a) the police officer has personal knowledge that it is
the person’s first offense; or b) the municipal court of Long Beach sets a
different bail amount by court rule. (Ord. 694, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 991, 1-19-
2021)
CHAPTER 7
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Fireworks Defined
6-7-2: Sale, Use And Discharge Of Fireworks Unlawful
6-7-3: Violation; Penalty
6-7-1: FIREWORKS DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, “fireworks” means any composition or device
designed to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, and which meets the definition of “articles pyrotechnic” or
“consumer fireworks” or “display fireworks” set forth in Revised Code of
Washington 70.77.126. (1988 Code § 8.04.010; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 1007, 6-27-
2022)
6-7-2: SALE, USE AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, use, discharge, ignite, or explode any
fireworks within the City of Long Beach; provided that this prohibition shall
not apply to duly authorized public displays as provided in Revised Code of
Washington 70.77.260. (1988 Code § 8.04.040; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 999, 11-1-
2021; Ord. 1007, 6-27-2022; Ord. 1015, 5-15-2023)
6-7-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. If the violator is under the age of eighteen (18),
the parents and/or guardian shall be held liable. (1988 Code § 8.04.050; amd.
2007 Code; Ord. 1007, 6-27-2022)
CHAPTER 8
FIRE HYDRANTS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Definitions
6-8-2: Service By Water Department
6-8-3: Building Permit Issuance
6-8-4: Installation Required; Contractor Or City
6-8-5: Installation Requirements And Specifications
6-8-6: Private Hydrants
6-8-7: Flush Hydrants Prohibited
6-8-8: Protection Of Hydrants
6-8-9: Replacement Of Nonconforming Hydrants
6-8-10: Obstruction Prohibited
6-8-11: Chlorine Use
6-8-12: Violation; Penalty
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are part of this chapter. Whenever the following
terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meanings as defined. The
definitions given shall not necessarily be limited to the meanings given in
this chapter whenever the term is one of common usage, in which case the
definition shall be augmented and enlarged by the accepted public use of the
term:
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The approving authority for the several conditions of this
chapter shall be the fire chief.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES: Includes, but is not necessarily limited
to, stores (retail and wholesale), warehouses, service stations, manufacturing
facilities, garages, theaters, hotels, motels, restaurants, bars, taverns,
banks, showrooms, barbershops and beauty shops.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The fire department of the city and/or any recognized fire
department normally responding in the area, to include a private fire brigade
organized, trained and equipped to protect specified property.
FLUSH TYPE HYDRANT: A hydrant installed entirely below grade.
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTIES: Includes, but is not necessarily limited to, places
of worship, schools (public and private), nursing homes, rest homes, lodges and
fraternal orders, unless the structure contains a function of a commercial or
industrial nature.
PRIVATE HYDRANT: A fire hydrant so situated and maintained as to provide water
for firefighting purposes with restrictions for its use limited to certain
defined property or properties. The location may be such that it is not readily
accessible for immediate use of the fire department for other than private
property.
PUBLIC HYDRANT: A fire hydrant so situated and maintained as to provide water
for firefighting purposes without restriction as to use. The location is such
that it is accessible for immediate use of the fire department.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES: Those properties intended for a purpose of human
habitation. Whenever the term "single-family dwelling" is used in this chapter,
such term shall also include the structure known as a "duplex". A residence
constructed and equipped for occupancy by more than two (2) families shall be
defined as a "multi-family dwelling" or "high density dwelling", the terms
being identical in meaning. (1988 Code § 8.08.010)
6-8-2: SERVICE BY WATER DEPARTMENT:
All fire hydrants installed as required by this chapter shall be served by the
water department of the city, unless conditions warrant a waiver of this
provision. (1988 Code § 8.08.030)
6-8-3: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
This chapter is necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the city. No building permits shall be issued for the
creation of any building or structure until plans which are in compliance with
this chapter have been submitted and approved. No building shall be occupied
until water is available. (1988 Code § 8.08.180)
6-8-4: INSTALLATION REQUIRED; CONTRACTOR OR CITY:
   A.   Installation Required: The installation of fire hydrants in accordance
with this chapter shall be required of the owner and/or developer of any future
business; commercial, institutional or industrial facility; dwelling; or
dwelling development. (1988 Code § 8.08.020)
   B.   Use Of Contractor Or City: The installation of fire hydrants may be
accomplished by a recognized contractor, or by payment of the costs thereof to
the city, to be done by the water department of the city. All installations
shall be approved by the fire chief and the city engineer. (1988 Code §
8.08.190)
6-8-5: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Foot Valve Installation:
      1.   There shall be a foot valve installed between the service main and
hydrant sufficient to permit the repair and replacement of the hydrant without
disruption of water service.
      2.   The type and style shall be determined by the approving authority.
      3.   The location of all such valves installed shall be properly and
accurately marked on identifiable plans or drawings, two (2) copies of which
shall be furnished to the approving authority.
      4.   This valve shall be furnished with a standard valve box. (1988 Code
§ 8.08.060)
   B.   Lead To Service Main: The lead from the service main to the hydrant
shall be no less than six inches (6") in diameter. Any hydrant leads over fifty
feet (50') in length from the service main to the hydrant shall be no less than
eight inches (8") in diameter. The provisions of this subsection shall apply
without exception and regardless of the size of the service main. (1988 Code §
8.08.070)
   C.   Hydrant Placement:
      1.   Private Property: All mains on private property serving more than
one fire hydrant shall be circulatory and not less than eight inches (8") in
diameter. The hydrants shall be not more than three hundred feet (300') apart,
as measured around the perimeter, fifty feet (50') from the building. All
buildings, except single-family dwellings, that are located so that a portion
is more than two hundred feet (200') from a street property line, or located at
a different elevation than the street, shall have fire hydrants around the
perimeter thereof to be located on the property as directed by the fire chief.
(1988 Code § 8.08.080)
      2.   Intersections: Fire hydrants shall be installed at all intersections
in all areas, except single-family residential, so that the distance between
them shall not exceed three hundred thirty feet (330'); and if the distance
between intersections is over four hundred feet (400'), then one hydrant shall
be placed halfway between. (1988 Code § 8.08.090)
      3.   Single-Family Residential Areas:
         a.   Fire hydrants shall be so installed in single-family residential
areas so that the distance between them shall not exceed six hundred feet
(600') and shall be installed at street intersections unless otherwise
specified by the approving authority.
         b.   If intersections are over seven hundred feet (700') apart, an
additional hydrant will be placed in between them so as not to be more than six
hundred feet (600') from hydrants on either side.
         c.   In addition to the spacing requirements set forth above, hydrants
located in cul-de-sac and dead end areas, either by design or by topographic or
manmade feature, which prohibit straight-line distance measurement, shall be
located to serve no more than one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square
feet. (1988 Code § 8.08.100)
      4.   Buildings:
         a.   Buildings having required fire flow of less than two thousand
five hundred (2,500) gpm, other than buildings of fire resistant construction,
can have fire hydrants on one side of the building only; yet, there shall never
be less than two (2) fire hydrants available for any building larger than five
thousand (5,000) square feet of ground area.
         b.   Location of fire hydrants protecting buildings requiring fire
flows larger than two thousand five hundred (2,500) gpm shall be determined by
the fire chief. (1988 Code § 8.08.110)
   D.   Design Requirements:
      1.   Standard hydrants shall have the following:
         a.   Two (2) 21/2-inch hose outlets; and
         b.   One 41/2-inch pumper port outlets.
      2.   All outlet ports shall have, and be of, national standard thread.
The valve openings shall be no less than five inches (5"). The hydrant shall
have a positive and automatic barrel drain; shall be Iowa type, or equal; and
shall be of the safety or breakaway style, so that if they are accidentally
broken off, the water will not flow. All ports shall be capped. (1988 Code §
8.08.120)
   E.   Engineering Requirements; Approval: Fire hydrants shall be installed to
meet sound engineering practices to include concrete blocking and strapping in
all cases, and must meet with the approval of the city engineer, who shall also
approve the selection and use of all pipe, fittings and valves. (1988 Code §
8.08.130)
   F.   Standing Plumb; Set To Grade: Hydrants shall stand plumb, to be set to
the established grade with the lowest outlet of the hydrant to be no less than
eighteen inches (18") above the grade and not less than thirty six inches (36")
of clear area is to be about the hydrant for clearance of the hydrant wrench on
both outlets and on the control valve. The pumper port shall face the street.
Where the street cannot be clearly defined or recognized, the port shall face
the most likely course or route of approach and location of the fire truck
while pumping, to be determined by the approving authority. (1988 Code §
8.08.140)
6-8-6: PRIVATE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Installation Limited; Requirements And Use: The installation of private
hydrants shall be limited to those cases when the number of public hydrants
installed under the distance provisions of this chapter shall be insufficient
in number. Private hydrants shall meet the requirements of the city for public
hydrants, and shall be located as designated by the approving authority. The
city shall have the right to go upon the premises and to use the private
hydrants for public purposes; including testing, flushing and emergency uses.
(1988 Code § 8.08.040)
   B.   Easement Required: No private hydrant shall be permitted unless the
person who owns the premises first grants to the city an easement for ingress
and egress to service the hydrant, and further conveys to the city title to the
pipe and hydrant. (1988 Code § 8.08.210)
6-8-7: FLUSH HYDRANTS PROHIBITED:
The installation of flush type hydrants is prohibited. (1988 Code § 8.08.050)
6-8-8: PROTECTION OF HYDRANTS:
Where needed, the fire chief will require hydrants to be protected by two (2)
or more posts, each eight inches (8") in diameter by five feet (5'), made
either of reinforced concrete or steel, their location to meet the provisions
of subsection 6-8-5F of this chapter. (1988 Code § 8.08.150)
6-8-9: REPLACEMENT OF NONCONFORMING HYDRANTS:
If there presently exists fire hydrants which do not conform to the
requirements of this chapter, such hydrants, when replaced, shall be replaced
with hydrants which do conform to the standards defined in this chapter. This
does not preclude a requirement by proper authority that a deficient hydrant
must be replaced should structural conditions of the area change to require a
hydrant or hydrants, or larger flow capacity. (1988 Code § 8.08.160)
6-8-10: OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   No one shall plant any vegetation, erect any structure, or perform any
action which results in obstructing the view of a fire hydrant for a distance
of fifty feet (50').
   B.   The owner/occupant of any area in which a hydrant is located shall be
responsible for removing weed and tree growth from around the hydrant for a
distance of not less than ten feet (10').
   C.   The purpose of this section is to maintain visual area around the
hydrant and is in addition to the requirements of subsection 6-8-5F of this
chapter. (1988 Code § 8.08.170)
6-8-11: CHLORINE USE:
Following the installation of fire hydrants, all piping, valves and hydrants
shall be treated with chlorine as prescribed by law for installation of any
other facility on a potable water system. (1988 Code § 8.08.200)
6-8-12: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1988 Code § 8.08.220; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 9
BURGLAR AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
6-9-1: Purpose
6-9-2: Definitions
6-9-3: Emergency Response Card
6-9-4: False Alarms
6-9-5: Ownership And Maintenance
6-9-6: Tampering With Fire And/Or Burglar Alarm Systems
6-9-7: Work On Auxiliary Systems; Notice
6-9-8: Automatic Calling Devices Prohibited
6-9-9: Sanctions, Notice
6-9-10: Administrative Sanctions, Notice
6-9-11: Appeal From Administrative Decision, Finality
6-9-12: Private Agencies
6-9-13: Violation; Penalties
6-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of this chapter to reduce the number of false alarms occurring
within the city and resultant waste of city resources by providing for
corrective administrative action, including fees and criminal penalties. (Ord.
911, 5-4-2015)
6-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHORIZED SERVICE PERSONNEL: Those persons who, by reason of their experience,
trade or occupation, have met the minimum state requirements for serving such
alarm systems and who are licensed by the state of Washington to work on an
alarm system.
BURGLAR ALARM: For purposes of this chapter, the transmission of an alarm by
automatic alarm systems and circuits leading to the connection with Pacific
County Communication or any component part thereof for the purpose of summoning
the police department when a burglary or emergency is occurring.
FALSE ALARM:
   A.   The activation of a burglar and/or a robbery alarm for the purposes of
summoning the police at a time when no burglary or robbery is being committed
or attempted on the premises; or
   B.   The activation of a fire alarm caused by defective or improperly
maintained equipment for the purpose of summoning the fire department at a time
when no fire or emergency is occurring.
FIRE ALARM: For the purposes of this chapter, the transmission of an alarm by
automatic alarm systems and circuits leading to the connection with Pacific
County Communication or any component part thereof for the purpose of summoning
the fire department when a fire or emergency is occurring.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or unincorporated
association.
PREMISES: Any building, structure, enclosure, real property or vehicle. (Ord.
911, 5-4-2015)
6-9-3: EMERGENCY RESPONSE CARD:
It is unlawful to have or maintain on any premises a burglary and/or robbery
alarm or fire alarm unless there is on file with the police department an
emergency response card containing no more than three (3) names and current
phone numbers of persons authorized to enter the premises if summoned. Names
and phone numbers shall be provided in writing to the Long Beach police
department. (Ord. 911, 5-4-2015)
6-9-4: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   Police: Each and every burglary alarm requiring a response within the
city of Long Beach shall be allowed two (2) false alarms during any calendar
year. Thereafter, false alarms shall be assessed a fine as follows: third false
alarm in the calendar year, fifty dollars ($50.00); fourth false alarm in the
calendar year, one hundred dollars ($100.00); fifth and subsequent alarms in
the calendar year, two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   B.   Fire: Each and every false alarm requiring a response within the city
of Long Beach shall be allowed one false alarm during any thirty (30) day
period. Thereafter, false alarms in said thirty (30) day period shall be
assessed a fine as follows: second false alarm in the calendar year, fifty
dollars ($50.00); third false alarm in the calendar year, one hundred dollars
($100.00); fourth and subsequent alarms in the calendar year, two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
   C.   Audible Alarm: Any alarm audible upon abutting property for a period in
excess of twenty (20) minutes is declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 911,
5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
6-9-5: OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE:
Ownership and maintenance of alarm systems, circuits leading to the connection
with Pacific County Communications, or any component parts thereof, except as
herein provided, shall remain and be the responsibility of the person owning or
leasing the property. (Ord. 911, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
6-9-6: TAMPERING WITH FIRE AND/OR BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS:
   A.   Tampering: It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or to
wantonly cut, break, deface, or actuate any alarm device (including auxiliary
alarm devices, wires or wire supports, or appurtenances thereto), or
intentionally to transmit an alarm knowing no emergency exists.
   B.   Exception: Subsection A of this section shall not apply to city
employees in the police division or fire department engaged in their official
duties.
   C.   Exception; Manufacturer's Representatives: Subsection A of this section
shall not apply to any competent representative of a manufacturer of burglar
alarm equipment or fire alarm equipment who, with the consent of the chief of
police or fire chief, is modifying, adjusting, altering, repairing, or
replacing the system or any of its component equipment.
   D.   Exception; Insurance Rating Engineer: Subsection A of this section
shall not apply to any competent insurance rating engineer who is testing the
system in discharge of his duties and with permission of the chief of police or
fire chief. (Ord. 911, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
6-9-7: WORK ON AUXILIARY SYSTEMS; NOTICE:
Any person doing any work on an auxiliary alarm system that may cause a signal
to be transmitted over the city system shall notify the chief of police or fire
chief before doing such work, stating the time and place thereof. (Ord. 911, 5-
4-2015; amd. Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
6-9-8: AUTOMATIC CALLING DEVICES PROHIBITED:
No person shall use or operate, or attempt to use or operate, or cause to be
used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program, or otherwise provide or install
any device or combination of devices that will, upon activation, either
mechanically, electronically, or by other automatic means, initiate a
telephonic or recorded message to any telephone number assigned, or any
additional telephone numbers assigned, to any rotary system of the city of Long
Beach including, but not limited to, the city of Long Beach police department
or fire department. (Ord. 911, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
6-9-9: SANCTIONS, NOTICE:
Notice of imposition of any fine, under the provisions of this chapter, shall
be given to the person having or maintaining a burglary, robbery and/or fire
alarm on premises owned or occupied by him, providing that with respect to
business premises, the owner, manager, or chief administrative agent regularly
assigned and employed on the premises at the time of the occurrence of a false
alarm shall be presumed to be the person having or maintaining said alarm on
said business premises. (Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
6-9-10: ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS, NOTICE:
Notice of imposition of any administrative sanction, including an order of
disconnection, under the provisions of this chapter, shall be given to the
person having or maintaining a burglary, robbery and/or fire alarm on premises
owned or occupied by him, providing that with respect to business premises, the
owner, manager, or chief administrative agent regularly assigned and employed
on the premises at the time of the occurrence of a false alarm shall be
presumed to be the person having or maintaining said alarm on said business
premises. (Ord. 911, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
6-9-11: APPEAL FROM ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION, FINALITY:
Any person subject to the imposition of an order of disconnection or other
administrative sanction under the terms of this chapter, shall have a right of
appeal therefrom to the Long Beach municipal court. Unless a written notice of
appeal is filed with the court, as the case may warrant, within ten (10) days
of receipt of notice of imposition of administrative sanction, said sanction is
deemed to be final. (Ord. 911, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
6-9-12: PRIVATE AGENCIES:
Any private agency, business or other entity monitoring fire, burglary or
robbery alarm systems within the corporate limits of the city of Long Beach
shall notify Pacific County Communications, as the case may be, immediately
upon receiving an alarm. All other notifications shall be secondary. Any
private agency, business or other entity making a vehicular response to an
alarm shall not display emergency lighting or otherwise disregard any traffic
signals, speed restrictions or other laws in responding to said alarm. (Ord.
911, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
6-9-13: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who wilfully fails to pay the amount of any fine within thirty (30)
days from the date of issuance or thirty (30) days after the adjudication in
the city of Long Beach municipal court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished by not more than ninety (90) days in jail and by a fine of
not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or both such incarceration and
fine. (Ord. 911, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1024, 9-18-2023)
CHAPTER 10
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN CONDUCT ON CITY PROPERTY WITHIN SERVICE FACILITY BUFFER
ZONES
SECTION:
6-10-1: Definitions
6-10-2:    Prohibition
6-10-3:    Establishing A Service Facility Buffer Zone
6-10-4:    No Goods Or Services To Be Provided On City Property Within A
Service Facility Buffer Zone Without Permit
6-10-5:    Service Facility Buffer Zone Maps
6-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
BLOCK:      A portion of the city bounded on all sides by streets or avenues.
            All property in which the City has a property interest, including easements. The
            term includes, without limitation, all parks, rights-of-way, piers, streets,
            trails, forests, museums, pools, beaches, open spaces, public squares, athletic
            facilities, and grounds around City owned or leased buildings, including, but
            not limited to, parking lots, and any other property in which the City has a
CITY        property interest of any type.
PROPERTY:   1.   Exceptions. "City property" does not include parks, museums, beaches,
            pools, or athletic facilities when such facilities are open to the public during
            operational hours, unless such facility is designated as a Qualifying High-
            Impact Location pursuant to LBMC 6-10-3B. "City property" does not include areas
            of private property where tables and chairs are placed for the use of patrons
            consuming food and/or beverages.
DESIGNATED
QUALIFYING  A specific address or cluster of addresses designated by the Mayor under LBMC 6-
HIGH-IMPACT 10-3B.
LOCATION:
DESIGNATED
QUALIFYING  A Qualifying Service Location designated by the Mayor under LBMC 6-10-3A.
SERVICE
LOCATION:
            One or more tent, lean-to, structure, tarpaulin, pallet, or makeshift structure
            used for purposes of habitation located in an identifiable area within the City
            of Long Beach. Habitation is evidenced by the presence of bedding materials,
ENCAMPMENT: campfires, cooking materials, storage of clothing or other personal belongings
            or items, gathered together in a manner where it appears to a reasonable person
            that the site is being used for habitation purposes. Encampments do not include
            sites a reasonable person would conclude are no longer in use, because any
            remaining materials are garbage, debris, or waste.
            Any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct, as shown through crime-
            report data, criminal activity, police calls for service, reports from city
            employees, or credible reports made by members of the public:
            1.   Trespass and related offenses as defined in LBMC.
            2.   Theft-related offenses as defined in LBMC.
            3.   Lewd Conduct and related offenses as defined in LBMC.
            4.   Harassment offenses as defined in LBMC.
            5.   Assault or reckless endangerment as defined in LBMC.
            6.   Disorderly conduct as defined in LBMC .
            7.   Unlawful Transit Conduct as defined in LBMC.
            8.   Criminal Mischief and related offenses as defined in LBMC
            9.   Offensive littering as defined LBMC.
            10.   Drug-related offenses as defined in LBMC.
QUALIFYING  11.   Legend drug offenses as defined in LBMC.
EVENT:      12.   Precursor drug-related offenses as defined in LBMC.
            13.   Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity as defined
            in LBMC.
            14.   Inhalation of toxic fumes as defined in LBMC.
            15.   Liquor-related offenses as defined in LBMC.
            16.   Violation of stay out of drug areas orders issued pursuant to LBMC.
            17.   Firearms and dangerous weapons offenses as defined in Chapter 9.41 RCW and
            LBMC.
            18.   Persons Obstructing Streets as defined in LBMC.
            19.   Unlawful abandonment of a junk motor vehicle as defined in LBMC.
            20.   Public disturbance noises as defined in LBMC.
            21.   The presence of an Encampment as defined in LBMC.
            22.   Activities, behavior or conduct that is contrary to the City health and
            safety code (LBMC Title 5), building and fire code (sections 10-2-1 through 10-
            2-13 LBMC), or noise control code (Chapter 5-5 LBMC).
            Any physical location within the City of Long Beach where a Qualifying Service
QUALIFYING  Provider provides on-site social services, and includes substance-use treatment,
SERVICE     mental health treatment, prepared meals distribution, or the physical location
LOCATION:   where any permitted indoor emergency shelter, outdoor emergency shelter,
            emergency housing facilities, extreme weather shelter, permanent supportive
            housing, or transitional housing.
            Any agency or organization that provides on-site social services and includes
            substance use disorder treatment, mental health treatment, and prepared meals
            distribution, as well as any city-permitted indoor emergency shelter, outdoor
QUALIFYING  emergency shelter, emergency housing facilities, extreme weather shelter,
SERVICE     permanent supportive housing, whether publicly or privately funded, and does so
PROVIDER:   at a Qualifying Service Location where individuals regularly access those
            services. Once deemed a Qualifying Service Provider, such qualification
            continues only as long as the Qualifying Service Provider is providing such
            services.
SERVICE     Either (1) the entire area within a two-block radius of any Designated
FACILITY    Qualifying Service Location or Designated High Impact Qualifying Location,
BUFFER      provided that if the two-block radius bisects a block that the entire block
ZONE:       shall be included in the Service Facility Buffer Zone, or (2) a smaller area
            defined in the Mayor's designation under LBMC 6-10-3. (Ord. 1017, 6-5-2023)
 
6-10-2: PROHIBITION:
   A.   Prohibition: No person shall sit or lie down upon, or place a blanket,
sleeping bag, backpack, chair, mattress, couch, stool, or any similar
equipment, item, or furniture upon City property, whether improved or
unimproved, within a Service Facility Buffer Zone.
   B.   Exceptions: The prohibitions in subsection (A) of this section shall
not apply to any person:
      1.   Temporarily sitting or lying down on a sidewalk or other City
property due to a medical emergency;
      2.   Who, as the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker,
or similar device to move about the public sidewalk or other City property; or
      3.   Operating or patronizing an activity on the public sidewalk or other
City property pursuant to a city-issued permit for the activity; or a person
participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally,
demonstration, meeting, or similar event conducted on the public sidewalk or
other City property pursuant to a street use or other applicable permit issued
by the City. Nothing in any of these exceptions shall be construed to permit
any conduct which is prohibited by any City ordinance, code, or regulation.
   C.   No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages
in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified by a law
enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section and refuses or
intentionally fails to cease such activity when ordered to do so.
   D.   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by up to
ninety (90) days in jail, a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), or
both. (Ord. 1017, 6-5-2023)
6-10-3: ESTABLISHING A SERVICE FACILITY BUFFER ZONE:
   A.   Designated Qualified Service Locations: The Mayor shall have the
authority from time to time to designate in writing one or more Qualifying
Service Locations as Designated Qualifying Service Locations, taking into
consideration the impact to public health and safety for residents, businesses,
staff, and individuals seeking services, as well as the city resources utilized
in the area. A Service Facility Buffer Zone for such Designated Qualifying
Service Location is established effective upon designation and remains
effective until revoked by the Mayor. The Mayor shall review each Designated
Qualifying Service Location at least every six (6) months.
      1.   No Qualifying Service Location may be designated as provided in LBMC
subsection A unless the proposed Qualifying Service Location has, within the
preceding six (6) months:
         a.   Had six (6) or more Qualifying Events occur or exist upon the
property; or
         b.   Had six (6) or more Qualifying Events occur or exists upon the
property or within two-hundred feet (200') of the property where a nexus exists
between the Qualifying Event and the proposed Qualifying Service Location.
   B.   Designated Qualifying High-Impact Locations: The Mayor shall have the
authority from time to time to designate in writing one or more specific
addresses or cluster of addresses as a Designated Qualifying High-Impact
Location, taking into consideration the impact to public health and safety for
residents, businesses, staff, and individuals seeking services, as well as the
city resources utilized in the area. A Service Facility Buffer Zone for such
Designated Qualifying High-Impact Location is established effective upon
designation and remains effective until revoked by the Mayor. The Mayor shall
review each Designated Qualifying High-Impact Location at least every six (6)
months.
      1.   No Qualifying High-Impact Location may be designated as provided in
LBMC subsection B unless the proposed Qualifying High-Impact Location has,
within the preceding six (6) months:
         a.   Had six (6) or more Qualifying Events occur or exist upon the
specific addresses or cluster of addresses; or
         b.   Had six (6) or more Qualifying Events occur or exists upon the
specific addresses or cluster of addresses or within two-hundred feet (200') of
the specific addresses or cluster of addresses where a nexus exists between the
Qualifying Event and the proposed Qualifying High-Impact Location.
   C.   Prohibited Conduct And Enforcement: Prohibited conduct and enforcement
for Service Facility Buffer Zones are the same, regardless of whether the
Service Facility Buffer Zone is established by Designated Qualifying Service
Location or Designated Qualifying High-Impact Location. (Ord. 1017, 6-5-2023)
6-10-4: NO GOODS OR SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED ON CITY PROPERTY WITHIN A SERVICE
FACILITY BUFFER ZONE WITHOUT PERMIT:
No person may provide on City property within a Service Facility Buffer Zone
any food, beverages, goods, supplies or services of any sort to any person
engaging in conduct prohibited by LBMC
6-10-2, unless such provision is authorized by a valid right-of-way use permit
or other applicable permit or permission issued by the department of public
works or by other City department. Such permit shall identify the specific
activity authorized by the permit, the specific location at which such activity
is permitted, and the times during which the activity may occur. The City
department may issue such permit only if it determines that the activity and
location for which the permit is requested will not have an unreasonable
adverse impact on City property. The City department may revoke such permit at
any time if it determines that the activity does have an unreasonable adverse
impact on the neighborhood, other uses in the vicinity, or the public's use of
the right-of-way. No such City permit or other permission shall be valid for
longer than one year. (Ord. 1017, 6-5-2023)
6-10-5: SERVICE FACILITY BUFFER ZONE MAPS:
The City Community Development Director or designee will establish maps
documenting the Service Facility Buffer Zones, post such maps on the City's
website, and provide additional outreach to the community and update such maps
at least every six (6) months. (Ord. 1017, 6-5-2023)
TITLE 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Model Traffic Ordinance Adopted
7-1-2: Vehicle Weight Limits
7-1-3: Off Road Operation Of Vehicle 1  (Rep. by Ord. 903, 8-18-2014)
7-1-4: Seat Belt Use Regulations
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4 of this title.
7-1-1: MODEL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
   A.   Adoption Of Ordinance: The 1993 version of the Washington model traffic
ordinance, being chapter 400 laws of 1993, laws of the state of Washington, is
hereby adopted in full by reference as and for the traffic ordinance of the
city, as if set forth in full herein. (Ord. 622, 6-17-1991; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Adoption Of Amendments: All additions and deletions made to the
Washington model traffic ordinance from time to time by the state of Washington
are hereby adopted as and for amendments to the traffic ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 622, 6-17-1991)
7-1-2: VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS:
   A.   Weight Limit On Tenth Street: A weight limit of ten thousand (10,000)
pounds is imposed on all vehicles using Tenth Street South. (1988 Code §
10.08.010)
   B.   Exceptions: The weight limit of ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall not
be imposed on the following: municipal, county or state licensed vehicles which
are doing maintenance work on the street; and refuse disposal trucks which are
removing refuse containers situated on the street. (1988 Code § 10.08.020)
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person in violation of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1988 Code § 10.08.030; amd. 2007 Code)
7-1-3: OFF ROAD OPERATION OF VEHICLE 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 903, 8-18-2014)
 
Notes
1 2. See chapter 4 of this title.
7-1-4: SEAT BELT USE REGULATIONS:
The Washington state seat belt law, Revised Code Of Washington 46.61.687,
"Child Passenger Restraint Required", and 46.61.688, "Safety Belts, Use
Required", are adopted by reference as and for the seat belt ordinance of the
city as if set forth in full in this section. (1988 Code § 10.24.010)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Two-Hour Parking
7-2-2: Truck Parking
7-2-3: Parking Restrictions
7-2-1: TWO-HOUR PARKING:
Between April 1 and September 15 of each year, parking of automobiles shall be
limited to two (2) hours only, from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. until six o'clock
(6:00) P.M., on both sides of Pacific Avenue from Sixth Street South to Third
Street North. Any violation of this order shall be punished as a misdemeanor.
(1988 Code § 10.12.010)
7-2-2: TRUCK PARKING:
No motor vehicle bearing a truck license, at a rated capacity of one and one-
half (11/2) or more tons shall park upon the portion of Pacific Avenue between
Third North and Sixth South from April 1 to September 15, except to make
deliveries or pick ups of merchandise when no other parking is practicable.
(1988 Code § 10.12.020)
7-2-3: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Bolstad Avenue: Parking on Bolstad Avenue, on the south side thereof,
between Pacific and Boulevard, shall be restricted to a two (2) hour
consecutive time period each day of the week, between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. until six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (1988 Code § 10.12.030)
   B.   Fire Hall:
      1.   It is unlawful to park any nonfire department vehicle in front of
the fire hall doors.
      2.   Violators will be towed away at the owner's expense.
      3.   The penalty for parking in front of the fire hall doors shall be as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, together with towing charges. (1988 Code § 10.12.040; amd.
2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
BICYCLES, UNICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Nonapplicability To Certain Devices
7-3-3: Operation Regulations And Restrictions
7-3-4: Confiscation Of Property
7-3-5: Special City Responsibility Not Created
7-3-6: Violation; Penalty
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings, respectively, ascribed to them in
this section:
BICYCLE: Shall have its normal and accepted meaning, and the term "bicycle"
shall be deemed to include the terms "unicycle" and "adult-size three-wheeled
cycle".
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT: All streets, alleys, parking lots, sidewalks, and
land from Eleventh Street South on the south and Second Street North on the
north and Boulevard Street on the west and Washington Street on the east,
including, but not limited to, the following streets and associated sidewalks:
Eleventh Street South, Sid Snyder Avenue, Second Street South, Third Street
South, Fourth Street South, Fifth Street South, Sixth Street South, Seventh
Street South, Eighth Street South, Ninth Street South, Oregon Street, Boulevard
Street, Second Street North.
COASTER OR SCOOTER: A footboard composed of lumber, plastic, fiberglass, or
other synthetic substitute material, mounted upon two (2) or more wheels and
controlled by an upright steering handle. This device may be propelled by the
user, or by a gas or electric motor, usually in an upright position. For
purposes of this chapter, a "scooter" is a "coaster" if it otherwise meets the
definitions in this section.
SKATEBOARD: A footboard composed of lumber, plastic, fiberglass, or other
synthetic or substitute material, mounted upon four (4) or more wheels and is
usually propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lies upon
the device while it is in motion.
SKATES: A pair of shoes mounted upon sets of wheels and is most often propelled
by the user in an upright standing position or kneeling, including roller and
in-line skates.
TO OPERATE IN A NEGLIGENT MANNER: The operation of one or more of the above
described devices in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any
person or property. Examples of operating in a negligent manner include, but
are not limited to, failure to obey all traffic control devices, or failure to
yield right of way to pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 796, 3-2-
2005)
7-3-2: NONAPPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN DEVICES:
The regulations of this chapter shall not apply to wheelchairs and other human
powered devices necessary for a person with disabilities, as defined in 42 USC
12101 et seq., to be ambulatory. (Ord. 796, 3-2-2005)
7-3-3: OPERATION REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Traffic Control Devices: Any person operating a bicycle, skateboard,
skates, coaster, or any similar device shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signals, signs, and other devices applicable to vehicles,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   Safe Operation:
      1.   Every person using a bicycle, skateboard, skates, a coaster, or any
device similar to the foregoing upon any sidewalk or public path shall use the
same in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed no greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions existing at the point of operation,
taking into account the amount and character of pedestrian traffic, grade and
width of sidewalk or public path, and condition of surface; and shall obey all
traffic control devices.
      2.   Every person using a bicycle, skateboard, skates, coasters, or any
similar device upon a sidewalk or public path shall yield the right of way to
any pedestrian thereon.
      3.   No person upon a bicycle, skateboard, skates, coaster, or any device
similar to the foregoing shall interfere with or restrict the flow of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic in any manner whatsoever.
   C.   Negligent Operation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any bicycle, skateboard, skates, coaster, or any device similar to the
foregoing in a negligent manner as defined herein upon any public street,
public sidewalk, or publicly owned parking lot within the city. (Ord. 796, 3-2-
2005)
   D.   Prohibited Areas: It shall be unlawful for anyone to use a bicycle,
skateboard, skates, coaster, or any similar device in any public plaza,
building, or parking lot owned, leased, or operated by the city, or in the
downtown "central business district" as defined in section
7-3-1 of this chapter, except that bicycles are permitted on public streets in
the downtown central business district. (Ord. 809, 4-5-2006)
   E.   Nighttime Operation; Lights And Brake Required:
      1.   No person upon a skateboard, skates, coaster, or any device similar
to the foregoing shall ride upon a public highway or public sidewalk during the
hours between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before
sunrise without wearing a reflective device on his/her front and back.
      2.   Every bicycle, when in use during the hours of darkness as defined
in Revised Code of Washington 46.37.020, shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
approved by the state patrol which shall be visible from all distances up to
six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from
a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to
the red reflector. A light emitting diode flashing taillight visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may also be used in addition
to the red reflector.
      3.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
   F.   Clinging To Motor Vehicles: No person upon a bicycle, skateboard,
skates, coaster, or any device similar to the foregoing shall attach the same
or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon any public highway. (Ord. 796,
3-2-2005)
7-3-4: CONFISCATION OF PROPERTY:
A law enforcement officer having probable cause to believe a violation of this
chapter has been committed shall have the authority to confiscate the bicycle,
skateboard, skates, coaster, or similar device used in violation of this
chapter, and hold the same as evidence pending adjudication of the infraction.
(Ord. 796, 3-2-2005)
7-3-5: SPECIAL CITY RESPONSIBILITY NOT CREATED:
   A.   It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote
the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and not to create or
otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons or
individuals who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the
terms of this chapter.
   B.   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to
create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the city or its
officers, employees, or agents for any injury or damage resulting from any
action or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the
enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees, or agents. (Ord. 796,
3-2-2005)
7-3-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by the imposition of
a monetary penalty of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord.
796, 3-2-2005)
CHAPTER 4
OFF ROAD VEHICLES AND WHEELED ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Prohibitions On Operating An ORV/WATV In The City Of Long Beach
7-4-3: Protection Of The Dune From Vehicular Damage
7-4-4: Penalties
7-4-5: Enforcement
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The carrying out of emergency functions related to
responding and recovering from emergencies and disasters, and to aid victims
suffering from injury or damage, resulting from disasters caused by all
hazards, whether natural, technological, or human caused, and to provide
support for search and rescue operations for persons and property in distress.
HIGHWAY: For the purpose of this chapter only, means the entire width between
the boundary lines of every roadway publicly maintained by the state department
of transportation or any county or city with funding from the motor vehicle
fund. A highway is generally capable of travel by a conventional two- wheel
drive passenger automobile during most of the year and in use by such vehicles.
LAND OWNED OR CONTROLLED BY THE CITY: Any land owned by the city of Long Beach,
or any land controlled by easement, lease, license, right of entry, or other
written agreement giving the city use of the subject property.
NONHIGHWAY ROAD: Any road owned or managed by a public agency, a primitive
road, or any private road for which the owner has granted an easement for
public use for which appropriations from the motor vehicle fund were not used
for: a) original construction or reconstruction in the last twenty five (25)
years; or b) maintenance in the last four (4) years. In Long Beach the only
nonhighway roads are 28th Street Northwest west of Seacrest Avenue and 3rd
Street Northeast east of Washington Avenue.
OFF ROAD VEHICLE OR ORV: A nonstreet registered vehicle when used for
recreational purposes on nonhighway roads, trails, or a variety of other
natural terrain. Off road vehicle or ORV includes, but is not limited to, all-
terrain vehicles, motorcycles, four-wheel drive vehicles, and dune buggies.
SEASHORE CONSERVATION AREA: All lands now or hereafter under state ownership or
control lying between Cape Disappointment and Leadbetter Point and occupying
the area between the line of ordinary high tide and the line of extreme low
tide, as these lines now are or may hereafter be located, and, where
applicable, between the seashore conservation line, as established by survey of
the Washington state parks and recreation commission and the line of extreme
low tide, as these lines now are or may hereafter be located; and shall also
include all state owned nontrust accreted lands along the ocean.
WHEELED ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OR WATV: A. Any motorized nonhighway vehicle with
handlebars that is fifty inches (50") or less in width, has a seat height of at
least twenty inches (20"), weighs less than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
pounds, and has four (4) tires having a diameter of thirty inches (30") or
less, or
   B.   A utility type vehicle designed for and capable of travel over
designated roads that travels on four (4) or more low pressure tires of twenty
(20) psi or less, has a maximum width less than seventy four inches (74"), has
a maximum weight less than two thousand (2,000) pounds, has a wheelbase of one
hundred ten inches (110") or less, and satisfies at least one of the following:
1) has a minimum width of fifty inches (50"); 2) has a minimum weight of at
least nine hundred (900) pounds; or 3) has a wheelbase of over sixty one inches
(61"). (Ord. 903, 8-18-2014)
7-4-2: PROHIBITIONS ON OPERATING AN ORV/WATV IN THE CITY OF LONG BEACH:
   A.   Exemptions: This chapter shall not apply to the use of an ORV/WATV when
operated for emergency management, city property and Discovery Trail
maintenance, or law enforcement purposes. This chapter shall also not apply to
use of an ORV/WATV when operated as farming, construction, or logging
equipment, and such operation is exempt or eligible for rebate under Revised
Code Of Washington 82.38.
   B.   ORV Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for a person to operate any off
road vehicle (ORV) on any highway, nonhighway road or street, on or across the
Discovery Trail in the city of Long Beach, or on any land owned or controlled
by the city of Long Beach located within the city of Long Beach.
   C.   WATV Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
wheeled all-terrain vehicle (WATV) on any highway, nonhighway road or street,
on or across the Discovery Trail in the city of Long Beach, or on any land
owned or controlled by the city of Long Beach located within the city of Long
Beach.
   D.   Ocean Beach Prohibition: Under mutual aid agreements, the city of Long
Beach shall enforce existing laws and as they are amended regarding ORVs and
WATVs in the seashore conservation area. (Ord. 903, 8-18-2014)
7-4-3: PROTECTION OF THE DUNE FROM VEHICULAR DAMAGE:
   A.   Beach Access: It is unlawful for anyone to access the ocean beach by
any motorized vehicle via any other route than the city's two (2) beach
approaches at Bolstad Avenue and Sid Snyder Drive.
   B.   Dune Prohibition: It is unlawful to drive any motorized vehicle, other
than for short term (less than a day) property maintenance purposes, in any
nonpaved portion of area west of Ocean Beach Boulevard and east of the line of
vegetation. In addition, it is unlawful to operate any motor vehicle either
across or on the Discovery Trail. (Ord. 903, 8-18-2014)
7-4-4: PENALTIES:
Violation of any section of this chapter by any person shall be punishable by a
fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. The parent or
legal guardian of a minor who knowingly allows the minor to operate an ORV/WATV
in violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. (Ord. 903, 8-18-2014)
7-4-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Infraction Classification; Exceptions: Violations of this chapter shall
be classified as traffic infractions, except as otherwise provided. Traffic
infractions are noncriminal offenses.
   B.   Notice Of Infraction; Contents:
      1.   A notice of infraction represents a determination that an infraction
has been committed. The determination will be final unless contested as
provided in this chapter.
      2.   The form for the notice of infraction shall include the following:
         a.   A statement that the notice represents a determination that an
infraction has been committed by the person named in the notice and that the
determination shall be final unless contested as provided in this chapter.
         b.   A statement that an infraction is a noncriminal offense for which
imprisonment may not be imposed as a sanction.
         c.   A statement of the specific infraction for which the notice was
issued.
         d.   A statement of the monetary penalty established for the
particular infraction.
         e.   A statement of the options provided in this chapter for
responding to the notice and the procedures necessary to exercise these
options.
         f.   A statement that at any hearing to contest the determination, the
city has the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
infraction was committed; and that the person may subpoena witnesses including
the officer who issued the notice of infraction.
         g.   A statement that at any hearing requested for the purpose of
explaining mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of the
infraction, the person will be deemed to have committed the infraction and may
not subpoena witnesses.
         h.   A statement that the person must respond to the notice as
provided in this chapter within fifteen (15) days.
         i.   A statement, which the person shall sign, that the person
promises to respond to the notice of infraction in one of the ways provided in
this chapter.
         j.   A statement that failure to respond to a notice of infraction
will result in the imposition of the penalties prescribed above.
   C.   Response To Notice; Contesting Determination; Hearing:
      1.   Any person who receives a notice of infraction shall respond to such
notice as provided in this section within fifteen (15) days of the date of the
notice.
      2.   If the person determined to have committed the infraction does not
contest the determination, the person responds by completing the appropriate
portion of the notice of infraction and submitting it, either by mail or in
person, to the municipal court. A check or money order in the amount of the
penalty prescribed for the infraction must be submitted with the response. When
a response which does not contest the determination is received, an appropriate
order shall be entered in the court records.
      3.   If the person determined to have committed the infraction wishes to
contest the determination, the person shall respond by completing the portion
of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing and submitting it, either by
mail or in person, to the municipal court. The court shall notify the person in
writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing, and that date shall not be
sooner than seven (7) days from the date of the notice, except by agreement.
      4.   If the person determined to have committed the infraction does not
contest the determination but wishes to explain the mitigating circumstances
surrounding the infraction, the person shall respond by completing the portion
of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing for that purpose and
submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the municipal court. The court
shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing.
      5.   If any person issued a notice of infraction:
         a.   Fails to respond to the notice of infraction within fifteen (15)
days as required by this section; or
         b.   Fails to appear at a hearing requested pursuant to subsection C3
or C4 of this section, the court shall enter an appropriate order assessing the
monetary penalty prescribed for the infraction.
   D.   Hearings; Rules Of Procedure; Counsel:
      1.   Infractions under this chapter shall be heard and determined by the
municipal court.
      2.   Procedures in the municipal court for infractions under this chapter
shall conform generally to those followed for traffic infractions under Revised
Code Of Washington chapter 46.63. The infraction rules for courts of limited
jurisdiction (IRLJ) shall, to the extent they are not inconsistent with this
chapter, apply to cases under this chapter.
      3.   Any person subject to proceedings under this chapter may be
represented by counsel.
      4.   Any attorney representing the city may, but is not required to,
appear at any infraction proceedings under this chapter.
   E.   Contesting Determination; Appeal:
      1.   A hearing held for the purpose of contesting the determination that
an infraction has been committed shall be without a jury.
      2.   The court may consider the notice of infraction and any other
written report made under oath submitted by the officer who issued the notice
or whose written statement was the basis for the issuance of the notice in lieu
of the officer's personal appearance at the hearing. The person named in the
notice may subpoena witnesses, including the officer, and has the right to
present evidence and examine witnesses present in court.
      3.   The burden of proof is upon the city to establish the commission of
the infraction by a preponderance of the evidence.
      4.   After consideration of the evidence and argument, the court shall
determine whether the infraction was committed. Where it has not been
established that the infraction was committed, an order dismissing the notice
shall be entered in the court records. Where it has been established that the
infraction was committed, an appropriate order shall be entered in the court
records.
   F.   Explanation Of Mitigating Circumstances:
      1.   A hearing held for the purpose of allowing a person to explain
mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of an infraction shall be
an informal proceeding. The person may not subpoena witnesses. The
determination that an infraction has been committed may not be contested at a
hearing held for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances.
      2.   After the court has heard the explanation of the circumstances
surrounding the commission of the infraction, an appropriate order shall be
entered in the court records.
      3.   There may be no appeal from the court's determination or order.
(Ord. 903, 8-18-2014)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Datum Plane
8-1-2: Sidewalk Maintenance
8-1-3: Vehicle Washing
8-1-4: Complete Streets
8-1-1: DATUM PLANE:
   A.   Designated: The datum, base of grade or bench mark, in and for the
City, is fixed, determined and established as follows: An inch and one-fourth
(11/4) galvanized pipe, protected by concrete, with a suitable, and engraved
cap, situated on the southwest corner of Lot 1 of block 85, in Tinkers Second
South addition to the City, according to the recorded plat thereof, on file in
the office of the auditor of Pacific County, Washington. (1988 Code §
12.04.010)
   B.   Elevation Established: The elevation of the datum, base of grade or
bench mark is fixed, determined and established at ninety nine (99). (1988 Code
§ 12.04.020)
8-1-2: SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Notice Requirements:
      1.   Notice To Abutting Owner: Whenever, in the judgment of the Street
Committee, the condition of any sidewalk, including curb, or any portion
thereof, in the City, is such as to render the same unfit or unsafe for
purposes of public travel, or require clearing, cleaning, repair or renewal,
the committee is authorized, empowered and directed to serve upon the owner of
the property immediately abutting upon the sidewalk, including curb, a notice
advising such owner of the condition thereof and instructing the owner to
clear, clean, repair or renew the same. (1988 Code § 12.12.010)
      2.   Contents Of Notice: The notice provided in this section shall
specify a reasonable time, to be stated therein, within which such clearing,
cleaning, repair or renewal shall be done, and shall state that in case the
owner shall fail to do such clearing or cleaning or to make such repairs or
renewal within the time therein specified, the Street Committee will clear or
clean the sidewalk or make such repairs or renewal forthwith, and will report
to the City Council at its next regular meeting, or as soon thereafter as
possible, the date to be definitely stated, an assessment roll showing the lot
or parcel of land immediately abutting on that portion of the sidewalk,
including curb, so improved, the cost of such improvement or repair, and the
name of the owner, if known, and that the Council will hear any or all protests
against the proposed assessment. (1988 Code § 12.12.020)
      3.   Service Of Notice: The notice provided for in this section shall be
served by delivering the same in person to the owner of the property or his
authorized agent; or if the owner is a nonresident, by mailing a copy of the
notice to his last known address; or, if the address is unknown, such notice
shall be mailed in the United States Post Office, addressed to such owner in
care of general delivery. (1988 Code § 12.12.030)
   B.   Failure To Make Repair; Cost Assessment: In case any property owner
fails or neglects to clear, clean, repair, or renew the sidewalk, including
curb, or any portion thereof, in accordance with the requirements of the notice
provided for in this section, the Street Committee shall cause such sidewalk to
be cleared, cleaned, repaired or renewed, and thereupon shall report to the
City Council an assessment roll showing the lot or parcel of the land
immediately abutting upon the portion of the sidewalk, including curb, so
improved; the cost of such improvement or repair; and the name of the owner, if
known. (1988 Code § 12.12.040)
   C.   Hearing On Assessment Roll: At the time designated in the notice
provided for in this section, or the time to which the hearing upon the roll
may be adjourned, the City Council, by ordinance, shall modify or confirm such
assessment roll and shall assess the cost of such improvement against such
abutting property in accordance with the benefits derived therefrom, which
assessment shall become a lien upon the property and shall be collected in the
manner provided by law or ordinance for the collection of local improvement
assessments. (1988 Code § 12.12.050)
8-1-3: VEHICLE WASHING:
   A.   Prohibited On Pacific Avenue: It is unlawful for any person,
association or corporation to use Pacific Avenue in the City for the purpose of
washing cars, buses or any other vehicle. (1988 Code § 10.20.010)
   B.   Violation; Penalty: In the event any person, corporation or association
shall be convicted of a violation of this section, such person, corporation or
association shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1988 Code § 10.20.020; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-4: COMPLETE STREETS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote pedestrian, bicycle,
and public transportation travel to reduce negative environmental impacts,
promote healthy living, advance the well- being of travelers, support the goal
of compact development, and meet the needs of the diverse populations that
comprise our community. It is intended to help achieve the goals and objectives
of the City of Long Beach (City) as a community in which all residents and
visitors, regardless of their age, ability, or financial resources, can safely
and efficiently use the public right-of-way to meet their transportation needs
regardless of their preferred mode of travel.
The City will plan for, design, construct, operate, and maintain an appropriate
and integrated transportation system that plans for the needs of all users in
new roadway construction, retrofit, or reconstruction projects. The system's
design will be consistent with sound engineering principles and supportive of
local neighborhoods, recognizing that transportation needs vary and must be
balanced in a flexible, safe, and cost-effective manner.
   B.   Complete Streets Definition: A "complete street" is a road that is
designed to provide safe access to all users, including bicyclists, motorists,
public transit vehicles and users, school buses, emergency responders,
wheelchair users, and pedestrians of all ages and abilities. The complete
streets concept focuses not just on individual roads but on changing the
decision-making process so that all users are routinely considered during the
planning, designing, building and operating of all roadways. Transportation
facilities that support the concept of complete streets include, but are not
limited to, pavement markings and signs; street and sidewalk lighting; sidewalk
and pedestrian safety improvements; Americans With Disabilities Act and title
VI compliance; transit accommodations; bicycle accommodations including
appropriate signage and markings, and as appropriate streetscapes that appeal
to and promote pedestrian use.
   C.   Projects: Those involved in the planning and design of projects within
the public right-of-way will consider all users and modes of travel from the
start of planning and design work. Transportation improvements shall be viewed
as opportunities to create safer, more accessible streets for all users. This
shall apply to new construction, reconstruction, and rehabilitation.
   D.   Exceptions: Exceptions to this policy may be determined by the City
Administrator under the circumstances listed below:
      1.   Street projects may exclude those elements of this policy that would
require the accommodation of street uses prohibited by law;
      2.   Ordinary and routine maintenance of the transportation network
designed to keep assets in serviceable condition that does not change the
roadway geometry or operations, such as mowing, snowplowing, sweeping, spot
repair, joint or crack sealing, or pothole filling do not require that elements
of this policy be applied beyond the scope of that maintenance activity;
      3.   Repairs made pursuant to pavement opening and restoration allowed by
approval of the City Administrator or City Engineer;
      4.   Ordinary maintenance paving projects should include evaluation of
the condition of existing facilities supporting alternate transportation modes
as well as modifying existing pavement markings and signage that supports such
alternative modes as appropriate;
      5.   Street reconstruction projects and maintenance paving projects which
involve widening pavement may exclude elements of this policy when the
accommodation of a specific use is expected to:
         a.   Require more space than is physically available; or
         b.   Be located where both current and future need is proven absent;
or
         c.   Incur cost that would be disproportionate to the current or
probable future need; or
         d.   Have adverse impacts on environmental resources such as streams,
wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes or other critical areas; or
         e.   Have significant adverse impacts on neighboring land uses or on
historic structures or sites above and beyond the impacts of currently existing
infrastructure, including impacts from right- of-way acquisition; or
         f.   Be unnecessary or inappropriate because it would be contrary to
public safety.
         g.   Street projects may exclude the development of sidewalks in areas
falling outside those identified as appropriate for sidewalks based on an
adopted sidewalk policy.
   E.   Intergovernmental Consideration: The City will foster partnerships and
cooperation with other transportation agencies including the Washington State
Department of Transportation and Pacific County to ensure the principles and
practices of complete streets are embedded within their planning, design,
construction, and maintenance activities. The City will specifically cooperate
to ensure the transportation network flows seamlessly between jurisdictions in
accordance with local and regional road, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian
plans.
   F.   Design Criteria: The City shall maintain design criteria, standards and
guidelines based upon recognized best practices in street design, construction
and operation as identified in section
11-5-1 of this Code. To the greatest extent possible, the City shall adopt
standards with emphasis on pedestrian and bicycle markings and wayfinding
signage (as permitted through this Code). Resources to be referenced in
developing these standards shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
the latest editions of: American Association of State Highway Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) Policy On Geometric Design of Highways and Streets,
Washington State Department of Transportation Design Manual, and the Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   G.   Community Context: Implementation of this section shall consider the
goal of enhancing the context and character of the surrounding built and
natural environments.
   H.   Network: Appropriate attention should be given to projects which
enhance the overall transportation system and its connectivity for access to
parks or recreation areas, schools, shopping/commercial areas, public
transportation, employment centers, existing pedestrian or bicycle networks, or
regional bicycle pedestrian plans prepared by other associated groups such as
the Washington State Department of Transportation and Pacific County.
   I.   Performance Measures: The City Administrator or his/her designee shall
report to the City Council on an annual basis on the transportation projects
undertaken within the prior year and planned within the coming six-year period
and the extent to which each of these projects has met the objectives of this
policy.
   J.   Implementation Of Complete Streets Principles: The City will
incorporate complete streets principles into the City's comprehensive plan,
public works standards, Parks and Recreation and Open Space Plan, and other
plans, manuals, rules, regulations and programs as appropriate. Implementation
may also be done through developing transportation network plans on a regional
basis within the City and in conjunction with regional plans. These plans shall
specify the type and location of improvements and shall be implemented as
funding becomes available. Special emphasis shall be placed on those elements
of these plans that can be accomplished with little or no additional expense,
such as providing bike lanes where existing pavement is adequate or where road
shoulders are sufficient to allow for safe bicycle use. (Ord. 957, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Short Title
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: Permit Requirements; Fee
8-2-4: Surety Bond
8-2-5: Insurance
8-2-6: Routing Traffic
8-2-7: Clearance For Fire Equipment
8-2-8: Protection Of Traffic
8-2-9: Removal And Protection Of Utilities
8-2-10: Protection Of Adjoining Property
8-2-11: Sidewalk Excavations
8-2-12: Excavation Site, Protective Measures
8-2-13: Attractive Nuisance
8-2-14: Care Of Excavated Material
8-2-15: Damage To Existing Improvements
8-2-16: Property Lines And Easements
8-2-17: Cleanup Of Rubbish, Debris
8-2-18: Protection Of Watercourses
8-2-19: Breaking Through Pavement
8-2-20: Tunnels
8-2-21: Backfilling; Surface Restoration
8-2-22: Trenches In Pipe Laying
8-2-23: Prompt Completion Of Work
8-2-24: Urgent, Emergency Action
8-2-25: Noise, Dust And Debris
8-2-26: Preservation Of Monuments
8-2-27: Inspections
8-2-28: Maintain Drawings
8-2-29: Exception, City Work
8-2-30: Nonliability Of City
8-2-31: Violation; Penalty
8-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the STREET EXCAVATION ORDINANCE
OF THE CITY OF LONG BEACH. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
APPLICANT: Any person making written application to the city for an excavation
permit hereunder.
CITY: The city of Long Beach.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator of the city of Long Beach.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Long Beach.
EXCAVATION WORK: The excavation and other work permitted under an excavation
permit and required to be performed under this chapter.
PERMITTEE: Any person who has been granted and has in full force and effect an
excavation permit issued hereunder.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
STREET: Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, easement made to the city
for public use, or other public way or public grounds in the city. (Ord. 751,
12-18-2000)
8-2-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEE:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break,
excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any street or to make or
cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street any earth
or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free
use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation
permit therefor from the city administrator or his designee as herein provided.
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application
for the issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the city administrator
or his designee.
      2.   The written application shall state the name and address of the
applicant, the nature, location and purpose of the excavation, the date of
commencement and date of completion of the excavation, and other data as may
reasonably be required by the city administrator or his designee.
      3.   The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the extent of
the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both the
existing ground prior to said excavation and of the proposed excavated
surfaces, the location of the excavation work, and such other information as
may be prescribed by the city administrator or his designee.
   C.   Permit Fee: A permit fee shall be charged by the city administrator or
his designee for the issuance of an excavation permit which shall be in
addition to all other fees for permits or charges relative to any proposed
construction work. The excavation permit fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
   D.   Excavation Placard: The city administrator or his designee shall
provide each permittee at the time a permit is issued hereunder a suitable
placard plainly written or printed in English letters at least one inch (1")
high with the following notice: "City of Long Beach Permit No.        Expires
         " and in the first blank space there shall be inserted the number of
said permit and after the word "expires" shall be stated the date when said
permit expires. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the
placard posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the excavation work. It
shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such placard at or about any
excavation not covered by such permit, or to misrepresent the number of the
permit or the date of expiration of the permit. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-4: SURETY BOND:
   A.   Bond Requirements: Before an excavation permit as herein provided is
issued, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk-treasurer a surety bond
in such reasonable amount as set by the city administrator or his designee
payable to the city. The required surety bond must be:
      1.   With good and sufficient surety;
      2.   By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state;
      3.   Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance;
      4.   Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this chapter to
fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its
original condition, and to the satisfaction of the city administrator or his
designee, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any
street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of twenty
four (24) months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear
expected, as it was in before said work shall have been done.
   B.   Settlement Of Surface: Any settlement of the surface within said two
(2) year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling
and/or paving by the permittee.
   C.   Repairs Made By City: Nothing herein contained shall be construed to
require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if
such repairs should prove defective.
   D.   Repair Of Sidewalk By Owner: Any owner of real estate repairing or
engaging another to repair his own sidewalk shall not be required to give such
bond.
   E.   Annual Bond: An annual bond may be given under this provision which
shall remain in force for one year conditioned as above, in the amount
specified above and in other respects as specified above but applicable as to
all excavation work in streets by the principal in such bond during the term of
one year from said date. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-5: INSURANCE:
   A.   Insurance Required: A permittee shall procure and maintain for the
duration of the agreement, insurance against claims for injuries to persons or
damage to property which may arise from or in connection with the performance
of the work hereunder by the permittee, their agents, representatives,
employees or subcontractors.
   B.   Evidence Of Insurance: The permittee shall provide a certificate of
insurance evidencing:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance written on an occurrence
basis with limits no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined
single limit per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate
for personal injury, bodily injury and property damage. Coverage shall include,
but not be limited to: blanket contractual; products/completed operations;
broad form property damage; explosion, collapse and underground (XCU) if
applicable; and employer's liability.
      2.   The city shall be named as an additional insured on the insurance
policy, as respects work performed by or on behalf of the permittee, and a copy
of the endorsement naming the city as additional insured shall be attached to
the certificate of insurance. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-6: ROUTING TRAFFIC:
   A.   Maintain Normal Traffic Conditions: The permittee shall take
appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation
work, traffic conditions as near normal as practicable shall be maintained at
all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants
of the abutting property and to the general public; provided, that the city
administrator or his designee may permit the closing of streets to all traffic
for a period of time prescribed by him if in his opinion it is necessary.
   B.   Routing Per Police Department Directions: The permittee shall route and
control traffic including its own vehicles as directed by the police
department.
   C.   Closing Street Or Restricting Traffic: The following steps shall be
taken before any street may be closed or restricted to traffic:
      1.   The permittee must receive the approval of the city administrator or
his designee and the police department therefor.
      2.   The permittee must notify the chief of the fire department of any
street so closed.
      3.   Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify the
city administrator or his designee and city police department before traffic is
moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made.
      4.   Where flag persons are deemed necessary by the city administrator or
his designee, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense.
Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In
instances in which this would not be feasible, the city administrator or his
designee will designate detours.
   D.   Detours; City Or Permitted Maintenance: The city shall maintain roadway
surfaces of existing streets designated as detours without expense to the
permittee, but in case there are no existing streets, the permittee shall
construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications
of the city administrator or his designee.
   E.   Permittee Responsible For Unnecessary Damage: The permittee will be
responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any streets by the operation
of its equipment. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-7: CLEARANCE FOR FIRE EQUIPMENT:
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere
with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall
not be placed within fifteen feet (15') of fireplugs. Passageways leading to
fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material
or other obstructions. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-8: PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC:
The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable timber barriers to confine
earth from trenches or other excavations in order to encroach upon streets as
little as possible. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and
safe crossings over excavations and across streets under improvement to
accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections.
Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers and
blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely. Decking
shall be not less than four inches (4") thick and shall be securely fastened
together with heavy wire and staples. Pedestrian crossings shall consist of
planking three inches (3") thick, twelve inches (12") wide and of adequate
length, together with necessary blocking. The walk shall be not less than three
feet (3') in width and shall be provided with a railing as required by the city
administrator or his designee. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-9: REMOVAL AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written
consent of the city administrator or his designee and the utility company or
person owning the utility. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to
accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the
permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly
borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person
owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or
otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in
any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to
support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. In
case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged,
they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of
such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and his or its bond shall be
liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any
public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer,
gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility and its bond shall be liable
therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of
all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. (Ord. 751, 12-
18-2000)
8-2-10: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY:
   A.   Duty Of Permittee: The permittee shall at all times and at its own
expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing
proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where,
in the protection of such property, it is necessary to enter upon private
property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the
permittee shall obtain a license from the owner of such private property for
such purpose and if permittee cannot obtain a license from such owner, the city
administrator or his designee may authorize permittee to enter the private
premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe.
   B.   Shore Up And Protect Buildings: The permittee shall, at its own expense
shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to
be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible
for all damage to public or private property or streets resulting from its
failure properly to protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be
necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be
carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as
required in this chapter.
   C.   Clean Lawn Area: All construction and maintenance work shall be done in
a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a
condition as near as possible to that which existed before such work began.
   D.   Removal Of Trees Or Shrubs: The permittee shall not remove even
temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements
across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent
of the property owner, or in the case of public property, the appropriate city
department or city official having control of such property. (Ord. 751, 12-18-
2000)
8-2-11: SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS:
Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a sidewalk shall be provided with
a substantial and adequate footbridge over said excavation on the line of the
sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet (3') wide and securely
railed on each side so that foot passengers can pass over safely at all times.
(Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-12: EXCAVATION SITE, PROTECTIVE MEASURES:
   A.   Fence, Barriers: The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or
barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to
persons using the city streets or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall
be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed.
   B.   Lights: At twilight there shall be placed upon such place of excavation
and upon any excavated materials or structures or other obstructions to streets
suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night
during the maintenance of such obstructions.
   C.   Removal Of Fences Or Other Barriers: It shall be unlawful for anyone to
remove or tear down the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any
lights provided for the protection of the public. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-13: ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE:
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain unguarded
at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment or other device
having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children
and be hazardous to their safety or health. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-14: CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL:
   A.   Piling Adjacent To Trench: All material excavated from trenches and
piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in
such a manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or
users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused
to those using streets and adjoining property.
   B.   Use Of Storage Site: Where the confines of the area being excavated are
too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such
as might be in the case of a narrow alley, the city administrator or his
designee shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the
excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at
the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure
the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required
storage and disposal. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-15: DAMAGE TO EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation
work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials and workmanship for such
repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable code or ordinance.
If upon being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and
materials for such repairs, the city administrator or his designee shall have
the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by
the city and the cost shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee
shall also be liable on its bond therefor. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-16: PROPERTY LINES AND EASEMENTS:
Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on the plan of
excavation submitted with the application for the excavation permit, and it
shall be the permittee's responsibility to confine excavation work within these
limits. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-17: CLEANUP OF RUBBISH, DEBRIS:
As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be
thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be
completed to the satisfaction of the city administrator or his designee. From
time to time as may be ordered by the city administrator or his designee and in
any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall at its
own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind
resulting from said work; and upon failure to do so within twenty four (24)
hours after having been notified to do so by the city administrator or his
designee, said work may be done by the city administrator or his designee and
at the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be
liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder. (Ord.
751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-18: PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSES:
   A.   The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or
drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the same in as
good condition as the permittee found them or shall make such provisions for
them as the city administrator or his designee may direct.
   B.   The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any street but shall use
all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface water.
   C.   The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water,
muck, silt, slicking or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from
sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting
from its failure to so provide. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-19: BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT:
Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for excavation
purposes and where trenches are to be four feet (4') or over in depth, the
pavement in the base shall be removed to at least six inches (6") beyond the
outer limits of the subgrade that is to be disturbed in order to prevent
settlement, and a six inch (6") shoulder of undisturbed material shall be
provided in each side of the excavated trench. The face of the remaining
pavement shall be approximately vertical. A power driven concrete saw shall be
used so as to permit complete breakage of concrete pavement or base without
ragged edges. Asphalt paving shall be scored or otherwise cut in a straight
line. No pile driver may be used in breaking up the pavement. (Ord. 751, 12-18-
2000)
8-2-20: TUNNELS:
Tunnels under pavements shall not be permitted except by permission of the city
administrator or his designee. Where pipes or cables are placed under main
thoroughfares, concrete streets, state highways, first grade asphalt streets,
or wherever designated by the city administrator or his designee, such work
shall be done by jacking or boring casings under street surfaces and placing
said pipes or cables inside of the casing. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-21: BACKFILLING; SURFACE RESTORATION:
   A.   Compacting:
      1.   Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an
excavation permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to
that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug. Compacting shall be
done by mechanical tappers or vibrators, by rolling in layers, or by water
settling, as required by the soil in question and sound engineering practices
generally recognized in the construction industry.
      2.   When water is taken from a hydrant, the permittee shall assign one
person to operate the hydrant and shall make certain that said person has been
instructed in the operation of the hydrant.
      3.   The city water department shall likewise be notified at both the
beginning and end of the job so that the condition of the fire hydrants can be
checked on both occasions. Any damage done to the hydrant during the excavation
shall be the responsibility of the permittee.
      4.   Water shall be paid for by the permittee on the terms agreed upon
with the city water department.
   B.   Water Settling:
      1.   When backfilling is to be done by water settling and before any
compacting of the trenches is attempted, the permittee shall cause the loose
material to be wetted by forcing a head of water of not less than thirty feet
(30') in height, down into the soft material so that the end of the pipe is not
more than three feet (3') above the bottom of the excavation. The permittee
shall allow the water to run until the material is saturated as indicated by
the water rising and running out on the surface of the ground around the pipe.
After each hole has been saturated, the jet pipe shall be moved along the
trench line a distance of approximately four (4) or five feet (5'), but in no
case more than eight feet (8'), and the process repeated for the entire length
of the backfill trench.
      2.   All work shall be done in such a manner as to obtain a relative
compaction throughout the entire depth of the backfill of not less than
existing adjacent to the excavation.
   C.   Dry Backfilling:
      1.   Backfilling up to the first eighteen inches (18") above the top of
the utility pipes or similar installations shall be done with thin layers. Each
layer is to be tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that are hand
tamped shall not exceed four inches (4") in thickness. Layers that are power
tamped shall not exceed six inches (6") in thickness. The same requirements
shall apply to the remainder of the backfilling if tamping is the method used
for backfilling. Backfilling of all pipes of over twenty four inches (24") in
diameter shall be carried up to the spring line of the pipe in three inch (3")
layers, with each layer moistened and thoroughly tamped with suitable
mechanical equipment. The backfill around all pipes twenty four inches (24") or
less in diameter shall be flooded or tamped as specified above to a depth of
eighteen inches (18") above the top of the pipe before any additional
backfilling is placed thereon.
      2.   Any deviation from the method set forth above shall have prior
written approval of the city administrator or his designee.
   D.   Backfill Material: Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is
made through rock, the pipe shall be laid six inches (6") above the rock bottom
of the trench and the space under, around and six inches (6") above the pipe
shall be backfilled with clean river sand, noncorrosive soil or one-fourth inch
(1/4") minus gravel. Broken pavement, large stones, and debris shall not be
used in the backfill.
   E.   Backfilling At Surface: Backfilling shall be completed by placing the
backfill material well up over the top of the trench. For dry backfilling, the
material shall be compacted with a roller of an approved type or with the rear
of a truck carrying at least five (5) tons until the surface is unyielding.
Care shall be taken that material being compacted has proper moisture content
for maximum compactibility. The surface shall then be graded as required.
   F.   Restoration Of Surface:
      1.   The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets, broken into
or damaged as a result of the excavation work, to its original condition in
accordance with the specifications of the city administrator or his designee.
The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made
in paved traffic lanes. Except when the pavement is to be replaced before the
opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above the bottom of the paving slab
shall be made with suitable material well tamped into place, and this fill
shall be topped with a minimum of at least one inch (1") of bituminous mixture
which is suitable to maintain the opening in good condition until permanent
restoration can be made. The crown of the temporary restoration shall not
exceed one inch (1") above the adjoining pavement. The permittee shall exercise
special care in making such temporary restorations and must maintain such
restorations in safe traveling condition until such time as permanent
restorations are made. The asphalt which is used shall be in accordance with
the specifications of the city administrator or his designee. If, in the
judgment of the city administrator or his designee, it is not expedient to
replace the pavement over any cut or excavation made in the street upon
completion of the work allowed under such permit by reason of the looseness of
the earth or weather conditions, the city administrator or his designee may
direct the permittee to lay a temporary pavement of wood or other suitable
material designated by him over such cut or excavation to remain until such
time as the repair of the original pavement may be properly made.
      2.   Permanent restoration of the street shall be made by the permittee
in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the city
administrator or his designee to restore the street to its original and proper
condition, or as near as may be.
      3.   Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the city
administrator or his designee shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim
against the permittee and its surety under the surety bond required hereunder
for incomplete or defective work if discovered within twenty four (24) months
from the completion of the excavation work. The city administrator's or his
designee's presence during the performance of any excavation work shall not
relieve the permittee of its responsibilities hereunder.
   G.   City's Right To Restore Surface; Permittee Liable For Costs:
      1.   If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the
street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time
fixed by such permit or failed to prosecute the work in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter or shall otherwise have failed to complete the
excavation work covered by such permit, the city administrator or his designee,
if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things
necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The
permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and twenty five percent
(25%) of such cost in addition for general overhead and administrative
expenses. The city shall have a cause of action for all fees, expenses and
amounts paid out and due it for such work, and the city shall also enforce its
rights under the permittee's surety bond provided pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the
site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the
excavation for two (2) years after restoring it to its original condition.
(Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-22: TRENCHES IN PIPE LAYING:
Except by special permission from the city administrator or his designee, no
trench shall be excavated more than two hundred fifty feet (250') in advance of
pipe laying nor left unfilled more than five hundred feet (500') where pipe has
been laid. The length of the trench that may be opened at any one time shall
not be greater than the length of pipe and the necessary accessories which are
available at the site ready to be put in place. Trenches shall be braced and
sheathed according to generally accepted safety standards for construction
work. No timber bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in
any trench. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-23: PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK:
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work
covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and
restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as
practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the
excavation permit therefor. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-24: URGENT, EMERGENCY ACTION:
   A.   Urgent Work: If in the city administrator or his designee's judgment,
traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the
public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency
work, the city administrator or his designee shall have full power to order, at
the time the permit is granted, that a crew of employees and adequate
facilities be employed by the permittee twenty four (24) hours a day to the end
that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.
   B.   Emergency Action: In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main,
conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in
such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety
of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit
or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit
hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy
the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and
safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility
shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next
succeeding day during which the city administrator or his designee's office is
open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first
obtaining an excavation permit hereunder. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-25: NOISE 1 , DUST AND DEBRIS:
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner
as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and
occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the
excavations work, noise, dust and unsightly debris, and between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. shall not use, except
with the express written permission of the city administrator or his designee
or in case of an emergency as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance or
equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose
of occupants of the neighboring property. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 5, chapter 5 of this code.
8-2-26: PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS:
The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found on the line
of excavation work until ordered to do so by the city administrator or his
designee. All street monuments, property corners, bench marks and other
monuments disturbed during the progress of the work shall be replaced by the
city administrator or his designee and the cost of the same shall be paid by
the permittee. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-27: INSPECTIONS:
The city administrator or his designee shall make such inspections as are
reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this chapter. When so made, the
permittee shall pay for such inspections at the city's cost. The city
administrator or his designee shall have the authority to promulgate and cause
to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to
enforce and carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-28: MAINTAIN DRAWINGS:
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans, and
profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures
including abandoned installations. Corrected maps shall be filed with the city
administrator or his designee within sixty (60) days after new installations,
changes or replacements are made. Such surety bond as required in section
8-2-4 of this chapter shall be maintained until as built drawings are submitted
to the city. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-29: EXCEPTION, CITY WORK:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any excavation work
under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city or
by any contractor of the city performing work for and on behalf of the city
necessitating openings or excavations in streets. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-30: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official
or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured
by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit is
issued hereunder; nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be
deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the approval of
any excavation work. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000)
8-2-31: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. (Ord. 751, 12-18-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SAND REMOVAL STANDARDS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Standards Designated; Permit Requirements
8-3-2: Violation; Penalty
8-3-1: STANDARDS DESIGNATED; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Tenth Street South Beach Approach, Use Restrictions; Permit:
      1.   Tenth Street South shall be the only designated beach approach that
private contractors will be allowed to haul sand over.
      2.   Contractors will only be able to use Tenth Street South beach
approach after securing the required one day permit from city hall.
      3.   The load limit on Tenth Street South is five (5) tons unless a
hauling permit has been issued. (1988 Code § 12.16.010)
   B.   Fee Schedule: The following fees are hereby established for removing
and hauling sand in the city; said fees will be placed into the street fund:
      Two-day permit, unlimited amount for seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
   C.   Permit Conditions And Requirements:
      1.   Contractors will display the one day permit in the lower left hand
corner of the truck windshield.
      2.   Permits may be issued up to one week prior to the scheduled hauling
date, but the city reserves the right to stay the permit if certain
circumstances arise, i.e.: freezing weather, tourist crowds, etc.
      3.   Contractors may be denied the one day hauling permit based on past
performance, such as not cleaning up spills, leaving large holes at the
excavation site, etc.
   D.   Time Of Hauling Restricted: Contractors shall not commence any hauling
activity or move any equipment over Tenth Street South beach approach prior to
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., nor after four o'clock (4:00) P.M. Furthermore,
hauling shall be prohibited on Fridays, weekends, holidays or any other day
that is determined to be inappropriate for any reason.
   E.   Compliance With Statute: Any sand removed shall be done so in
compliance with the shoreline management act 1  and the related Washington
administrative codes.
   F.   Liability For Cleanup And Repair Of Streets: Contractors are held
liable for the cleanup and repair to any improved streets as a result of load
spills or structural damage associated with hauling activity.
   G.   Size Of Load: The highest point of any load shall be kept six inches
(6") below the sideboards of all trucks.
   H.   Application Of Provisions: These regulations do not limit sand removal
activity to the beach approaches only, but do apply to all sand removal
activity within the city limits.
   I.   Exemptions: Basic service vehicles such as refuse collection trucks,
gas delivery trucks, etc., as well as governmental and emergency vehicles,
shall be declared exempt from these regulations. (1988 Code § 12.16.010)
   J.   Disposition Of Revenue: Revenue generated from sand hauling activity
shall be deposited in the street fund. (1988 Code § 12.16.010; amd. 2007 Code;
Ord. 967, 5-6-2019; Ord. 970, 7-1-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 90.58.
8-3-2: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1988 Code § 12.16.020; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
CITY PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Unlawful Intent
8-4-3: Violation; Penalties; Procedure
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CITY PARK COMMISSIONER: That city council member designated by the city council
to be manager of the city parks.
DANGEROUS WEAPONS: The definition of "dangerous weapons" contained in Revised
Code of Washington 9.41.280 is hereby adopted.
FIELD: The definition of "field" shall mean Culbertson field/park.
FOUL, OBSCENE OR OFFENSIVE WORDS: The terms "foul", "obscene", or "offensive
words" mean the following: shit, fuck, fucker, cunt, bitch, son of a bitch,
mother fucker, bastard, whore, asshole, prick, cocksucker, faggot, nigger,
spic, camel jockey, or any other racial slur.
HARASS: The definition of "harass" contained in Revised Code of Washington
chapter 10.14 is hereby adopted.
THREAT OR THREATEN: The definition of "threat" or "threaten" contained in
Revised Code of Washington 9A.04.110(25) is hereby adopted. (Ord. 775, 9-15-
2003)
8-4-2: UNLAWFUL INTENT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in fighting in Culbertson
field.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to threaten or harass any person in
Culbertson field.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to use foul, obscene, offensive, or
fighting words within Culbertson park.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to smoke within one hundred feet (100')
of the skateboard park.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person to possess any knife or dangerous weapon
within Culbertson park. This subsection does not apply to city employees or law
enforcement officers.
   F.   It is unlawful to be in Culbertson park after dusk. (Ord. 775, 9-15-
2003; amd. Ord. 776, 11-3-2003)
8-4-3: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Exclusion From Field: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punished as follows:
      1.   For a first offense, the person shall be excluded from the field for
three (3) days.
      2.   For a second offense, the person shall be excluded from the field
for seven (7) days.
      3.   For a third or subsequent offense, the person shall be excluded from
the field for thirty (30) days.
   B.   Procedure:
      1.   Notice: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
notified in writing of the violation and the penalty therefor by a police
officer.
      2.   Detain Violator: An officer having probable cause to believe a
violation of this chapter has occurred may detain a person long enough to write
and deliver the notification required herein. (Ord. 775, 9-15-2003)
      3.   Right To Hearing: Any person notified of a violation may appeal the
penalty to the city administrator and shall be entitled to a hearing before
said administrator within twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 775, 9-15-2003; amd.
2007 Code)
   C.   Criminal Action: Any person failing to abide by an order of exclusion
may be prosecuted for criminal trespass. (Ord. 775, 9-15-2003)
CHAPTER 5
LONG BEACH DOG PARK
SECTION:
8-5-1: Unlawful Intent
8-5-2: Definitions
8-5-3: Penalty
8-5-4: Procedure
8-5-5: Criminal Action
8-5-1: UNLAWFUL INTENT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or dog to engage in fighting in the dog
park.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to threaten or harass any person or dog
in the dog park.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to use foul, obscene, offensive, or
fighting words within the dog park.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to smoke within the dog park.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person to possess any knife or dangerous weapon
within the dog park. This subsection does not apply to City Employees or Law
Enforcement Officers.
   F.   It is unlawful to be in the dog park after dusk or before dawn.
   G.   It is unlawful for dogs to be unleashed while entering or exiting the
dog park.
   H.   It is unlawful for any person to not immediately clean their dog's
waste.
   I.   It is unlawful for any person to not remove aggressive, sick, or dogs
in heat from the dog park. (Ord. 1043, 4-21-2025)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
DANGEROUS WEAPONS: The Definition of Dangerous Weapons contained in RCW
9.41.280 is hereby adopted.
FOUL, OBSCENE OR OFFENSIVE WORDS: The term Foul, Obscene, or Offensive Words
contained in City Code 8-4-1: Definitions.
HARASS: The Definition of Harass contained in RCW 10:14 is hereby adopted.
THREAT: The Definition of Threat or Threaten contained in RCW 9A.04.110 (25) is
hereby adopted. (Ord. 1043, 4-21-2025)
8-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as
follows:
For a first offense the person shall be excluded from the dog park for three
(3) days.
For a second offense the person shall be excluded from the dog park for seven
(7) days.
For a third or subsequent offense the person shall be excluded from the dog
park for thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1043, 4-21-2025)
8-5-4: PROCEDURE:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be notified in writing
of the violation and the penalty therefore by a Long Beach Police Officer.
An officer having probable cause to believe a violation of this chapter has
occurred may detain a person long enough to write and deliver the notification
required herein.
Any person notified of a violation may appeal the penalty to the City
Administrator and shall be entitled to a hearing before said administrator
within twenty-four (24) hours. (Ord. 1043, 4-21-2025)
8-5-5: CRIMINAL ACTION:
Any person failing to abide by an Order of Exclusion may be prosecuted for
Criminal Trespass. (Ord. 1043, 4-21-2025)
TITLE 9
UTILITIES; WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definition
9-1-2: Creation Of Utility
9-1-3: Administrator Of Utility
9-1-4: Storm Water Management Utility Fund
9-1-5: Authority To Establish Rates And Charges
9-1-6: Limitation Of Liability
9-1-1: DEFINITION:
The "utility" shall mean the city of Long Beach, Washington, storm water
management utility, a utility which operates and maintains the storm or surface
water drains, channels and facilities, outfalls for storm drainage and the
rights and interests in property relating to the system. (Ord. 644, 4-19-1993)
9-1-2: CREATION OF UTILITY:
   A.   Utility Created: There is hereby created and established a storm and
surface water utility which shall be known as the "City Of Long Beach,
Washington, Storm Water Management Utility" (the "utility"), for the purposes
set forth in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Purposes: The city shall exercise, through the utility where possible,
all the lawful powers necessary and appropriate to the construction,
condemnation and purchase, acquisition, addition to, maintenance, conduct and
operation, management, regulation and control of the storm and surface water
within the boundaries of the city, as necessary to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the citizens of the city; including, without limitation, all the
lawful powers to fix, alter, regulate and control the rates, charges and
conditions for the use thereof; to purchase and condemn property on behalf of
the utility; to regulate actions taken with respect to public and private
property which affect the flow of storm and surface water and the use of
drainage facilities; and to adopt, alter, and amend a plan adopted as necessary
to implement the policies of the city pertaining to storm and surface water
drainage.
   C.   Exclusion, Protection Against Water Drainage: It is not the purpose of
this chapter to create a duty of the city or its utility to ensure or protect
individual persons or property against water drainage. (Ord. 644, 4-19-1993)
9-1-3: ADMINISTRATOR OF UTILITY:
The city administrator or the official designated by the mayor shall be
administrator of the utility and shall report directly to the mayor. (Ord. 644,
4-19-1993)
9-1-4: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY FUND:
   A.   Utility Fund: There is hereby created a fund which shall be known as
the "storm water management utility fund". All revenues, assessments, and other
charges collected by the utility, or otherwise received for drainage purposes
or attributable to the operation and maintenance of the utility, and all loans
to or grants or funds received for its construction, improvement and operation,
shall be deposited in the storm water management utility fund. All
disbursements for costs of data collection, planning, designing, constructing,
acquiring, maintaining, operating, and improving the drainage utility
facilities, whether such facilities are natural, constructed or both, and
administering the utility shall be made from the storm water management utility
fund.
   B.   Other Funds: The city may create, at such time or times as it deems
appropriate, any other funds necessary to the administration of the storm water
management utility and may designate the revenues to be placed therein and the
purpose or purposes of such funds which may be the same as one, some or all of
the purposes designated in this section as the purposes of the storm water
management utility fund created herein, and such purposes shall then be
transferred to such newly created fund. (Ord. 644, 4-19-1993)
9-1-5: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Establish Rate Classifications, Charges: The city shall establish by
ordinance rate classifications, service charges, system development charges,
inspection, and permitting fees, application, and connection fees and such
other fees and charges necessary and sufficient in the opinion of the city
council to pay for the following:
      1.   The costs associated with the development and adoption of a storm
water management plan;
      2.   The costs, including debt service and related financing expenses,
for the construction and reconstruction of storm drainage facilities necessary
and required for the handling of storm and surface waters within the service
area, but not presently in existence;
      3.   The operation, repair, maintenance, improvement, replacement and
reconstruction of storm drainage facilities within the service area which
presently exist;
      4.   The purchase of a fee or lesser interest, including easements, in
land which may be necessary for the storm and surface water drainage system in
the service area including, but not limited to, land necessary for the
installation and construction of storm drainage facilities, and all other
facilities, including retention and detention facilities, which are reasonably
required for proper and adequate handling of storm waters within the service
area;
      5.   The costs of monitoring, inspection, enforcement and administration
of the utility including, but not limited to, water quality surveillance,
private maintenance inspection, construction inspection and other activities
which are reasonably required for the proper and adequate implementation of the
city's storm and surface water policies; and
      6.   The construction and subsequent maintenance of those future
facilities as required by the utility.
   B.   Disposition Of Fees And Charges: The fees and charges to be paid and
collected pursuant hereto shall not be used for general or other governmental
or proprietary purposes of the city, except to pay for the equitable share of
the costs of accounting, management and government thereof incurred on behalf
of the utility. (Ord. 644, 4-19-1993)
9-1-6: LIMITATION OF LIABILITY:
   A.   Intent: This chapter, any drainage code to be adopted by the city
council to implement this chapter, and any guidelines, rules, standards,
specifications, requirements, regulations and procedures established pursuant
to any section of such code are intended to provide the authority and processes
to achieve cost effective storm and surface water management in accordance with
reasonable standards for such management in the Long Beach area as necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and of the city.
   B.   Recommendations: Such reasonable standards shall be recommended by the
administrator and approved by the city council.
   C.   Nonliability Of City:
      1.   No city liability shall be inferred, implied, or interpreted by the
adoption and application of this chapter for damages to individual persons or
properties which result from existing conditions or which occur subsequent to
the effective date hereof.
      2.   There shall be no liability associated with the utility's approval
of any privately constructed portion of the storm and surface water system and/
or privately maintained portion of the storm and surface water system, unless
the city accepts the same as part of its publicly owned and/or maintained
system and is negligent in its administration of such a system. (Ord. 644, 4-
19-1993)
CHAPTER 2
HOOKUP CHARGES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Charges
9-2-2: Payment Due; Permit Required
9-2-3: Water Meter Installation
9-2-4: Aggrieved Persons, Right To Appeal
9-2-1: CHARGES:
   A.   Charge Imposed: There is hereby imposed by the city a water and/or
sewer hookup charge, which charge is applicable to all land served by the water
and/or sewer systems of the city.
   B.   Basic Charges: The basic charge for hookup is two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) each, for water or sewer, plus installation fees, with an
additional hookup charge of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per
unit for multi-unit residential developments. The unit or units chargeable in
addition to the basic charge are as set out in the chart attached to ordinance
779, on file in the office of the city clerk- treasurer, which by reference is
made a part of this chapter. The unit fee consists of one thousand two hundred
fifty dollars ($1,250.00) for water hookup and one thousand two hundred fifty
dollars ($1,250.00) for sewer hookup. The unit fee for water and sewer for
hotels/motels is eight hundred seventy five dollars ($875.00) for each
additional rentable unit. The installation fees are as set out in said chart
attached to ordinance 779. (Ord. 779, 12-1-2003, eff. 1-1-2004)
   C.   28th Street Lift Station: The total cost of the repair and upgrade to
the 28th Street lift station was one hundred forty thousand one hundred ninety
dollars forty cents ($140,190.40). The city had a deposit of eighty two
thousand dollars ($82,000.00) from the original developer. The total cost less
the cash on hand leaves a balance of fifty eight thousand one hundred ninety
dollars forty cents ($58,190.40) to be paid by the developers of said property.
      1.   This fee must be paid before any developer can hook up to the 28th
Street lift station.
      2.   This fee does not relieve the future developer of this site (parcel
number 10110433054; 74006005001; 74006010001) from other hookup fees covered in
subsections A and B of this section. (Ord. 858, 9-7-2010)
9-2-2: PAYMENT DUE; PERMIT REQUIRED:
The charge is immediately due and payable upon, and concurrently with, the
issuance of a valid building permit, or a valid permit for connection to the
water or sewer system of the city, whichever first occurs. The city
administrator shall collect the permit charges before permitting any connection
to the city water and/or sewer systems. (Ord. 779, 12-1-2003, eff. 1-1-2004;
amd. 2007 Code)
9-2-3: WATER METER INSTALLATION:
Each installation of a water meter shall constitute a basic hookup charge,
irrespective of how many meters are installed for a given building.
Furthermore, every commercial unit shall have an individual water meter and
sewer connection charge. Multi-unit commercial developments, except for
itinerant lodging establishments, shall not be served via a master meter.
Furthermore, when a commercial business and residential dwelling are located in
the same structure, each will be served by a separate water meter. (Ord. 779,
12-1-2003, eff. 1-1-2004)
9-2-4: AGGRIEVED PERSONS, RIGHT TO APPEAL:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any person who is aggrieved by any special use charges
by the city administrator may appeal such decisions to the city council. Such
appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days of notice to the person by the
city of such charge, which notice shall be sent to the applicant's address by
certified mail. (Ord. 779, 12-1-2003, eff. 1-1-2004; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Hearing Before Council: The hearing before the council shall be held
within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of appeal, and decision on such
appeal shall be made and the person notified by certified mail of such decision
within fifteen (15) days of the hearing.
   C.   Review Of Council Decision, Superior Court: Any review of the council's
decision shall be by writ of review before the Pacific County superior court,
with application for writ of review filed within thirty (30) days of notice
being mailed by certified mail to the applicant of the council's decision.
(Ord. 779, 12-1-2003, eff. 1-1-2004)
CHAPTER 3
USER RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Recitals And Findings
9-3-2: Water Rates And Charges
9-3-3: Storm And Surface Water Rates And Charges
9-3-4: Sewer Rates And Charges
9-3-5: Miscellaneous Fees
9-3-6: Aggregate Of Rates
9-3-7: Low Income Senior Citizen Discount Rate
9-3-8: Payment Plan Options
9-3-9: Water And Sewer Connection Charges
9-3-1: RECITALS AND FINDINGS:
   A.   The City of Long Beach ("City") owns and operates a Waterworks Utility,
including a water system, sewer system, and storm and surface water system
("Utility"), including both local and regional facilities.
   B.   The City has financed the acquisition and improvement of local and
regional utility facilities with the proceeds of its revenue bonds.
   C.   The facilities and services provided by the utility are critical to the
health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the City and the neighboring
community served by the utility.
   D.   Rate adjustments are necessary from time to time to ensure that
sufficient revenues exist to properly maintain and efficiently operate the
utility and make additions and planned improvements as appropriate. (Ord. 933,
12-5-2016; amd. Ord. 965, 12-3-2018; Ord. 977, 12-2-2019; Ord. 1002, 12-6-2021;
Ord. 1011, 12-5-2022; Ord. 1029, 12-4-2023; Ord. 1038, 12-2-2024)
9-3-2: WATER RATES AND CHARGES:
Water Rates For Lots Connected To The Water System: The rates and charges for
water service to lots connected to the water system within the corporate limits
of the city are fixed and established as follows:
A.   The minimum monthly rate charge is based on meter size per the following
schedules:
Meter Size 2022 2023 2024 2025
Meter Size             2022    2023    2024   2025
Inside City limits:                          
 Residential:                               
  3/4 inch - 1 inch  $ 39.23 $ 40.80 $42.84 $46.27
 Commercial:
  3/4 inch - 1 inch  46.66   48.53   50.96  55.03
  1.5 inch           55.51   57.73   60.62  65.47
  2 inch             80.17   83.38   87.55  94.55
  3 inch             108.93  113.28  118.95 128.46
Outside City limits:
 Residential:
   3/4 inch - 1 inch58.87   61.22   64.28  69.43
 Commercial:
  3/4 inch - 1 inch  69.99   72.79   76.43  82.54
  1.5 inch           83.21   86.54   90.87  98.13
  2 inch             120.25  125.06  131.32 141.82
  3 inch             163.40  169.94  178.43 192.71
 
   B.   Commodity Charge: The monthly commodity charge (or excess rate) is
charged per the following schedule regardless of water meter size:
      Adopted December 2, 2024, and effective on the first day of January for
each and every succeeding year on and after 2025, shall be subject to a
commodity charge for each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water in excess of
the four hundred (400) cubic foot minimum allowed per month thereof, as
follows:
  2022 2023 2024 2025
                               2022  2023  2024  2025
Inside City limits:                            
 Subservice charge            $4.12 $4.29 $4.50 $4.86
 Nursing home per bed         1.57  1.63  1.71  1.85
 Commodity per 100 cubic feet 7.01  7.29  7.66  8.27
Outside City limits:
 Subservice charge            6.17  6.41  6.73  7.27
 Nursing home per bed         2.34  2.43  2.55  2.76
 Commodity per 100 cubic feet 7.01  7.29  7.66  8.27
 
   C.   Contracts Authorized: The city council may enter into contracts with
water users deviating from such rates where special circumstances dictate;
provided, that such rates shall not be discriminatory. (Ord. 949, 1-2-2018;
amd. Ord. 965, 12-3-2018; Ord. 977, 12-2-2019; Ord. 987, 12-7-2020; Ord. 1002,
12-6-2021; Ord. 1011, 12-5-2022; Ord. 1029, 12-4-2023; Ord. 1038, 12-2-2024)
9-3-3: STORM AND SURFACE WATER RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   The rates and charges set forth in this chapter shall be considered
uniform rates and charges for the following uniform rates per class of
customers or service furnished by the system:
      1.   Adopted December 2, 2024, and thereafter effective on the first day
of January for each and every succeeding year the rates shall be as follows:
 
                     2020   2021   2022   2023   2024   2025
Residential          $14.36 $14.36 $14.65 $14.65 $14.80 $14.94
Commercial (per ERU) 14.36  14.36  14.65  14.65  14.80  14.94
 
   The ERU is a Residential Equivalent Unit equal to 3,600 square feet. The
City Administrator or his designee shall determine the quantity of the storm
and surface water drainage from lots that are dedicated to a substantially
undeveloped state by virtue of being public parks, recreational area, other
undeveloped publicly owned land, or open space designated under RCW Chapter
84.34.
   B.   For purposes of computing storm and surface water rates under this
section, the land use designation as residential or commercial shall be the
principal activity on the premises as determined by the City Administrator or
his designee. For rate purposes, developed and undeveloped residential lots
shall be deemed a single class. Developed lots are those for which any city or
county permit or application for real estate improvement activity (including,
but not limited to driveway, septic, building and electrical improvements and
water meter installation) has been issued, should have been issued or would now
be required if the development occurred under present city regulations. (Ord.
949, 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 965, 12-3-2018; Ord. 977, 12-2-2019; Ord. 987, 12-7-
2020; Ord. 1002, 12-6-2021; Ord. 1011, 12-5-2022; Ord. 1028, 12-4-2023; Ord.
1038, 12-2-2024)
9-3-4: SEWER RATES AND CHARGES:
Sewer Rates For Connected Lots: The rates and charges for sewer service to lots
are fixed and established as follows:
   A.   Rates: Adopted December 2, 2024, and effective the first day of January
for each and every succeeding year the rates shall be as follows:
Sewer Type 2023 2024 2025
Sewer Type                                                 2023   2024   2025
Single family residence                                    $78.94 $82.88 $91.17
Apartments, per unit                                       78.94  82.88  91.17
Motels, base charge                                        105.29 110.56 121.61
Motels, each additional rental                             17.83  18.72  20.59
Condominiums, each rental                                  78.94  82.88  91.17
Mobile home parks, each rental space                       78.60  85.53  90.78
Trailer parks, base charge                                 105.43 110.70 121.77
Trailer parks, each hookup                                 13.15  13.80  15.18
Laundromats, self-service and dry cleaning                 361.22 379.28 417.21
Industrial laundry                                         657.56 690.44 759.49
Car washing facilities                                     361.22 379.28 417.21
Canner operations                                          361.22 379.28 417.21
Restaurants, taverns (first 20 person capacity)            150.70 158.23 174.06
Restaurants, taverns (each additional 5 person capacity)   11.52  12.10  13.31
Schools - summer rate                                      197.20 207.06 227.77
Schools - September - May (each occupant)                  5.58   5.86   6.45
Nursing homes, convalescent center base charge             92.17  96.78  106.45
Nursing homes, convalescent center each patient bed        17.83  18.72  20.59
available
Service station                                            105.29 110.56 121.61
Churches, Municipal parks and buildings                    118.45 124.37 136.81
Theaters, large stores, banks, medical and dental clinics, 120.81 126.85 139.53
mortuaries and beauty shops
Fraternal halls, per floor                                 171.06 179.61 197.58
Business offices, small stores and optometrist             85.82  90.11  99.12
State parks restroom facilities                            255.28 268.04 294.85
 
   B.   Sewer Rates Standards And Policies: The City Council may enter into
contracts with sewer users deviating from the rates in this Section where
special circumstances dictate; provided, that such rates shall not be
discriminatory.
   C.   Disputes: All questions or disputes regarding the appropriate rate to
be applied to the structure shall be resolved by the City Administrator. Any
appeal from the decision of the City Administrator shall be to the city hearing
examiner.
   D.   Outside City, Surcharge: All sewer connections located outside the
corporate limits of the City shall pay an additional fifty percent (50%)
surcharge on the total amount billed for sewer service.
   E.   Temporary Reductions For Remodels: Temporary reductions in the sewer
charges may be allowed. During the permitted remodel, the sewer charges will be
prorated to twenty five percent (25%) of normal, for a period not to exceed
four (4) months. If the remodel is completed and approved by the building
inspector before the four (4) months have passed, the bill will return to
normal. Multiple-tenant buildings subject to this subsection will only be
reduced for the units affected by the remodel. This temporary reduction will be
approved provided the customer meets all of the following requirements:
      1.   The remodel of the structure is substantial enough to require a
building permit.
      2.   The remodel requires the structure to discontinue providing the
building’s primary permitted use during the remodel. (Ord. 770, 12-16-2002;
amd. Ord. 880, 5-21-2012; ord. 949, 1-2-2018; Ord. 965, 12-3-2018; Ord. 977,
12-2-2019; Ord. 987, 12-7-2020; Ord. 1002, 12-6-2021; Ord. 1011, 12-5-2022;
Ord. 1029, 12-4-2023; Ord. 1038, 12-2-2024)
9-3-5: MISCELLANEOUS FEES:
   A.   Deposit: Water/sewer deposits for renters shall be seventy five dollars
($75.00) due before the renters move in.
   B.   Insufficient Fund Checks: Checks returned to the City because of
insufficient funds shall be charged an additional one dollar ($1.00) over the
NSF chargeback from the bank.
   C.   Account Transfers: Transfers of water/sewer accounts shall be charged
twenty dollars ($20.00).
   D.   Lien Filing Fee: Lien filing fee shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   E.   Lien Removal Fee: Lien removal fee shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   F.   Certified Letter Fee: Certified letter fee shall be twenty dollars
($20.00).
   G.   Duplicate Bill Fee: Duplicate bill fee shall be two dollars ($2.00).
   H.   Water Installation Fees:
      1.   Labor is figured at forty five dollars ($45.00) per hour.
      2.   Parts are sold at our cost.
      3.   Backhoe is figured at seventy five dollars ($75.00) per hour.
Hourly rate is figured as the time the labor and/or equipment is at the job
site, rounded to the nearest fifteen (15) minutes.
   I.   Compost Sales: Compost shall be sold for twenty five dollars ($25.00)
per yard. (Ord. 670, 12-19-1994; amd. Ord. 934, 3-20-2017; Ord. 989, 1-19-2021;
Ord. 993, 6-7-2021)
9-3-6: AGGREGATE OF RATES:
The City declares that the rates and charges fixed and placed in effect by this
chapter are founded on assumptions that there will be growth in the number of
services (connections) and in demand in the City and neighboring community. The
City adopts and establishes whatever aggregate monetary charges the rates and
charges, placed in effect by this chapter, generate when applied to the units
of service provided, now and in the future. (Ord. 949, 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 965,
12-3-2018; Ord. 977, 12-2-2019; Ord. 989, 1-19-2021; Ord. 1002, 12-6-2021; Ord.
1011, 12-5-2022; Ord. 1029, 12-4-2023; Ord. 1038, 12-2-2024)
9-3-7: LOW INCOME SENIOR CITIZEN DISCOUNT RATE:
The following will be low income senior citizen discount rate guidelines:
A.   The low income senior citizen discount will apply only to the base rate
for the billing.
B.   Current full-time residential or owner occupied commercial customers of
the City of Long Beach, Washington Utility System may apply for a discount
under the Utility Discount Program by filing an application attesting and
affirming to the following:
   1.   Utility service in under the occupant's (applicant's) name.
   2.   The applicant has been a full-time resident in the Long Beach Utility
Service area using utilities for not less than one (1) year.
   3.   Senior Citizen is Age sixty five (65) or older as of January 1, 2025.
   4.   Rates for applicants approved for the Senior Citizen Low Income Utility
Discount Program shall receive the following credit against the applicant's
utility bill for each calendar year.
 
Total Household Income Percentae of Credit Discount Amount Annual Total
$25,475 - $29,631      15%                 $22.86          $274.32
$15,796 - $25,474      30%                 $45.71          $548.52
$9,519 - $15,795       45%                 $68.57          $822.84
$9,518 and under       60%                 $91.43          $1,097.16
 
   Maximum allowable credit per year is $1,097.16.
   5.   Eligible residential customers are required to reapply for this program
on an annual basis.
   6.   The total income from all sources of everyone living in the home shall
be reported. If this is a new application, please provide a copy of your 2024
IRS Tax Return with schedules, along with supporting documentation. (Ord. 949,
1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 965, 12-3-2018; Ord. 977, 12-2-2019; Ord. 987, 12-7-2020;
Ord. 1002, 12-6-2021; Ord. 1011, 12-5-2022; Ord. 1029, 12-4-2023; Ord. 1038,
12-2-2024)
9-3-8: PAYMENT PLAN OPTIONS:
   A.   Customer may request a payment plan if reasonable hardship
circumstances exist that affect the customer’s ability to pay in a timely
manner. Examples of hardship may include the following: loss of employment due
to natural disaster or declared state of emergency. The City Administrator or
designee will use discretion in offering payment plans of up to twelve (12)
months on a case-by-case basis. Hardship claims do not guarantee continuation
of services.
   B.   Customers who have failed to comply with previous payment plans or who
have a history of excessive delinquencies and/or shut-offs may be denied the
payment plan request.
   C.   Once approved, the payments will be billed as a line item on the
monthly combined water/sewer/stormwater billing and due by the 15th of each
month along with the current bill.
   D.   Customer will be charged an interest fee at the rate of 1.5%
   E.   Failure to make timely payment for current service and monthly payment
plan amount according to the terms of an executed Payment Plan Agreement shall
be cause for termination of service according to the regular termination
procedures.
   F.   Customer agrees to pay the monies owed according to the terms of the
payment plan even if they move. (Ord. 984, 7-6-2020)
9-3-9: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES:
There is hereby imposed by the City of Long Beach a water and/or sewer
connection charge, which charge is applicable to all land served by the water
and/or sewer systems of the City.
 
Basic Connection Fees
Basic Charge for Water $5,500 per service
Basic Charge for Sewer $5,500 per service
 
 
Per Unit Fees
Multi-unit residential development $5,500 per unit
Unit fee for Water                 $2,750 per unit
Unit fee for Sewer                 $2,750 per unit
Unit fee for hotels/motels         $1,750 per unit ($875 for water, $875 for
                                   sewer)
Unit fee for food trucks           $2,750 per unit ($1,375 for water, $1,375
                                   for sewer)
 
The connection charges are immediately due and payable upon the acceptance of a
Utility Service Application by the City. City Hall staff shall collect the
connection charges before permitting any connection to the City’s water and/or
sewer systems. Water meter installation is performed by the Long Beach city
crew. Therefore, in addition to the connection charges there will an additional
bill issued to the customer for parts and labor incurred during the time of
installation.
Each installation of a water meter shall constitute a basic connection charge,
irrespective of how many meters are installed for a given building.
Furthermore, every commercial unit shall have an individual water meter and
sewer connection charge. Furthermore, when a commercial business and
residential dwelling are located in the same structure, each will be served by
a separate water meter.
*All unit fees are in addition to the basic fees. Each unit fee is outlined in
Attachment B to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 1028, 12-4-2023)
CHAPTER 4
COST BASED RECONNECTION CHARGE
SECTION:
9-4-1: Definitions
9-4-2: Reconnection
9-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
CURRENT RATES: The current rates of the utility system at the time of
reconnection.
CUSTOMER: The user of the water, sewer or storm water service. The "customer"
must be an owner of the property requesting service.
DISCONTINUED ASSESSMENT: The current rates multiplied by the discontinued
period.
DISCONTINUED PERIOD: The number of months the service has been disconnected,
not to exceed sixty (60) months.
EXISTING ACCOUNT: An account where the service has been discontinued for a
period less than five (5) years.
EXPIRED ACCOUNT: An account where the service has been discontinued for longer
than five (5) years.
NEW HOOKUP FEES: The current fees for new service for water, sewer and storm
water.
PAST DUE AMOUNT: The amount delinquent from an existing account.
REINSTALL COSTS: The actual costs to reinstall the water meter or two hundred
dollars ($200.00), whichever is greater.
REMOVAL COSTS: The actual costs to remove the water meter or two hundred
dollars ($200.00), whichever is greater. (Ord. 741, 1-18-2000)
9-4-2: RECONNECTION:
   A.   Existing Accounts: To reconnect an existing account, all of the
following must be met:
      1.   The past due amount must be paid in full.
      2.   The discontinued assessment must be paid in full.
      3.   The removal costs and reinstall costs must be paid in full.
      4.   The customer must have all services reconnected. Sewer reconnection
shall be done by the customer or a private contractor.
      5.   The account must be single-family residential.
   B.   Expired Accounts: To reconnect an expired account, all of the following
must be met:
      1.   The new hookup fee shall be paid in full.
      2.   The reinstall costs shall be paid in full.
      3.   The customer must have all services reconnected. Sewer reconnection
shall be done by the customer or a private contractor. (Ord. 741, 1-18-2000)
CHAPTER 5
CROSS CONNECTION
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: Purpose
9-5-3: Application And Responsibilities
9-5-4: Cross Connections Regulated
9-5-5: Backflow Prevention Assembly Requirements
9-5-6: Irrigation Systems
9-5-7: Fire Systems
9-5-8: Temporary Meters And Hydrant Valves
9-5-9: Mobile Units
9-5-10: Right Of Way Encroachment
9-5-11: Wholesale Customers
9-5-12: Plumbing Code
9-5-13: Testing And Repairs
9-5-14: Backflow Assembly Tester Responsibilities
9-5-15: Maintenance Of Assemblies
9-5-16: Installation Requirements And Specifications
9-5-17: Thermal Expansion
9-5-18: Retrofitting
9-5-19: Costs Of Compliance
9-5-20: Recovery Of Costs
9-5-21: Termination Of Service
9-5-22: Emergency Suspension Of Service
9-5-23: Nonemergency Suspension Of Service
9-5-24: Falsifying Information
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except where specifically designated herein, all words used in this chapter and
the city's guidance manual shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in
the present tense include the future and plural words include the singular. The
word "shall" is always mandatory, and the word "may" denotes a use of
discretion in making a decision. Any definition not found in this section will
take its meaning from the WAC (246-290), or as amended, or in the most recent
edition of the "Manual Of Cross Connection Control" published by the Foundation
for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern
California.
ADMINISTRATOR: City administrator or the city administrator's designee.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY OR BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY OR ASSEMBLY: An
assembly to counteract backpressures or prevent backsiphonage. This assembly
must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by the Washington state
department of health. The assembly must be purchased and installed as a
complete unit including two (2) shutoff valves and test cocks.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water source or system other than city of Long Beach's
water.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, gases or solids from any source
back into the distribution system. The flow of water in the opposite direction
of its intended flow.
BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY TESTER: A person holding a valid BAT certificate issued in
accordance with the Washington administrative code 246-290-490 and the Revised
Code of Washington 18.106, 18.27 and 70.119.
BACKPRESSURE: Backflow due to water pressure on the downstream side of the
meter which exceeds the operating pressure of the public potable water supply.
BACKSIPHONAGE: Backflow due to a negative or reduced pressure within the public
potable water supply.
CITY: City of Long Beach.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a public water supply system of
any substance which may be harmful to health and/or quality of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement where a public water system is
connected, directly or indirectly (actual or potential), with any other
nondrinkable water system or auxiliary system, wells, sewer, drain conduit,
swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers, or any other
device which contains, or may contain, contaminated or polluted water, sewage,
used water, or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable
of imparting contamination or pollution to the public water system as a result
of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections,
swivel or changeover devices, or other temporary or permanent devices through
which, or because of which, backflow may occur are considered to be cross
connections.
CROSS CONNECTION SPECIALIST OR SPECIALIST: A person holding a valid cross
connection specialist certificate issued in accordance with the Washington
administrative code.
DOH: Washington department of health.
DEGREE OF HAZARD: The low or high hazard classification that shall be attached
to all actual or potential cross connections.
GUIDANCE MANUAL: The most recent edition of the guidance manual written
specifically for the city.
HIGH HEALTH HAZARD: The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross
connection that could allow a substance of a physical, toxic, or biological
nature to backflow into the potable water supply. This substance could cause
illness or death.
IN PREMISES PROTECTION: A method of protecting the health of consumers served
by the customer's plumbing system (i.e., located within the property lines of
the customer's premises) by the installation of an approved air gap, backflow
prevention assembly or device at the point of hazard.
MOBILE UNIT: Units connecting to the water system through a hydrant, hose bibb,
or other appurtenance of a permanent nature that is part of the city water
system or a permanent water service to a premises. Examples can include, but
are not limited to, the following: water trucks, pesticide applicator vehicles,
chemical mixing units or tanks, waste or septage hauler trucks or units, sewer
cleaning equipment, carpet or steam cleaning equipment, rock quarry or asphalt/
concrete batch plants, or any other mobile equipment or vessel. Uses that are
excluded from this definition are recreational vehicles at assigned sites or
parked in accordance with other city ordinances pertaining to recreational
vehicles, and homeowner devices that are used by the property owner in
accordance with other provisions of this chapter, or other city of Long Beach
ordinances pertaining to provision of water service to a premises.
PNWS-AWWA: Pacific Northwest Section - American Water Works Association.
PERSON: A natural person (individual), corporation, company, city, partnership,
firm, limited liability company, joint venture company or city, and other such
entity.
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY: Any system of water supply intended or used for human
consumption or other domestic use and meets all requirements established by the
safe drinking water act and the DOH regulations.
PREMISES: Any piece of property to which water is provided including, but not
limited to, all improvements, mobile structures and structures located on it.
PREMISES ISOLATION: A method of protecting a public water system by
installation of an approved double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure
backflow assembly at the point of service (where the city loses control of the
water supply) to separate the customer's plumbing system from the purveyor's
distribution system.
RCW: Revised Code of Washington.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY OR REDUCED PRESSURE
PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY OR RP ASSEMBLY: An assembly containing two (2) independently
acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operated,
mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the
check valves. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and
tightly closing shutoff valves at each end of the assembly.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The point at which the city loses control of their potable
water.
THERMAL EXPANSION: The pressure created by the expansion of heated water.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by the city to a customer's property after it
has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of
the city.
WAC: The most recent edition of the Washington administrative code. (Ord. 819,
2-21-2007)
9-5-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the water system of the city of Long
Beach from contamination or pollution due to any existing or potential cross
connections as defined in WAC 246-290-010, or as amended and this chapter.
(Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-3: APPLICATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
This chapter applies throughout the city and to every premises and property
served by the city of Long Beach. It applies to any premises, public or
private, regardless of date of connection to the city water. Every owner,
occupant and/or person in control of any concerned premises is responsible for
compliance with the terms and provisions contained herein. The city
administrator shall appoint a specialist employed by or under contract with the
city to carry out or cause the requirements of this chapter to be carried out.
(Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-4: CROSS CONNECTIONS REGULATED:
   A.   No cross connections shall be created, installed, used or maintained
within the area served by the city, except in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   The specialist employed by or under contract with the city shall carry
out or cause evaluations to be carried out to determine if any actual or
potential cross connections exist. If found necessary, an assembly commensurate
with the degree of hazard will be required to be installed at the service
connection.
   C.   The owner, occupant or person in control of the property is responsible
for all cross connection control within the premises.
   D.   All high health hazard premises which are defined in table 9 of the WAC
section 246-290-490, or as amended, are required to have premises isolation by
installing a reduced pressure principle assembly in accordance with this
chapter.
   E.   It is the responsibility of the property owner/occupant to purchase,
install, test, repair, and maintain all backflow assemblies. (Ord. 819, 2-21-
2007)
9-5-5: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY REQUIREMENTS:
The specialist employed by or under contract with the city shall determine the
type of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the city.
All assemblies shall be installed at the service connection unless it is
determined by the administrator to be acceptable at an alternate location.
The cross connection shall be eliminated or an assembly shall be required to be
installed at the service connection in each of the following circumstances, but
the specialist is in no way limited to the following circumstances:
   A.   The nature and extent of any activity on the premises, or the materials
used in connection with any activity on the premises, or materials stored on
the premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply.
   B.   Premises having any one or more cross connections or potential cross
connections, as that term is defined in this chapter and the WAC.
   C.   When a cross connection survey report form is required by the city and
has not been received.
   D.   Internal cross connections are present that are not correctable.
   E.   Intricate plumbing arrangements exist or plumbing subject to frequent
changes are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross
connections exist.
   F.   There is a repeated history of cross connections being established or
reestablished.
   G.   There is unduly restricted entry so that evaluations for cross
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross
connections do not exist.
   H.   Materials, chemicals or any substance or apparatus is being used that
if backflow occurred contamination would result.
   I.   Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to
be necessary in the judgment of the specialist/administrator to accomplish the
purpose of this chapter.
   J.   Any premises having an auxiliary water supply.
   K.   In the event an in premises assembly has not been tested or repaired or
is not commensurate with the specialist's assessed degree of hazard as required
by the WAC 246-290-490, or as amended, and this chapter.
   L.   If it is determined that additions or rearrangements have been made to
the plumbing system without obtaining proper permits as required by the city's
building code enforcement division.
   M.   When a garden hose attachment is connected to the following, including,
but not limited to: fertilizer applicators, pesticide applicators, radiator
flush kits, and there is not appropriate in premises protection.
   N.   Wherever the potential of backpressure or backsiphonage exists.
   O.   Wherever used or reclaimed water is used on premises. (Ord. 819, 2-21-
2007)
9-5-6: IRRIGATION SYSTEMS:
All irrigation systems shall be protected in accordance with the uniform
plumbing code, WAC and the Revised Code of Washington. In the event any system
is equipped with an injector system, a reduced pressure principle assembly will
be required. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-7: FIRE SYSTEMS:
An approved double check backflow prevention assembly shall be the minimum
protection on all new fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not
approved for potable water use, and/or that does not provide for periodic flow
through. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly must be
installed, if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into
the sprinkler system. Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required
in each of the following circumstances:
   A.   Where improper maintenance has occurred;
   B.   On all high health hazard systems;
   C.   Wherever the city's specialist deems necessary; and
   D.   Wherever required by the WAC.
In the event an assembly is installed on a designated lateral, a detector
assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required. (Ord. 819, 2-
21-2007)
9-5-8: TEMPORARY METERS AND HYDRANT VALVES:
Backflow protection will be required on all temporary meters and hydrant valves
before any use. The type of assembly will be commensurate with the degree of
hazard and will be determined on a case by case basis by the city's specialist.
(Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-9: MOBILE UNITS:
Any "mobile unit" or apparatus, as defined in section
9-5-1 of this chapter, which uses the water from any premises within the city's
water system, shall first obtain a permit from the city and be inspected to
assure appropriate backflow prevention is installed in accordance with the most
recent edition of the city's guidance manual. The city reserves the right to
revoke the business license of the owner of the apparatus or mobile unit if the
owner fails to comply with these procedures. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-10: RIGHT OF WAY ENCROACHMENT:
   A.   No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon
or within any city right of way except as provided in this section.
   B.   The city reserves the right to have an assembly installed in the right
of way.
   C.   A backflow prevention assembly required by the city may be installed
upon or within any city right of way only if the owner proves to the city that
there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and installing
it in the right of way will not interfere with traffic or utilities. The city
retains the right to approve the location, height, depth, enclosure, and other
requisites of the assembly prior to its installation.
   D.   All permits required by this code to perform work in the right of way
shall be obtained.
   E.   A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's
expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city
right of way, when such relocation is necessary for street or utility
construction or repairs for purposes of public safety. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-11: WHOLESALE CUSTOMERS:
Any customer that has a wholesale contract for water services with the city
must have an active, ongoing cross connection control program. The cross
connection program must be in compliance with Washington administrative code
requirements pertaining to public water systems. Wholesale customers shall
provide annually to the city a copy of their cross connection control summary
report which was submitted to the DOH. The city reserves the right at all times
to require a reduced pressure principle assembly at the interconnect. (Ord.
819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-12: PLUMBING CODE:
As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate
their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with all pertinent Washington
state codes, including the Revised Code Of Washington and the uniform plumbing
code, or as amended. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007; amd. Ord. 918, 8-3-2015)
9-5-13: TESTING AND REPAIRS:
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested and repaired in accordance with
the requirements set out in the Washington administrative code, the Revised
Code Of Washington, and this chapter.
If an assembly is found not to be functioning properly, the assembly owner is
responsible to have the assembly repaired or replaced within seventy two (72)
hours of the assembly's initial failing test.
All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies that do not meet the
requirements of this chapter, but were approved assemblies for the purpose
described herein at the time of installation, are commensurate with the degree
of hazard and that have been properly maintained, shall, except for the
inspection, testing, and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the
requirements of these rules so long as the city is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from
the present location, requires more than minimum maintenance, or parts are no
longer available, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention
assembly. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-14: BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY TESTER RESPONSIBILITIES:
All backflow assembly testers operating within the city shall be certified in
accordance with all applicable regulations and shall comply with all
stipulations in this chapter and the most recent edition of the city's guidance
manual. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-15: MAINTENANCE OF ASSEMBLIES:
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in accordance with the
requirements set out in the Washington administrative code, or as amended, and
the most recent edition of the city's guidance manual. The assembly owner is
responsible for protecting their assembly from freezing and vandalism. (Ord.
819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-16: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements set out in the Washington administrative code and the most recent
edition of the PNWS-AWWA "Cross Connection Control Manual".
In the event the administrator allows a premises isolation assembly to be
installed at an alternate location, there shall be no inter-ties or connections
between the meter and the premises isolation assembly unless backflow
protection is provided commensurate with the specialists assessed degree of
hazard. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-17: THERMAL EXPANSION:
If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow
prevention assembly, it is the responsibility of the property owner to
eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-18: RETROFITTING:
Retrofitting shall be required at all service connections where an actual or
potential cross connection exists, and wherever else the city deems
retrofitting necessary to comply with the WAC, this chapter, and the most
current edition of the city's guidance manual. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-19: COSTS OF COMPLIANCE:
All costs associated with the purchase, installation, inspections, testing,
replacement, maintenance, parts, and repairs of the backflow assembly are the
responsibility of the property owner, their renter, lessee, agent, or personal
representative. For residential properties, a water user may apply for
assistance with the cost of compliance if they meet the criteria established in
the most current edition of the city's guidance manual. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-20: RECOVERY OF COSTS:
Any water customer violating any of the provisions of this chapter and who
causes damage to or impairs the city's water system, including, but not limited
to, allowing contamination, pollution, any other solution or used water to
enter the city's water system, shall be liable to the city for any expense,
loss or damage caused by such violation. The city shall collect from the
violator for the cost incurred by the city for any cleaning, purifying, repair
or replacement work or any other expenses caused by the violation. Refusal to
pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall
result in the termination of service.
All cost associated with any disconnect fees resulting from the enforcement of
this chapter are the sole responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 819, 2-
21-2007)
9-5-21: TERMINATION OF SERVICE:
Failure on the part of any property owner, their renter, lessee, agent or
personal representative to discontinue the use of a cross connection, meet
testing and maintenance requirements, or to abide by all the conditions of this
chapter is sufficient cause to: a) immediately discontinue water service by the
city to the premises or the city; or b) install a reduced pressure backflow
assembly at the meter. The city reserves the right to cause the assembly to be
installed at the service connection by a third party. All cost associated with
the purchase, installation, and initial test of this assembly will be reflected
on the water user's current water bill and is subject to all collection
policies as stipulated by the city. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-22: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE:
The administrator or their designee may, without prior notice, suspend water
service to any premises when such suspension is necessary to stop the imminent
threat of any actual or potential "cross connection" as defined in this chapter
and the most recent edition of the city's guidance manual. (Ord. 819, 2-21-
2007)
9-5-23: NONEMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE:
The administrator or their designee may suspend, with twenty four (24) hours'
notice, the water supply to any premises where the conditions of this chapter
or the most recent edition of the city's guidance manual have been violated.
(Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
9-5-24: FALSIFYING INFORMATION:
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record,
report or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
backflow assembly, device or method required under this chapter shall (in
addition to civil and/or criminal penalties provided by state law) be guilty of
a misdemeanor subject to the general penalty clause of city of Long Beach's
guidance manual. (Ord. 819, 2-21-2007)
CHAPTER 6
FATS, OILS, AND GREASE (FOG) CONTROL
SECTION:
9-6-1: Scope And Purpose
9-6-2: Definitions And Exemptions
9-6-3: Applicability And Exemptions
9-6-4: FOG Discharge Limits
9-6-5: FOG Control Requirements - General
9-6-6: FOG Control Device Design And Implementation Standards
9-6-7: FOG Control Device Operations And Maintenance Requirements
9-6-8: Maintenance Records, Monitoring, And Reporting
9-6-9: Significant Changes In Facility Operation
9-6-10: Facility Closure
9-6-11: Judicial Enforcement Remedies
9-6-1: SCOPE AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) Control Ordinance (Ordinance)
is to prevent interference with wastewater treatment and to prevent blockages
and obstructions of the sanitary sewer system due to contributions and
accumulation of fats, oils, and grease from, including but not limited to,
commercial, industrial, and/or institutional facilities, which engage in, among
other things, the preparation, processing, packaging, and/or serving of food.
The Ordinance seeks to meet that purpose by instituting the following
objectives:
   A.   Requiring FOG dischargers to prepare a FOG Management Plan
   B.   Requiring FOG dischargers to control FOG discharge through installation
of FOG control devices and through use of Best Management Practices (BMPs)
   C.   Requiring FOG dischargers to perform maintenance and reporting on FOG
control devices and BMPs. (1032, 5-6-2024)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
               Methods or techniques found to be the most effective in achieving an objective
               such as preventing or minimizing pollution. In this Ordinance, BMP’s refer to
BEST           methods and techniques used by food service establishments and food
MANAGEMENT     manufacturers/processors and other facilities that may have an impact on the
PRACTICES:     sewer system by the deposition of FOG, to prevent or minimize the deposition of
               fats, oils, and grease from cooking, baking, processing, manufacturing, and
               other processes in private sewer laterals and public sewer lines, structures,
               and wastewater treatment facilities.
               Fats, Oils, and Greases (FOG) and food solids that are retained in and removed
               from FOG control devices most commonly serving food service establishments,
BROWN GREASE:  institutions with commercial kitchens, and industrial food manufacturers/
               processors. Brown grease is generally considered unsuitable for reuse in most
               applications.
               Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain
FATS, OILS,    multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable
AND GREASES    and measurable using analytical test procedures established in the United
(FOG):         States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to
               time. All are sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or “greases.”
FOG CONTROL    A control device for removing or significantly reducing FOG from the liquid
DEVICE:        waste stream of a food service establishment or food manufacturer/ processor
               prior to the wastewater entering the municipal sewer system.
FOG            An FSE, FM/P, or any other nonresidential User who discharges FOG to the sewer
DISCHARGER:    system.
FOOD
MANUFACTURER/  Those manufacturing facilities are primarily engaged in manufacturing and/or
PROCESSER (FM/ processing food, either for human or non-human (pets, livestock, etc.)
P):
               consumption. Manufacturers and/or processors include, but are not limited to,
               dairies; creameries; slaughterhouse, meat processing, and packing facilities;
              industrial bakeries; condiment producers; salad dressing producers; cooking oil
               facilities, canning facilities; and any other commercial/industrial facility
               that discharges FOG into the sewer system.
               Those establishments engaged in the activity of preparing, serving, or
               otherwise making food available for consumption by the public, which use one or
               more of the following preparation methods: cooking by frying (all methods),
               baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all
FOOD SERVICE   methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, infrared heating, searing,
ESTABLISHMENTS barbecuing, and any other method of food preparation that produces or may
(FSE):         produce hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires
               washing. These establishments include, but are not limited to, restaurants,
               bakeries, commercial kitchens, caterers, hotels, schools, religious
               institutions, hospitals, prisons, correctional facilities, and care
               institutions.
               A device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes
               prior to the exit of the wastewater from the trap and the entry of such
GREASE TRAP:   wastewater into the sanitary sewer system. Such traps are typically under-the-
               sink units that are near food preparation areas but could include other types
               of grease trap units.
               A structure or device designed for the purpose of removing and preventing fats,
GREASE         oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer system. These devices are
INTERCEPTOR:   often below-ground units in outside areas and are built as two or three chamber
               baffled tanks but could include other types of interceptor units.
MINIMUM DESIGN The design features of a grease interceptor or grease trap and the ability or
CAPACITY:      volume required of either to effectively intercept and retain FOG from FOG-
               laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer.
               A small structure or chamber, usually below ground with a surface access, that
               easily allows the collection of a wastewater sample. A sample well is often
SAMPLE WELL:   placed immediately downstream of an outdoor in-ground grease interceptor and
               upstream of the sanitary sewer line. A sample well can also be incorporated
               into the discharge of an under-the-sink grease trap in a commercial or
               institutional kitchen.
SEWER          A pipe or conduit (sewer) intended to carry wastewater or water-borne wastes
(SANITARY      from homes, businesses, and industries.
SEWER):
               A system for collecting, conveying, and treating sewage. The system may include
SEWER SYSTEM:  private sewer laterals, public sewer lines, manholes, other structures, and
               wastewater treatment facilities.
               Any person or entity, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits
               of the City of Long Beach (City), who contributes, causes, or permits the
USER:          contribution or discharge of wastewater into the City’s sewer system, including
               persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who
               discharge hauled wastewater.
               Mainly derived from used cooking oils from deep fryers used in FSEs and
               institutions with commercial kitchens but could also be generated by FM/Ps.
YELLOW GREASE: Yellow grease is typically preferred over brown grease for biofuels, animal
               feed additives, soap manufacturing, and other manufacturing uses. (1032, 5-6-
               2024)
 
9-6-3: APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   All FSE’s and FM/P’s discharging wastewater, or any other User
discharging FOG-laden wastewater in excess of the limits set forth in this
Ordinance, are subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.
   B.   Private living quarters (such as single-family homes and single
dwelling units in multi-plexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, etc.) are
exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance. (1032, 5-6-2024)
9-6-4: FOG DISCHARGE LIMITS:
No User shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from a subject FOG
Control Device to exceed 100 milligrams per liter (mg/L), as defined by EPA
Test Method 1664 (40 CFR 136.3 Table IB). (1032, 5-6-2024)
9-6-5: FOG CONTROL REQUIREMENTS - GENERAL:
All FSE’s and FM/P’s discharging wastewater to the city sewer system are
subject to the following requirements:
   A.   FOG Management Plan: All FSE’s and FM/P’s are required to submit a FOG
Management Plan for review and approval by the City. A FOG Management Plan
describes an FSE’s or FM/P’s operations and requires plans to control the
discharge of FOG from their facility into the City’s sewer system.
      1.   New Facilities: New FSE’s and FM/P’s shall submit their FOG
Management Plan either before submitting their Building Permit Application or
with their Building Permit Application.
      2.   Tenant Improvement (TI) Applicants: For a change in use, Tl’s shall
submit their FOG Management Plan with their TI Application. For a change in
owner, the Tl’s shall submit their FOG Management Plan within 24 months of the
date this Ordinance becomes effective.
      3.   Existing Facilities: Existing FSE’s and FM/P’s shall submit a FOG
Management Plan within 24 months of the date this Ordinance becomes effective.
   B.   FOG Management Plan Contents: The Waste Water Plant Operator will
provide printed forms for a Fog Management Plan indicating thereon the
information to be furnished by the User. The Waste Water Plant Operator shall
establish administrative guidelines and application forms necessary to
establish the following:
      1.   Type of Use
      2.   Contact Information for Users
      3.   Likely FOG impact
      4.   Proposed BMP’s and FOG Control Devices
   C.   Best Management Practices (BMP’s): An FSE or FM/P shall implement FOG
control requirements and BMP’s in their kitchen’s food production and
processing areas. Examples of BMPs include dry scraping of dishes and cooking-
ware and the installation of flat screens and/or baskets in the pre-rinse.
   D.   Food Grinders/Garbage Disposal Units: In-sink garbage disposal units
shall not be installed in any FSE or FM/P, as these can increase FOG and the
waste load in the City’s sewer system. The City discourages the continued use
of existing in-sink garbage disposal units, as these can increase FOG and the
waste load in the City’s sewer system. However, if used, garbage disposal units
must be connected to grease interceptors. Garbage disposal units shall not be
used for disposal of any materials (food scraps included) that can be disposed
of as solid waste. For purposes of this section, an in-sink garbage disposal
unit is any device designed to grind food and other waste material and
discharge such waste to the sewer system.
   E.   Grease interceptor requirements: All FSE’s and FM/P’s are required to
install, operate, and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease
interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this
Ordinance, unless the City has determined that they are exempt by an approved
variance or conditional waiver. All grease interceptors must meet the
requirements of this Ordinance and the current edition of the Uniform Plumbing
Code (UPC).
   F.   Implementation: All new FSE’s and FM/P’s are subject to FOG Control
Requirements. Existing facilities proposing tenant improvements are subject to
FOG Control Requirements. All such facilities must submit a FOG Management Plan
that includes a grease interceptor which is sized in conformance with this
Ordinance, in order to obtain a building permit or tenant improvement permit.
All grease interceptors shall be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. All existing FSEs and FM/Ps, determined by the Waste Water Plant
Operator, to have a reasonable potential to discharge wastewater containing
more than 100mg/L FOG to the City’s sewer system shall be notified of the
obligation to install a grease interceptor. The required grease interceptor
shall be installed and operational within 36 months of the effective date of
this Ordinance.
   G.   Variance from the FOG Control Requirements
      1.   Variance from Grease Interceptor Requirements: An FSE or FM/P may
request that the Waste Water Plant Operator grant a variance from the grease
interceptor requirement to allow an alternative FOG control device in lieu of a
grease interceptor. The FSE or FM/P must demonstrate that the alternative
equals or exceeds the effectiveness of a grease interceptor or that it is
impossible or impracticable to install, operate or maintain a grease
interceptor and that the proposed alternative is sufficient to control FOG
discharge to less than 100 mg/L. In order to obtain a variance, an FSE or FM/
P shall demonstrate at least one of the following:
         a.   There is no adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of
a grease interceptor;
         b.   There is no adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen
plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease
interceptor and the private sewer lines or the public sewer;
         c.   It is impossible or impracticable to install, operate and
maintain a grease interceptor;
         d.   The alternative FOG control device is equally or more effective
than a grease interceptor in controlling FOG discharge;
      And the FSE or FM/P shall demonstrate that:
         e.   After installation of the proposed alternative FOG control
device, the control device is effective in controlling FOG discharge through
downstream visual monitoring of the public sewer at the FSE’s or FM/P’s own
expense;
      The Waste Water Plant Operator’s determination will be based upon
evaluation that the FSE or FM/P meets the above conditions. The Waste Water
Plant Operator, at his/her discretion, may evaluate and require additional
conditions before granting a variance. Any variance issued pursuant to this
section may be revoked at any time at the discretion of the Waste Water Plant
Operator. Variances for consideration must be reviewed by a professional
engineer.
      2.   Conditional Waiver of Requirement to Install Grease Interceptor. The
Waste Water Plant Operator may grant a conditional waiver of the requirement to
install a grease interceptor to an FSE that the Waste Water Plant Operator
determines to have negligible FOG discharge and insignificant impact to the
public sewer system. Although the Waste Water Plant Operator may grant a waiver
from installation of a grease interceptor, the FSE may be required to provide
space and plumbing segregation for future installation of a grease interceptor.
The Waste Water Plant Operator’s determination to grant or revoke a conditional
waiver shall be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following
conditions:
         a.   Quantity of FOG discharge as measured or indicated by the size of
the FSE based on water usage, menu, seating capacity, number of meals served,
amount of on-site consumption of prepared food, number of plumbing fixtures and
other conditions that may reasonably be shown to contribute to FOG discharges;
         b.   Adequacy of implementation of BMPs and compliance history;
         c.   Sewer size, grade, and condition based on visual and other
information, FOG deposition in the sewer by the FSE, and history of maintenance
and sewer overflows caused by FOG from the FSE;
         d.   Changes in operations that significantly affect FOG discharge;
and
         e.   Any other condition that the Waste Water Plant Operator deems
reasonably related to the generation of FOG discharges.
      3.   Application for Variance or Conditional Waiver of Requirement for
Grease Interceptor. An FSE or FM/P may submit to the City an application for a
conditional waiver or variance from the grease interceptor requirement. The FSE
or FM/P bears the burden of demonstrating that the installation of a grease
interceptor is not feasible or otherwise required. The Waste Water Plant
Operator will provide printed forms for application indicating thereon the
information to be furnished by the User. The Waste Water Plant Operator shall
establish administrative guidelines and application forms necessary to
establish conditions allowing a Variance or Conditional Waiver. Upon
determination by the Waste Water Plant Operator that reasons are sufficient to
justify a variance or waiver, an approval of the variance will be issued to
relieve the FSE or FM/P from the requirement. The Waste Water Plant Operator
shall have up to 30 calendar days to review the application.
      4.   Terms and Conditions of Variance or Conditional Waiver. A variance
or conditional waiver shall contain the terms and conditions that serve as the
basis for its issuance. A variance or conditional waiver may be revoked by the
Waste Water Plant Operator at any time upon his or her determination that any
of the terms or conditions for issuance are not satisfied or if the conditions
upon which the variance or conditional waiver was based have changed so that
the justification for the variance or conditional waiver no longer exists. The
variance or conditional waiver shall be valid so long as the FSE or FM/
P remains in compliance with the terms and conditions until the expiration date
specified in the variance or conditional waiver but shall not automatically
transfer when a use is changed.
   H.   Prohibited Discharges: The wholesale shredding and subsequent discharge
of food wastes (or any wastes) into the City’s sewer system is prohibited.
   I.   FOG Control Additives. The use of any additive, such as emulsifiers,
enzymes, chemicals, or bacteria, as a substitute for grease interceptors or
grease traps or for their maintenance is prohibited. (1032, 5-6-2024)
9-6-6: FOG CONTROL DEVICE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Grease Interceptors: All grease interceptor installations shall meet
the following criteria:
      1.   Interceptor Design: Grease interceptors shall conform to the
standards in the current edition of the UPC. Grease interceptors shall have a
minimum of two compartments and shall be capable of separation and retention of
grease storage and settled solids. Grease interceptors shall be designed,
constructed, and installed for a load-bearing capacity adequate for its
intended location.
      2.   Interceptor Location:
         a.   A grease interceptor shall be installed on a separate building
sewer line servicing only kitchen or food manufacturing/ processing flows and
shall be connected only to those fixtures or drains which would allow FOG to be
discharged. This includes, but is not limited to:
            (1)   Pot sinks;
            (2)   Pre-rinse sinks;
            (3)   Any sink into which FOG are likely to be introduced;
            (4)   Soup kettles or similar devices;
            (5)   Wok stations;
            (6)   Floor drains or sinks into which kettles may be drained;
            (7)   Automatic hood wash units;
            (8)   Dishwashers without pre-rinse sinks; and/or
            (9)   Any other fixtures or drains likely to allow FOG to be
discharged.
         b.   Grease interceptors are intended for below-ground installation
and shall be located outside of the building, preferably close to the kitchen
or production/processing area where FOG may be discharged. They shall be easily
accessible for servicing and inspection including access by a pumper truck.
Parking, other than for emergency vehicles, shall not be allowed over any of
the access manholes.
         c.   No fixture or drain other than those listed in the beginning of
this subsection shall be directly connected to the grease interceptor unless
approved by the Waste Water Plant Operator. The following shall not be
discharged into the grease interceptor:
            (1)   Sanitary wastewater (i.e. from restrooms, shower facilities,
etc.);
            2)   Waste that does not contain FOG and that otherwise does not
require pretreatment;
         (3)   Wastewater, from dish washing machines or other sources, with a
temperature exceeding 140°F;
         (4)   Any substance that may cause excessive foaming in the Wastewater
Treatment Plant; or
         (5)   Emulsifiers or FOG enzymes.
         The outlet discharge line from the grease interceptor shall be
directly connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system.
         The private sanitary sewer service pipe for the facility shall connect
to the discharge pipe at least 10 feet downstream of the grease interceptor
sample well or where the discharge pipe invert is at least 0.4 feet lower than
at the grease interceptor outlet or sample well invert.
         The location of all grease interceptors shall be shown on the approved
building plan or site plan for a tenant improvement application and shall be
approved in writing by the City.
      3.   Grease Interceptor Capacity and Sizing: Grease interceptor capacity
calculations shall be performed by each facility based on size and type of
operation according to the formulas contained in the sizing guidelines in the
most current edition of the UPC. The minimum wet volume of any one unit shall
be 500 gallons and the maximum wet volume of any one unit shall be 10,000
gallons.
   B.   Grease Traps: Where allowed by the Waste Water Plant Operator, all
grease trap installations must meet the following criteria:
      1.   Grease Trap Design: Grease traps shall conform to the standards in
the current edition of the UPC. The rate of flow shall not exceed the
manufacturer’s rated capacity in gallons per minute for the unit.
      2.   Grease Trap Capacity and Sizing: The required flow capacity of the
grease trap shall be per the most current edition of the UPC. (1032, 5-6-2024)
9-6-7: FOG CONTROL DEVICE OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Grease Interceptor. Each facility required to install and maintain a
grease interceptor under this Section shall provide regular maintenance of said
interceptor to the satisfaction of the Waste Water Plant Operator in accordance
with the requirements set forth in this Section. Each person who removes FOG
waste from the grease interceptor shall, to the extent technically and
mechanically possible, remove the entire content of the grease interceptor.
      1.   Pumping: All grease interceptors shall be maintained by the User at
the User’s expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all
contents, including floating materials (scum), wastewater, and bottom sludges
and solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor
from which the waste was removed or any other grease interceptor, for the
purposes of reducing the volume to be hauled, is prohibited. Waste removed from
each grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility that is permitted to
receive such wastes. Grease or grey water shall not be returned to any grease
interceptor, private sewer line, or to any portion of the City’s sewer system.
      2.   FOG Removal and Grease Interceptor Pumping Frequency: All grease
interceptors must be pumped out completely once every three months at a minimum
unless otherwise dictated by the Waste Water Plant Operator. However, each
facility shall determine the appropriate frequency of maintenance that is
needed to meet the maintenance requirements and to prevent any of the
following:
         a.   Floatable grease or scum layer exceeds 12 inches in depth as
measured in the inlet compartment;
         b.   The total volume of captured grease or scum and settled solid
material (sludge) displaces more than 25 percent of the capacity of the
interceptor as measured in the inlet compartment;
         c.   The FOG removal efficiency of the device, as determined through
sampling and analysis, falls below 80 percent; and/or
         d.   Failure to meet the manufacturer’s recommendations for
maintenance.
      3.   Disposal of Grease Interceptor Pumpage: All waste removed from each
grease interceptor must be disposed of at a facility permitted by the health
department with jurisdiction in the county in which the disposal facility is
located. Under no circumstances shall the pumpage be returned to any sewer
system, whether public or private. A receipt from the disposal facility must be
obtained and kept with the facility’s maintenance records.
      4.   Maintenance Requirements: Each person who engages in the handling of
FOG shall maintain all vehicles, hoses, pumps, tanks, tools, and equipment
associated with FOG waste handling in good repair, free of leaks, and in a
clean and sanitary condition. All hoses and valves on FOG waste handling
vehicles or tanks shall be tightly capped or plugged after each use to prevent
leakage, dripping, spilling, or other discharge of FOG wastes onto any public
or private property.
      5.   Repairs: The User shall be responsible for the cost and scheduling
of all repairs to its grease interceptor(s). Repairs required by the Waste
Water Plant Operator shall be completed within 14 calendar days after the date
of the written notice of required repairs is received by the facility or other
schedule upon written approval from the Waste Water Plant Operator. Reporting
of such repairs must be submitted to the Waste Water Plant Operator within 30
calendar days of the written notice requiring the repairs.
   B.   Grease Trap Maintenance. Each User that is allowed by the Waste Water
Plant Operator to install and maintain a grease trap under this Ordinance shall
provide regular maintenance of said trap to the satisfaction of the Waste Water
Plant Operator in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Section.
      1.   Maintenance Requirements: Each User shall be solely responsible for
the cost of inspection, cleaning, maintenance, and record keeping. Each
facility may contract with a grease hauler, or it may develop a written
protocol and perform its own grease trap cleaning and maintenance procedures.
Cleaning and maintenance must be performed when the total volume of captured
FOG and solid material displaces more than 25 percent of the total volume of
the unit. Grease traps shall be opened, inspected, cleaned, and maintained at a
minimum of once per week. However, each facility shall determine the
appropriate frequency for maintenance needed to meet the maintenance
requirements.
      2.   Repairs: The facility shall be responsible for the cost and
scheduling of all repairs to its grease trap(s). Repairs required by the Waste
Water Plant Operator shall be completed within 14 calendar days after the date
of written notice of required repairs is received by the facility. Users may
utilize a different schedule for repair upon prior written approval from the
City. Reporting of such repairs must be submitted to the Waste Water Plant
Operator within 30 calendar days of the written notice requiring the repairs.
(1032, 5-6-2024)
9-6-8: MAINTENANCE RECORDS, MONITORING, AND REPORTING:
   A.   Maintenance Records: A maintenance log indicating each pumping of a
grease interceptor for the previous 12 months shall be kept by each FSE or FM/
P. This log shall include, at a minimum, the date, time, amount of waste
pumped, name of hauling company, and name of disposal site and shall be kept in
a designated location for inspection by the City on demand. The hauling
company’s receipts shall also be kept for a minimum of two years.
   B.   Monitoring: Users may be required to install a sample well (for
measuring FOG) on new or existing sewer lines discharging to the City’s sewer
system. Grease interceptors and grease traps may be inspected by City staff as
necessary to ensure compliance with this Section and to assure proper cleaning
and maintenance schedules are being heeded.
   C.   Maintenance Reporting: The information required in the maintenance log
shall be submitted to the City of Long Beach Code Enforcement Officer, “FOG
CONTROL PROGRAM” annually. The reporting period is January 1st through December
31st of each year. The report shall be submitted within thirty (30) days after
the end of the reporting period, and no later than January 31st immediately
subsequent to the calendar year of reporting. The City will send out a letter,
by December 31st, reminding the User that the information must be submitted.
The City may request additional information from the User to verify the
maintenance log. (1032, 5-6-2024)
9-6-9: SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN FACILITY OPERATIONS:
An FSE or FM/P shall notify the Waste Water Plant Operator prior to any
significant changes in the operation of their facility including the following:
   A.   Grease control equipment upgrades;
   B.   For an FSE, increases in seating capacity of 20 percent or greater of
that reported in the current FOG Management Plan;
   C.   For an FM/P, sustained increases in production quantity of 20 percent
or greater of that reported in the current FOG Management Plan; or
   D.   Changes in menu selections and/or food service production processes
that potentially increase FOG discharge by 20 percent or more. (1032, 5-6-2024)
9-6-10: FACILITY CLOSURE:
   A.   An FSE or FM/P with a grease interceptor shall notify the Waste Water
Plant Operator 45 days in advance whenever the FSE or FM/P closes for business
and is subsequently:
      1.   Razed or demolished;
      2.   Remodeled such that the grease interceptor will not be used; or
      3.   Replaced with a type of business that will not utilize the grease
interceptor.
      The reason for this notification is to delete the FOG control device from
the City’s inventory database.
   B.   A facility that closes for business shall properly demolish or abandon
their grease interceptor so as to prevent a safety hazard, unless the grease
interceptor is used by a new property owner or occupant. (1032, 5-6-2024)
9-6-11: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
   A.   The Waste Water Plant Operator:
      1.   Shall enforce Title 9, Chapter 6
      2.   May refer cases within the City’s jurisdiction to the City’s
Attorney’s Office and petition the Municipal Court of the City of Long Beach or
Pacific County District Court through the City Attorney’s Office for action
pursuant to this section.
   B.   When a person violates the provisions under Title 9, Chapter 6, the
Waste Water Plant Operator or the City Attorney’s Office, may initiate
enforcement or disciplinary actions, or any other legal proceeding authorized
by law, including but not limited to any one or a combination of the following:
      1.   Informal administrative conferences, convened at the request of the
Waste Water Plant Operator, User, or Property Owner, to explore facts and
resolve problems;
      2.   Orders directed to the User or Property Owner and/or person causing
or responsible for the violation of the rules of Title 9, Chapter 6,
      3.   Denial, suspension, modification, or revocation of permits,
approvals, or certification;
      4.   The issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate,
which restrains or compels the specific performance of any requirement imposed
by this Ordinance on activities of the User. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a User; and
      5.   The imposition of civil penalties pursuant to RCW 7.80.
   C.   Orders authorized under this section include the following:
      1.   Enforcement Orders requiring corrective measures necessary to effect
compliance with Title 9, Chapter 6 which may include a compliance schedule; and
      2.   Enforcement Orders to stop work and/or refrain from any FOG
discharge into the City sewer system until all permits, certifications, and
approvals required by Title 9, Chapter 6, rule, or statute are obtained.
   D.   Enforcement orders issued under this section shall:
      1.   Be in writing; Name the person or persons to whom the Order is
directed;
      2.   Briefly describe each action or inaction constituting a violation of
the rules of Chapter Title 9, Chapter 6;
      3.   Specify any corrective action, if applicable;
      4.   Specify the effective date of the Order and appropriate period of
time, as required by Chapter Title 9, Chapter 6, for the correction of the
violation;
      5.   Provide notice of the consequences of failure to comply or repeated
violation, as appropriate. Such notices may include a statement that continued
or repeated violation may subject the violator to:
         a.   Denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit approval, or
certification if violations are not corrected within 90 days; and/or
         b.   Referral to the office of the City Attorney; and/or
         c.   Other appropriate remedies imposed pursuant to RCW 7.80.
      6.   Provide the name, business address, and phone number of an
appropriate staff person who may be contacted regarding an Order.
   E.   Enforcement Orders shall be personally served in the manner of service
of summons in a civil action pursuant to RCW 7.80 or in a manner showing proof
of receipt.
   F.   The Waste Water Plant Operator shall have cause to deny the application
or reapplication for an operational permit or to revoke, suspend, or modify a
required operational permit of any person who has:
      1.   Failed or refused to comply with the provisions of Title 9, Chapter
6, or any other statutory provision or rule regulating the operation of an FSE,
FM/P, or any other FOG discharger;
      2.   Obtained or attempted to obtain a permit or any other required
certificate or approval by misrepresentation.
   G.   For the purposes of subsection (6) of this section, a person is defined
to include:
      1.   Applicant;
      2.   Re-applicant;
      3.   Permit Holder; or
      4.   Any individual associated with subsection 7(1), (2), or (3) of this
section including, but not limited to:
         a.   Board members;
         b.   Officers
         c.   Managers;
         d.   Partners;
         e.   Association members;
         f.   Agents;
         g.   Third persons acting with the knowledge of such persons.
         h.   Property Owners.
   H.   Should any person refuse to allow the Waste Water Plant Operator to
enter onto property for the purpose of enforcing these rules and regulations,
the Waste Water Plant Operator may, with the assistance of the City Attorney,
present an affidavit, naming the person so refusing, the property involved, and
the reason entry is necessary, to the City of Long Beach Municipal Court, from
which an authorizing warrant may issue.
   I.   The Waste Water Plant Operator shall have the right of entry to inspect
any FSE, FM/P, or any other FOG discharger.
   J.   Civil Penalties.
      1.   A User who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this Ordinance or order issued hereunder has committed a civil violation and
shall be liable for civil penalties imposed pursuant to RCW 7.80 and a maximum
civil penalty of $1,000 per violation, per day.
      2.   Enforcement shall be pursuant to RCW 7.80.
      3.   The Waste Water Plant Operator may recover reasonable attorneys’
fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the City.
      4.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall
consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained through the User’s violation, corrective actions by
the User, the compliance history of the User, and any other factor as justice
requires. (1032, 5-6-2024)
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Terms Defined
10-1-1: TERMS DEFINED:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to
give this title its most reasonable application. For purposes of this title,
the following words and terms shall have the meanings designated in this
section:
ADEQUATE (Regarding Transportation): A transportation facility that meets or
exceeds the city's adopted standards of service set forth in the city's
comprehensive plan.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this
title or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet (3'); a
clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as
sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood".
Designation on maps always includes the letter A or V.
BASEMENT: Any area of a building having its floor below ground level
("subgrade") on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
BUILDING PERMIT: Written permission by the building inspector or his designee
for the construction, repair, alteration, or addition of a structure.
CAPACITY, TRAFFIC: The maximum number of vehicles that can be accommodated
during a specified travel period at a specified level of service. Capacity
shall be calculated according to the methodology used in the most current
highway capacity manual. An alternative methodology may be used only if it is
preapproved by the city administrator or his/her designee.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA: An area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. The coastal high hazard area is designated on the FIRM as zone V1-30,
VE, or V.
COMPLETION OF DEVELOPMENT: That point in time when the certificate of occupancy
or other approval has been issued by the city, thereby authorizing occupancy
and use of a development.
CONCURRENCY: The concept that capital facilities shall be "concurrent" with new
development or redevelopment (infrastructure is developed on a "pay as you go"
basis). The level of service for intersection and roadway segments adopted in
the city's comprehensive plan shall be maintained or improved with completion
of new development or redevelopment.
CONCURRENCY DISTRICTS: Geographic subareas of the city established to monitor
available transportation capacity.
CONCURRENCY, FINDING OF: The finding that is part of the building permit issued
by the city indicating the transportation system has adequate unused or
uncommitted capacity, or will have adequate capacity to accommodate traffic
generated by a proposed development, without causing level of service to
decline below adopted standards.
CONCURRENCY TEST: The comparison of the traffic generated by a proposed
development with the unused or uncommitted capacity of existing and planned
transportation facilities, in order to assess the impact of the proposed
development on the transportation level of service.
CONCURRENT WITH DEVELOPMENT: The improvements or transportation strategies in
place at the time of building permit issuance, or the financial commitment in
place to complete the improvements or strategies within six (6) years.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might
be too great. Critical facilities include, and are not limited to: schools;
nursing homes; hospitals; police, fire and emergency response installations;
installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous
waste.
DEVELOPMENT: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels. The
construction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of
any structure; any authorized mining, excavation, landfill, or land
disturbance; use or extension of land.
DEVELOPMENT, IN AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: For purposes of chapter 4 of
this title, "development" is any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Written permission by the city administrator or his
designee for the division of property, a conditional use, a variance,
activities exceeding a certain dollar amount in the shoreline area, or other
land disturbing or construction activities not specifically yet defined.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its
lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The official form (FEMA form 086-0-33) used to track
development, provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with
community floodplain management ordinances, and determine the proper insurance
premium rate, with section B completed by the Long Beach building inspector.
FINANCIAL COMMITMENT, TRANSPORTATION: Revenue sources forecast to be available
and designated for transportation facilities or strategies in the comprehensive
plan or in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan; other
unanticipated revenue from federal or state grants, or other sources from which
the city has received a notice of commitment; and/or revenue that is assured by
an applicant in a form approved by the city.
FIRE RESISTANT SKIRTING: A type of wainscoting around the lower part of a
mobile or manufactured home that covers the wheels and undercarriage and is
constructed of a fire resistant material, usually aluminum panels or fiber
cement board.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal
insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard
and the applicable risk premium zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance
administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters; and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters
from any source.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
GRADE: The vertical elevation of the ground surface.
GRADE, FINISHED: The final elevation of the average ground level adjoining a
building or structure at all exterior walls after development; also known as
postconstruction grade.
GRADE, NATURAL: The elevation of the ground level of a site in its natural
state before construction, filling or excavation; also known as preconstruction
grade.
IMPACT FEE: A fee imposed on development to help finance the cost of
improvements or services.
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS) STANDARD: A qualitative measurement describing
operational conditions within a traffic stream along a given roadway segment or
at a given intersection. Roadway and intersection level of service standards
are commonly denoted by a letter ranking from "A" (free flowing/minimal
intersection delay), the highest LOS, to "F" (gridlock/long intersection
delay), the lowest LOS.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, except for
unfinished or flood resistant enclosures used solely for parking vehicles,
building access, or storage. If the lowest enclosed area is used for anything
other than parking vehicles, building access, or storage, the floor of that
area is considered the lowest floor. Where a basement is present, the floor of
the basement (where "basement" means the floor is below grade on all sides)
will always be the lowest floor, regardless of how the space is used.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure intended for residential habitation that is
manufactured in one area, then transported to another area for occupation, and
that is consistent with the requirements of Revised Code Of Washington
35A.63.145(2).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A residential development designed,
equipped, or maintained for placement of two (2) or more manufactured homes.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING: A park or subdivision where
construction of facilities servicing lots/sites on which manufactured homes are
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the city's original
adopted floodplain management regulations (August 1979).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXPANSION: The creation of additional
lots/sites by construction of additional facilities for servicing lots on which
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, NEW: A park or subdivision where
construction of facilities for servicing lots/sites on which manufactured homes
are affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of adopted
floodplain management regulations.
MOBILE HOME: A dwelling constructed in a factory prior to June 15, 1976, to
standards other than the code set forth by the United States department of
housing and urban development (HUD).
MODULAR HOME: A dwelling constructed in a factory in accordance with the
international building code and bearing the appropriate sign indicating such
compliance.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on
or after the effective date of this title.
OPENING: In reference to flood hazard reduction, a hole in an otherwise solid
wall or footing that allows water to flow through rather than build up pressure
on one side of the wall or footing.
RV PARK: Any lot or parcel on which two (2) or more stalls are located,
established, or maintained for occupancy by RVs for a fee as temporary living
quarters for recreation or vacation purposes, and with each site having
individual connections for electricity and sanitary services. An RV park may
also include amenities for the use of the occupants, including, and not limited
to, laundry, showers, game room, recreation, or restaurant.
RV PARK STALL: A space wherein an RV may be parked within an RV park.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): Any vehicular portable structure without permanent
foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven, and is primarily designed as a
temporary living accommodation for recreational and camping purposes.
Recreational vehicles (RVs) include, and are not limited to, travel trailers,
truck campers, camping trailers, and self- propelled motor homes. RVs located
in a special flood hazard area (SFHA) are those that are:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
RECURRENCE INTERVAL: The average number of years between the occurrence of two
(2) floods with the same level of discharge. For the "base flood" (see
definition in this section), the recurrence interval is one hundred (100)
years.
RIGHT OF WAY PERMIT: Written permission by the city administrator or his
designee for any activity occurring by noncity personnel located within a city
right of way.
SCREENING: The use of fences, walls, plants, berms, structures or other
materials to shield or buffer a use from adjacent properties or uses.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the "actual start of construction" (see
definition of "Start Of Construction, Actual" in this section), repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date.
START OF CONSTRUCTION, ACTUAL: Placement of permanent elements of a structure
on a site, such as pouring of slab or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns, or any work beyond excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Does not include land preparation,
installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations, or erection of temporary forms. Also does not include
installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed in the ground, or anything erected that
requires location on the ground or water, or is attached to something having
location on or in the ground, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground, but not including fences less than six feet (6') in
height, paths, trails, or paved areas.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is
started; or b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. Does not include either: 1) any project for improvement of
a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or 2) any alteration of a structure listed on the national register
of historic places or a state inventory of historic places.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES, EXISTING: Facilities in place at the time a
concurrency test is applied.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES, PLANNED: Facilities scheduled to be completed no
later than the sixth year of the capital facilities plan and/or transportation
element in effect at the time the city approves the development.
TRANSPORTATION STRATEGIES: Transportation demand management plans, schemes,
techniques, programs, and methodologies for minimizing transportation facility
demand. Examples include improved transit service, off peak travel, and ride
sharing programs.
VARIANCE: An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of this
title to a particular piece of property which, because of special circumstances
applicable to it, is deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same vicinity and zone and which adjustment remedies
disparity in privileges.
WATER DEPENDENT: A structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any
nonwater location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic
nature of its operations. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 889, 4-13-2013; Ord.
909, 4-20-2015)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
10-2-1: Building Codes Adopted
10-2-2: Fire Code
10-2-3: Building Official
10-2-4: Building Permits And Fees
10-2-5: Construction In Compliance With Approved Plans
10-2-6: Accessory Buildings
10-2-7: Fences
10-2-8: Retaining Walls
10-2-9: Signs
10-2-10: Repairs And Maintenance
10-2-11: Inspection Of Improvements
10-2-12: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-2-13: Appeals
10-2-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Adoption: The model codes listed below, as approved and adopted by the
State Building Code Council except as noted, together with any amendments or
additions, modifications, or recodifications are hereby adopted by this
reference. These codes must apply to all new construction, remodeling, or
repairs. Copies of the codes are on file for inspection in the Office of the
Building Department of the City.
      1.   International Building Code: Most current cycle adopted by the State
of Washington (includes International Code Council/American National Standards
Institute A117.1 - accessible and useable buildings and facilities as well as
the International Existing Building Code);
      2.   International Residential Code: Most current cycle adopted by the
State of Washington, with the following exceptions:
         a.   For multi-family residential structures of five (5) or more
dwelling units, automatic fire sprinkling systems are required;
         b.   Any structure located west of State Route 103 (also identified as
Pacific Highway or Pacific Avenue), or in areas of exposure category C or D,
shall use asphalt felt as the water resistive barrier. Products that
incorporate asphalt felt as a component layer of protection will be subject to
approval by the Long Beach building inspector;
      3.   International Mechanical Code: Most current cycle adopted by the
State of Washington includes the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) 58) and the National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) for
LP gas;
      4.   Uniform Plumbing Code: Most current cycle adopted by the State of
Washington;
      5.   Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa, and Hot Tub Code, 2006;
      6.   Washington State barrier fee regulations;
      7.   National Electrical Code (NFPA 70): Most current edition as adopted
by the State of Washington;
      8.   International Energy Conservation Code/Washington State Energy Code:
Most current cycle adopted by the State of Washington;
      9.   Washington State Historic Building Code: Most current cycle adopted
by the State of Washington;
      10.   Washington State Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality Code;
      11.   Uniform Housing Code, 1997, adopted by the City independently of
the Washington State Building Code Council.
   B.   Additional Adoptions: The City hereby adopts by this reference the
following codes together with any amendments or additions, modifications, or
recodifications thereto:
      1.   International Property Maintenance Code, 2009, adopted by the City
independently of the Washington State Building Code Council;
      2.   Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997, adopted
by the City independently of the Washington State Building Code Council.
   C.   Climatic And Geographic Design Table:
      1.   All plans or designs submitted with the building permit application
are to follow table R301.2(1) using the provided information in this section;
this criterion shall be applied to all new construction and renovations.
Ground snow load                  25 lbs
Wind design:                       
 Speed                           140 V-ult/108 V-asd
 Topographic effects             No
 Special wind region             Yes
 Wind-borne debris zone          No
Seismic design category           D-2
Subject to damage from:            
 Weathering                      Moderate
 Frost line depth                5 inches
 Termite                         No
Winter design temp                23
Ice barrier underlayment required No
Flood hazards                     Yes
Air freezing index                108
Mean annual temp                  50.15 F
 
(Ord. 943, 8-21-2017)
10-2-2: FIRE CODE:
   A.   International Fire Code Adopted: The most current edition adopted by
the State of Washington is hereby adopted in its entirety for the purpose of
describing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property,
fire, or explosion.
      1.   The City does not adopt section 903.2.8: Group R requiring automatic
sprinkler systems in all residential dwellings in its entirety. The City does
not require such systems in residential buildings of four (4) or fewer dwelling
units.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   The provisions of this section shall apply to all buildings
constructed or developed within the City limits, when the buildings will be
served by water mains and fire hydrants capable of delivering the required fire
flow and installed as required by this section, unless specifically exempted by
this section, or unless waived or modified by the Fire Marshal.
      2.   Decisions of the Fire Marshal are deemed to be made in the best
interest of, and with the concurrence of, an affected fire district in the
absence of any credible evidence to the contrary. (Ord. 918, 8-3-2015)
10-2-3: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
It is the duty of the building official to administer and enforce this chapter.
If the building official finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are
being violated, the person responsible for such violations shall be notified in
writing indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct such violation. The building official shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of
illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural
changes to buildings; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or take
any other action necessary to ensure compliance with or to prevent violations
of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-2-4: BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: No building or other structure may be erected,
moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit issued by the
building official. No building permit may be issued except in conformity with
the provisions of this title.
      2.   Application And Accompanying Documents: All applications for
building permits must be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale,
showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact
sizes and location of existing buildings on the lot, if any; and the location
and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application must
include such other information as lawfully may be required by the building
official, including existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or
proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping
units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions
existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine
conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of, this title.
         a.   Stamp Required: All applications for building permits concerning
commercial uses must be stamped and submitted by a licensed Washington State
architect or registered design professional.
      3.   Plans Required: One copy of the plans will be returned to the
applicant by the building official after marking such copy approved or
disapproved and attest to same by having signed such copy. The second copy of
the plans will be retained by the building official.
      4.   Time Limit To Begin Work: If work described in any building permit
has not begun within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of
the permit, the permit will expire, unless an extension(s) has been granted in
writing by the building official for periods no more than one hundred eighty
(180) days each. The permit will be canceled by the building official, and
written notice must be given to the applicant.
   B.   Building Permit Fees:
      1.   The City hereby adopts by reference building permit fees, which are
set forth in table 1-A of the 1997 Uniform Building Code as amended and the
building valuation data schedule as published in the most current "Building
Safety Journal" of the International Code Council and are on file for
inspection in the Building Department at the Long Beach City Hall. Values of
structures not listed in the schedule herein will be determined by a bid from a
licensed contractor. Permit fees for work other than new construction and
additions or not otherwise listed, including, but not limited to, alterations,
remodeling, mechanical permits and demolition, shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.
         a.   All valuations based on materials only without a labor cost
included will be doubled for the purpose of calculating permit fees.
         b.   For the purpose of calculating the building valuation, all decks
whether be covered or uncovered, will be valued at fifty percent (50%) of the
"U - utility/misc.", rounded up to the nearest one cent ($0.01). This is to
include all constructed walking or standing surfaces that result in a width of
four feet (4') and length of six feet (6'), that are not considered sidewalks,
or serving a garage as a driveway.
      2.   Additionally, the fees for manufactured house placement are as
follows 1 :
 
Singlewide $250.00
Doublewide 350.00
Triplewide 450.00
 
      3.   Once an application is made and fee paid, an applicant may withdraw
the application. If at the time of withdrawal plan review is not yet initiated,
the City may refund up to fifty percent (50%) of the building permit fee. Once
plan review is initiated, the City will retain the entire fee and refund shall
not occur.
      4.   In accordance with section 109.4 of the International Building Code,
all work commencing before issuance of a building permit will result in a
monetary fee of one hundred percent (100%) of the building permit fee in
addition to the original permit fee, or a doubling of the fee.
      5.   Modular home permit valuations, once modular homes are installed
they are considered stick built. Therefore, they should be valuated that way
less thirty percent (30%) for certain inspections not performed.
   C.   Water And Sewer Connection: No building permits for primary use
structures shall be issued without the applicant having first paid water and
sewer connection fees and secured a side sewer permit. (Ord. 943, 8-21-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 3 of this title and title 12, chapters 11 and 16 of this
  Code.
10-2-5: CONSTRUCTION IN COMPLIANCE WITH APPROVED PLANS:
   A.   Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved
by the building official authorize only the construction set forth in such
approved plans and application and no other construction.
   B.   Construction different than that authorized will be deemed a violation
of this title and punishable as provided by title 14 of this Code. (Ord. 847,
8-17-2009)
10-2-6: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Building permits are required for the construction of sheds and other accessory
buildings equal to or greater than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in
total floor area. Accessory buildings or sheds equal to or greater than one
hundred twenty (120) square feet total floor area are not to be constructed
prior to commencement of construction of the main building. One accessory
building or shed equal to or less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet
total floor area may be constructed prior to commencement of construction of
the main building. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-2-7: FENCES:
Building permits are required for all fence construction over six feet (6') in
height. No fence on a corner lot may interfere with a driver's ability to see
at an intersection as described in section
12-13-10 of this Code. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-2-8: RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Building permits are required for all retaining walls over four feet
(4') in height, measured from the bottom of the footing.
   B.   All retaining walls over four feet (4') in height, measured from the
bottom of the footing, shall be designed by a professional engineer licensed by
the State of Washington. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-2-9: SIGNS:
Sign permits are required for sign installations and must comply with
regulations of title 12, chapter 14, "Signs", of this Code 1 . (Ord. 847, 8-17-
2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 58.17.
10-2-10: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
Nothing in this title prevents strengthening or restoring to a safe condition
any building or part of a building declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting public safety. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-2-11: INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Prior to signing off the final inspection, the building official will inspect
all improvements on or adjacent to the site installed as a requirement of this
title or as a condition of permit. Any improvements found to be damaged by the
builder must be repaired prior to receiving final inspection sign off. (Ord.
847, 8-17-2009)
10-2-12: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until and unless water and sewer
connections are completed to the satisfaction of the City Water and Sewer
Supervisor, and all improvements required by the development approval are
completed. However, completion of improvements may be deferred, provided a
security agreement is executed according to requirements of section
11-1-10 of this Code and a surety bond equal to one hundred fifty percent
(150%) of the cost of completing the work is posted with the City. The
certificate of occupancy may be revoked if the water and/or sewer service is
disconnected or unavailable. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not
be construed to warrant or otherwise represent any opinion as to the quality of
construction of any structure, suitability of any structure for any purpose, or
the existence or reliability of any utility. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-2-13: APPEALS:
Appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official
or Fire Marshal relative to the application and interpretation of the City's
adopted Building Codes, set forth in section
10-2-1 of this chapter, and Fire Code, set forth in section
10-2-2 of this chapter, shall be to the hearing examiner. Those parties of
record aggrieved by the decision of the building official or Fire Marshal may
appeal such decision to the hearing examiner as provided in section
11-2C-14 of this Code. (Ord. 918, 8-3-2015)
CHAPTER 3
MANUFACTURED HOMES AND PARKS; RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Recreation Vehicles; Restrictions
10-3-2: Recreational Vehicle Parks; Requirements
10-3-3: Manufactured Home Regulations
10-3-4: Manufactured Home Parks; Requirements
10-3-5: Violations; Investigation
10-3-6: Violations; Penalties
10-3-1: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Parking Restrictions: No person shall park and occupy a recreational
vehicle (RV) within the corporate limits of the city, except within a duly
licensed RV park or as permitted by section
12-11-5 of this code.
   B.   Applicability: This prohibition shall extend to all public streets and
ways, and to private property within the city limits. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-3-2: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Water, Sanitary Facilities; Health Requirements: Each RV park shall
provide adequate water and sanitary facilities for the occupants thereof in
accordance with the health requirements as set forth by the state of Washington
and Pacific County public health district.
   B.   Sewer Connection; Holding Tanks: Recreational vehicles may be connected
to the city sewer system during the period of residence. Holding tanks with
chemically treated waste shall not be dumped into the city sewer system.
   C.   Development Standards: RV parks shall also be subject to the
requirements of section
12-11-19 of this code. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-3-3: MANUFACTURED HOME REGULATIONS:
   A.   Regulations And Requirements:
      1.   Location: Manufactured homes may be placed in any zone district
where permitted subject to compliance with all requirements of the zone
district in which they are located. Where applicable, manufactured homes shall
comply with design requirements of title 12, chapter 10, "Design Review
Criteria", of this code.
      2.   Width: Manufactured homes shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide.
      3.   Age: No manufactured home shall be older than three (3) years at the
time of placement, except within an established manufactured home park.
      4.   Construction Standards: Any manufactured home established in the
city shall be a modern manufactured home, containing flush type toilet and
other sanitary facilities. Such manufactured home shall bear a tag or seal of
approval of the state of Washington. All construction and all installation of
heating, plumbing, gas piping, electrical equipment and wiring shall be in
compliance with state of Washington statutes and standards as they presently
exist or as they may be amended and regulations made pursuant thereto. Every
manufactured home shall likewise comply in construction with the building code
of the city.
      5.   Improvements; Building Permit Required: All building improvements on
a lot or parcel or land necessary to establish any manufactured home may be
permitted only by obtaining a building permit from the city; provided, that
such a permit would be required from the owner of a conventional and fixed
residence in the zone where the manufactured home is located or is to be
established.
         a.   Placement fees for manufactured homes shall be paid as set forth
in subsection 10-2-4B2 of this title.
      6.   Foundation Required: A manufactured home shall be placed upon a
continuous cement or concrete block foundation constructed in accordance with
requirements of the city's adopted building code.
      7.   Supports: Manufactured homes shall be supported by masonry or
concrete. Metal stands shall not be used. Supports shall be placed as per the
manufacturer's specifications.
      8.   Running Gear: All running gear including road lights, towing tongue,
axle, and wheels shall be removed from exterior view. A manufactured home shall
be skirted between the floor and the ground.
      9.   Energy Code: A manufactured home shall be thermally equivalent to
the requirements of the state energy code.
      10.   Mobile Homes: Preexisting mobile homes shall be maintained in
conformance with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-3-4: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Governing Provisions: All requirements for manufactured homes as stated
in section
10-3-3 of this chapter shall be met; except, where in conflict with this
section, in which case this section shall govern.
   B.   Development Standards: Manufactured home parks shall also be subject to
the requirements of section
12-11-20 of this code.
   C.   Improvements; Building Permit Required: All building improvements on a
lot or parcel of land necessary to establish any manufactured home may be
permitted only by obtaining a building permit from the city; provided, that
such a permit would be required from the owner of a conventional and fixed
residence in the zone where the manufactured home is located or is to be
established.
   D.   Fire Department Access Between Manufactured Homes: There shall be a
minimum setback of ten feet (10') between manufactured homes. Landings and
stairs projecting no more than three feet (3') from each unit shall be allowed
to project into the setback area. The setback area shall be kept otherwise free
and clear of structures, for purposes of fire department access. (Ord. 847, 8-
17-2009)
10-3-5: VIOLATIONS; INVESTIGATION:
The city administrator or his authorized agent shall investigate any charge of
violation of this title brought to the city administrator's attention. Upon
verifying a violation of this title, the city administrator shall serve notice
to the property owner to comply with city building regulations. The city
administrator or his authorized agent shall inspect the premises after serving
notice of violation and, if the violation is still in effect, may take any
action authorized in title 14, "Enforcement Procedures", of this code. (Ord.
847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
10-3-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be assessed and enforced
pursuant to title 14, "Enforcement Procedures", of this code. (Ord. 847, 8-17-
2009; amd. Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
CHAPTER 4
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
10-4-1: Authorization, Purpose And Objectives
10-4-2: Interpretation
10-4-3: Lands To Which Chapter Applies
10-4-4: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
10-4-5: Local Administrator
10-4-6: Development Permit
10-4-7: General Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
10-4-8: Specific Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
10-4-9: Regulatory Floodway Not Designated
10-4-10: Areas Designated As Floodways
10-4-11: Standards For Shallow Flooding Areas (AO Zones)
10-4-12: Coastal High Hazard Areas
10-4-13: Construction Of New Critical Facilities
10-4-14: Appeals And Variances
10-4-15: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
10-4-16: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
10-4-17: Violations; Investigation
10-4-18: Penalties For Noncompliance
10-4-19: Severability
10-4-1: AUTHORIZATION, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of Washington has
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of Long Beach are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all which have the potential to adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to the flood loss.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Maximize benefit from expenditure of public money;
      3.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding;
      4.   Avoid or minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   Avoid or minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure
located in areas of special flood hazard;
      6.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to avoid or minimize future
flood damage;
      7.   Ensure potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
      8.   Ensure those who occupy areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
   D.   Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes,
this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
      1.   Restricting or prohibiting uses that are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
      2.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
      4.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
      5.   Preventing or regulating construction of flood barriers that could
divert floodwaters from their natural course or may increase flood hazards in
other areas. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-2: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-3: LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-4: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal insurance
administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study For Pacific County, Washington And Incorporated Cities" dated
May 18, 2015, and any revisions thereto, with an accompanying flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) dated May 18, 2015, and any revisions thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood
insurance study and the FIRM are on file at Long Beach City Hall, 115 Bolstad
West, Long Beach, Washington, and the FIRM can be viewed via the city's GIS
system found by following the GIS link at longbeachwa.gov. The best available
information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in subsection 10-
4-5B2 of this chapter shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is
issued which incorporates the data utilized under subsection 10-4-5B2 of this
chapter. (Ord. 909, 4-20-2015; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-5: LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The city administrator is hereby appointed to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions. The city administrator may
authorize a designee to implement this chapter or any portion thereof.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties of the local administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Permit Review:
         a.   Review all development permits to determine that permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
         b.   Review all development permits to determine all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required.
         c.   Review all development permits to determine if proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that
encroachment provisions of subsection 10-4-10A of this chapter are met.
         d.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding.
         e.   Notify FEMA when annexations occur in the Special Flood Hazard
Area.
      2.   Use Of Other Base Flood Data (In A And V Zones): When base flood
elevation data has not been provided (A and V zones) in accordance with section
10-4-4 of this chapter, the local administrator shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, in order to administer sections
10-4-8 and
10-4-10 of this chapter.
      3.   Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
         a.   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood
insurance study, FIRM, or required as in subsection B2 of this section, obtain
and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement.
         b.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures
where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study,
FIRM, or as required in subsection B2 of this section:
            (1)   Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and
            (2)   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection
10-4-6B3 of this chapter.
         c.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to
provisions of this chapter.
         d.   Certification required by subsection
10-4-10A, floodway encroachments.
         e.   Records of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
         f.   Improvement and damage calculations.
   C.   Alteration Of Watercourses:
      1.   Notify adjacent communities and the department of ecology prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the federal insurance administration.
      2.   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
   D.   Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations where needed,
as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in subsections
10-4-14A and B of this chapter. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-6: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A development permit shall be obtained before
construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard
established in section
10-4-4 of this chapter. The permit shall be for all structures including
"manufactured homes", as set forth in chapter 1 of this title, and for all
"development", including fill and other activities, also as set forth in the
definitions, section
10-1-1 of this title.
   B.   Application For Development Permit: Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city and shall include, and not
be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question, existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, and drainage facilities.
Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures recorded on a current elevation
certificate with subsection B completed by the Floodplain Administrator.
      2.   Elevation to which any structure has been floodproofed relative to
mean sea level;
      3.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet floodproofing
criteria in section
10-4-8 of this chapter; and
      4.   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
      5.   Where a structure is proposed in a V,V1-30, or VE zone, a V-zone
design certificate;
      6.   Where development is proposed in a floodway, an engineering analysis
indicating no rise of the Base Flood Elevation; and
      7.   Any of such information that may be reasonably required by the
Floodplain Administrator in order to review the application.
   D.   Changes To Special Flood Hazard Area: If a project will alter the BFE
or boundaries of the SFHA, then the project proponent shall provide the
community with engineering documentation and analysis regarding the proposed
change. If the change to the BFE or boundaries of the SFHA would normally
require a Letter of Map Change, then the project approval shall be conditioned
accordingly. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-7: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
   A.   Anchoring:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements, including those
related to manufactured homes, shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy.
      2.   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors
(reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation In Flood Hazard Areas"
guidebook for additional techniques).
   B.   Drainage: Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   C.   Construction Materials And Methods:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      3.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
   D.   Utilities:
      1.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
avoid or minimize infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
      2.   Any proposed water well shall be located on high ground that is not
in the floodway 1;
      3.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
avoid or minimize infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into floodwaters; and
      4.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
of them or contamination from them during flooding.
   E.   Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
      2.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
      3.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
      4.   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
   F.   Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available
either through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or from another authoritative
source (section
10-4-4 of this chapter), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to
assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The
test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data,
high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure
to elevate at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade in these
zones may result in higher insurance rates.
   G.   Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
      1.   The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious to
human, animal, or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is
prohibited in special flood hazard areas. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 889,
4-13-2013; Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-8: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in section
10-4-4 of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction:
      1.   In AE and A1-30 zones or other A zoned areas where the BFE has been
determined or can be reasonably obtained, new construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be waterproofed or elevated at least
one foot above the BFE.
      2.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      3.   Below grade crawl spaces will not be considered basements if the
following conditions are met:
         a.   The interior grade of a crawl space below the BFE must not be
more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
         b.   The height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the floor joist must not exceed
four feet (4') at any point.
         c.   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space. The enclosed area should
be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event.
         d.   The velocity of floodwater at the site should not exceed five
feet (5') per second.
         e.   Ductwork must either be placed above the BFE or sealed to prevent
the entry of floodwaters.
         f.   The height of a below grade crawl space, measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation wall
shall not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
      4.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure in an Unnumbered A zone for which a BFE is not available and cannot
be reasonably obtained shall be reasonably safe from flooding, but in all cases
the lowest floor shall be at least two feet above the Highest Adjacent Grade.
      5.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure in an AO zone shall meet the requirements in section
10-4-11.
      6.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure in a V, V1-30, or VE zone shall meet the requirements in section
10-4-12.
      7.   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the
garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
         Alternatively, a registered engineer or architect may design and
certify engineered openings.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall meet the requirements of subsection 1 or 2, below.
      1.   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet all of the following
requirements:
         a.   In AE and A1-30 zones or other A zoned areas where the BFE has
been determined or can be reasonably obtained:
         New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated one foot or more above the BFE, or elevated as
required by ASCE 24, whichever is greater. Mechanical equipment and utilities
shall be waterproofed or elevated least one foot above the BFE, or as required
by ASCE 24, whichever is greater.
         b.   If located in an AO zone, the structure shall meet the
requirements in Section
10-4-11.
         c.   If located in an Unnumbered A zone for which a BFE is not
available and cannot be reasonably obtained, the structure shall be reasonably
safe from flooding, but in all cases the lowest floor shall be at least two
feet above the Highest Adjacent Grade.
         d.   If located in a V, V1-30, or VE zone, the structure shall meet
the requirements in Appendix B.
         e.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall meet the requirements of subsection
10-4-8A2.
      2.   If the requirements of subsection B1 are not met, then new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall meet all of the following requirements:
         a.   Be dry flood proofed so that below one foot or more above the
base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water or dry flood proofed to the elevation
required by ASCE 24, whichever is greater;
         b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
         c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.
Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection
10-4-5B3.
         d.   Any below grade crawl space must comply with subsections A2a and
A2f of this section.
         Applicants who are flood proofing nonresidential buildings shall be
notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot
below the flood proofed level (e.g. a building flood proofed to the base flood
level will be rated as one foot below). Flood proofing the building an
additional foot will reduce insurance premiums.
   C.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on
sites:
         a.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
         b.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
         c.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or
         d.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood;
   shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home is elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the base
flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      2.   Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not subject to
the above manufactured home provisions shall be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated a minimum
of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation; or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and are securely anchored to an
adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
      3.   Any below grade crawl space must comply with subsections A2a and A2f
of this section.
   D.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites are
required to:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days; or
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, be attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
      3.   Meet the requirements of subsection C of this section and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes per subsection
10-4-7A2 of this chapter.
   E.   Enclosed Area Below the Lowest Floor: If buildings or manufactured
homes are constructed or substantially improved with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor, the areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 909, 4-20-2015;
Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-9: REGULATORY FLOODWAY NOT DESIGNATED:
In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it
is demonstrated the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any
point within the community. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-10: AREAS DESIGNATED AS FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
10-4-4 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry
debris and potential projectiles, and which have erosion potential, the
following provisions apply:
   A.   Encroachments Prohibited: Encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other development are prohibited
unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that a proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.
   B.   Construction Or Reconstruction Prohibited: Construction or
reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within designated
floodways, except for: 1) repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure which do not increase the ground floor area; and 2) repairs,
reconstruction or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either: a)
before the repair or reconstruction is started, or b) if the structure has been
damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions or to structures identified as historic places
shall not be included in the fifty percent (50%).
   C.   Compliance With Certain Provisions: If subsection A of this section is
satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections
10-4-7 through
10-4-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-11: STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING AREAS (AO ZONES):
Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. The
base flood depths in these zones range from one to three feet (3') above ground
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
usually characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions
apply:
   A.   Residential Structures And Manufactured Homes: New construction and
substantial improvements of residential structures and manufactured homes
within AO zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above
the highest adjacent grade to the structure a minimum of one foot (1') above
the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet
above the highest adjacent grade to the structure if no depth number is
specified).
   B.   Nonresidential Structures: New construction and substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures within AO zones shall either:
      1.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade of the building site a minimum of one foot (1') or more
above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet (2') if no
depth number is specified); or
      2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to or above the FIRM depth level so that any space
below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this
method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect as in subsection
10-4-8B3 of this chapter.
   C.   Drainage: Adequate drainage paths shall be placed around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   D.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites within AO
zones on the community's FIRM are required to:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days; and
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, be attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
      3.   Meet the requirements of subsections A and C of this section and the
anchoring requirements for manufactured homes (subsection
10-4-7A2 of this chapter). (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-12: COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
10-4-4 of this chapter are coastal high hazard areas, designated as zones V1-
30, VE and/or V. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high
velocity waters from surges and, therefore, in addition to meeting all
provisions in this chapter, the following provisions shall also apply:
   A.   Design And Method Of Construction:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements in zones V1-30 and
VE (V if base flood elevation data is available) on the community's FIRM shall
be elevated on pilings and columns so that:
         a.   The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated a minimum of one
foot (1') above the base flood level; and
         b.   The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement resulting from
wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and
water loading values shall each have a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (a 1 in 100 chance, based on the 100-year mean
recurrence interval as defined in chapter 1 of this title).
      2.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications and plans for construction, and
shall certify the design and methods of construction to be used are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of
subsection A1 of this section.
   B.   Record Of Elevation: Obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings and columns) of each new and substantially improved
structure in zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community's FIRM, and ascertain
whether or not each structure contains a basement. The city administrator shall
maintain a record of all such information.
   C.   Location: All new construction within zones V1-30, VE, and V on the
community's FIRM shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.
   D.   Breakaway Walls:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements within zones V1-
30, VE, and V on the community's FIRM shall have the space below the lowest
floor either free of obstructions or constructed with non-supporting breakaway
walls, open wood lattice work, or insect screening intended to collapse under
wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. For the purposes of this section, a breakaway wall shall
have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more
than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a
design safe loading resistance of twenty (20) pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a
registered professional engineer or architect certifies the design as proposed
meets the following conditions:
         a.   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood; and
         b.   The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water
loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a one percent
(1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (a 1 in 100 chance,
based on the 100-year mean recurrence interval as defined in chapter 1 of this
title).
      2.   If breakaway walls are utilized, space enclosed or partially
enclosed by such walls shall be useable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage. Such space shall not be used for human habitation.
   E.   Fill Prohibited: Use of fill for structural support of buildings within
zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community's FIRM shall be prohibited.
   F.   Alteration Of Sand Dunes Prohibited: Manmade alteration of sand dunes
within zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community's FIRM which would increase
potential flood damage shall be prohibited.
   G.   Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved within zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community's FIRM on
sites located:
      1.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
      2.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
      3.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
      4.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood;
shall meet standards of subsections A through F of this section. Manufactured
homes placed or substantially improved on other sites in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision within zones V1-30, V, and VE on the FIRM
shall meet requirements of subsection
10-3-4 of this title.
   H.   Recreational Vehicles: RVs placed on sites within zones V1-30, V, and
VE on the community's FIRM are required to:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days; and
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, be attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
      3.   Meet the requirements of subsection
10-4-7A2 of this chapter, and subsections A through F of this section. (Ord.
847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-13: CONSTRUCTION OF NEW CRITICAL FACILITIES:
   A.   Location: Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the
extent feasible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area
(SFHA) (100-year floodplain).
   B.   Site: Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible
within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available.
   C.   Lowest Floor Elevation: Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor elevated a minimum three feet (3') above the base
flood level or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access
to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height
utilized above.
   D.   Floodproofing And Sealing: Floodproofing and sealing measures must be
taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into
floodwaters.
   E.   Access Routes: Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base
flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent
possible. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-14: APPEALS AND VARIANCES:
The hearing examiner shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Consideration Of Appeals And Variances: In passing upon such
applications, the hearing examiner shall consider all technical evaluations,
all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter;
and:
      1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      6.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      10.   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
      11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
   B.   Appeals:
      1.   The hearing examiner shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
      2.   Those aggrieved by the decision of the local administrator may
appeal such decision to the hearing examiner as provided in section
11-2C-14 of this code.
   C.   Variances:
      1.   The hearing examiner shall have the authority to grant a variance
from provisions of this chapter when conditions as set forth in this section
have been found to exist; provided, that any variance granted shall be subject
to conditions that will assure that adjustment thereby authorized shall not
constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations upon
other property in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is
situated. Variances shall be considered according to the procedures set forth
in section
11-2D-1 of this code, except the required showings shall be as set forth in
subsection C6 of this section.
      2.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, provided items in subsection A of this section have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
      3.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in this section.
      4.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      5.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination a variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      6.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      7.   Upon consideration of the factors of this section and the purposes
of this chapter, the hearing examiner may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as the examiner deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
      8.   Variances as interpreted in the national flood insurance program are
based on the general zoning law principle that: they pertain to a physical
piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the
structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances; and they
primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As
such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
      9.   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited
circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry
floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage
potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection C2 of
this section, and otherwise complies with subsections
10-4-7A, C, and D of this chapter.
      10.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   D.   Procedure For Approval Of Variance:
      1.   Application: A request for a variance may be initiated by a property
owner or his/her authorized agent by filing an application with the city on
forms prescribed by the city. The application shall be accompanied by a site
plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed
development and its relationship to the surrounding property, a survey
including the property boundaries and topography, and a written narrative
describing the relief that is requested and a statement of how the applicant
believes the standards of this section are met. Each application shall be
accompanied by a receipt indicating payment of fees, as established by the city
council.
      2.   Notice Of Application: Notice of application shall be provided as
set forth in section
11-2C-9 of this code.
      3.   Public Hearing: Before a request for a variance is acted upon, it
shall be considered at a public hearing.
      4.   Notice Of Public Hearing: Notice of public hearing shall be provided
as set forth in subsection
11-2C-11D of this code.
      5.   Recess Of Hearing: The hearing examiner may recess a hearing
regarding a request for a variance in order to obtain additional information.
Upon recessing for this purpose, the hearing examiner shall announce the time
and date when the hearing will be resumed.
      6.   Final Action:
         a.   The hearing examiner shall cause written notification of his
action to be mailed to the applicant for a variance within ten (10) days after
the decision has been rendered.
         b.   The local administrator shall maintain the records of all actions
and report any variances to the federal insurance administration upon request.
         c.   The applicant or any other aggrieved party with standing in the
matter may appeal the decision of the hearing examiner to city council in
accordance with the provisions of section
11-2C-14 of this code. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-15: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 847, 8-
17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-16: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, or the federal insurance administration, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-17: VIOLATIONS; INVESTIGATION:
All development within special flood hazard areas is subject to the terms of
this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
The city administrator or his authorized agent shall investigate any charge of
violation of this title brought to the city administrator's attention. Upon
verifying a violation of this title, the city administrator shall serve notice
to the property owner to comply with city building regulations. The city
administrator or his authorized agent shall inspect the premises after serving
notice of violation and, if the violation is still in effect, may take any
action authorized as described below. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 887a, 2-
4-2013; Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-18: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance
and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this
ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions), shall constitute a fine. Any person who violates this ordinance or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall thereof be fined not more
than $10,000 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013; Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
10-4-19: SEVERABILITY:
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable.
Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 1016, 6-5-2023)
CHAPTER 5
TRANSPORTATION SERVICE STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Authority And Purpose
10-5-2: Findings Of Concurrency
10-5-3: Level Of Service Standards
10-5-4: Concurrency Test
10-5-5: Exemptions From Concurrency Test
10-5-6: Building Permits; Finding Of Concurrency
10-5-7: Fees
10-5-8: Concurrency System
10-5-9: Monitoring Transportation System
10-5-10: Intergovernmental Coordination
10-5-11: Appeals
10-5-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Authority: This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's powers as a
code city, article XI, section 10 of the Washington state constitution; Revised
Code of Washington chapter 35A; the growth management act, Revised Code of
Washington chapter 36.70A, generally; and Revised Code of Washington 36.70A.070
specifically.
   B.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter:
      1.   To ensure adequate levels of service on transportation facilities
for existing land uses as well as new development;
      2.   To provide transportation facilities that achieve and maintain the
city's level of service standards as established in the city comprehensive
plan; and
      3.   To ensure that the city's level of service standards are achieved
concurrently with development as required by the growth management act. (Ord.
847, 8-17-2009)
10-5-2: FINDINGS OF CONCURRENCY:
   A.   Determination Of Necessity; Financial Commitments: Prior to approving
proposed subdivisions, dedications, short plats, short subdivisions, planned
residential developments, or binding site plans, the reviewing authority shall
make written findings that public facilities which will be needed as a result
of the new development, such as streets, roads and other public ways, will be
provided concurrent with development. For all other development applications
listed herein, the concurrency finding shall be made prior to the issuance of
the building permit. The concurrency requirement is satisfied if the
improvements are in place at the time the impacts of development occur, or if
the necessary financial commitments are in place. Such financial commitments
shall include, and are not limited to, impact fees anticipated to be generated
by the development to complete improvements required to meet specified
standards of service designed in the transportation study within six (6) years
of the time of building permit issuance. Any combination of the following shall
constitute "necessary financial commitments" for the purposes of this chapter:
      1.   The city has received voter approval of and/or has bonding
authority;
      2.   The city has received approval for federal, state or other funds;
      3.   The city has received a secured commitment from a fee payer ensuring
the payer will construct the needed improvement(s) or facility and the city has
found such improvement(s) or facility to be acceptable and consistent with its
capital facilities plan; and/or
      4.   The city has other assured funding, including, and not limited to,
impact fees that have been paid.
   B.   Compliance With Statutes; Time Of Making Findings:
      1.   Compliance with this concurrency requirement shall be sufficient to
satisfy the provisions of Revised Code of Washington 58.17.060 and 58.17.110,
and the act 1 .
      2.   The finding of concurrency shall be made at the time of preliminary
plans or planned residential development (PRD) approval or at the time of
binding site plan approval.
      3.   For all other development applications, the finding shall be made at
the time of building permit issuance.
   C.   Application Approval: The city shall not approve applications for
preliminary plats, PRDs or binding site plans unless the city is able to make a
finding of concurrency; provided, that, if the fee payer opts to dedicate land,
to provide improvements, and/or construction consistent with the requirements
of section
10-5-4 of this chapter governing credits, where appropriate, the city can make
a finding of concurrency.
   D.   Term Of Validity:
      1.   A finding of concurrency provided to the applicant at the time of
preliminary plat or PRD approval, or at the time of binding site plan approval,
shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from the date concurrency is
issued.
      2.   If, pursuant to law, an applicant requests an extension of the three
(3) year period between the date of preliminary and final plat or PRD approval,
the applicant shall be subject to a new concurrency determination prior to the
granting of a request for an extension.
   E.   Exemption; City Options:
      1.   If any party for any reason is able to exempt itself from the
operation of this chapter, the city reserves the right to review its land use
plan in conjunction with its capital facilities plan in order to ensure
concurrency.
      2.   In the event that the impact fees that might have been paid would
have been an integral part of the financing to ensure concurrency, the city
reserves the right to deny approval for the development on these grounds. (Ord.
847, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 58.17.
10-5-3: LEVEL OF SERVICE STANDARDS:
   A.   Comprehensive Plan Controls: The following level of service (LOS)
standards, established in the city comprehensive plan, are hereby adopted for
the purposes of this chapter. If a conflict arises between a LOS standard
identified in this chapter and a standard identified in the comprehensive plan,
the LOS standard in the comprehensive plan shall control.
The Southwest Washington regional transportation planning organization (RTPO)
adopted the following LOS standards based on the 1985 highway capacity manual
for the region:
C - Roads in rural areas
   D - Within the city limits
   B.   City And City Area Arterials And Collectors: LOS standards are applied
to the city's arterials and collectors as follows:
   LEVEL OF SERVICE (ROADWAYS AND PATHWAYS)
      Existing LOS By Route Type           Proposed LOS By Route Type
Route Vehicular (Road) Nonvehicular (Path) Vehicular (Road) Nonvehicular (Path)
                Existing LOS By Route Type     Proposed LOS By Route Type
Route           Vehicular (Road) Nonvehicular  Vehicular (Road) Nonvehicular
                                 (Path)                         (Path)
SR 103          C                B             D                B
Sandridge       C                NP            D                C
Pioneer Road    C                NP            D                C
S. Tenth Street C                C             D                B
S. Boulevard    C                D             D                B
N. Boulevard    C                D             D                B
   
   Notes:
Road: Section of the route for motorists and vehicular traffic
Path: Section of the route for nonvehicular traffic (pedestrians, equestrians,
wheelchairs, etc.)
NP: No existing pathway/boulevard
(Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-5-4: CONCURRENCY TEST:
   A.   Except as provided for in subsection 10-5-5A of this chapter, the test
for concurrency shall be conducted as a part of the building permit
application.
   B.   The city may conduct an alternative concurrency test for the
applications identified in subsection 10-5-5B of this chapter and through the
process set forth in that subsection.
   C.   The test for concurrency shall be conducted in the order in which the
completed building permit application is received.
   D.   The concurrency test shall be performed only for the specific property
use(s), residential density(ies) and intensity(ies) of the use(s) described on
the building permit application. The applicant shall describe the proposed
development in a manner adequate for the city to determine the peak hour
traffic which is likely to be generated by the proposed development. The
applicant shall also provide to the city a legal description of the property.
Revisions to the proposed development that may create additional impacts on
transportation facilities shall be required to undergo an additional
concurrency test.
   E.   In conducting the concurrency test, the city shall use the trip
generation tables set forth in the latest edition of the "Institute Of
Transportation Engineers" (ITE), information report - trip generation. The
presumption is that rates used by the city are accurate unless proven
otherwise.
   F.   If the applicant pays the fees identified in section
10-5-7 of this chapter, the applicant may submit a calculation of alternative
trip generation rates for the proposed development. The city shall review the
alternate calculations and indicate in writing whether such calculations are
acceptable in lieu of standard ITE trip generation rates.
   G.   The city may adjust the trip generation forecast of the proposed
development in order to account for any transportation strategies proposed by
the applicant and acceptable to the city.
   H.   The city shall not make a finding of concurrency as a part of the
issuance of a building permit if the proposed development will result in
transportation facilities declining below adopted LOS standards. If the LOS of
the transportation facilities meets or exceeds the adopted LOS standards, the
concurrency test is passed, and the city shall make a finding of concurrency.
(Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-5-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM CONCURRENCY TEST:
   A.   The following applications for a building permit shall be exempt from
the concurrency test. This exemption from the concurrency test does not exempt
the applicant from other applicable development code requirements:
      1.   Any proposed development that creates no additional impacts on any
transportation facility;
      2.   Any project that is a component of another proposed development and
that was included in a prior application for a finding of concurrency;
      3.   Any renewal of a previously issued but unexpired permit;
      4.   Any application for a residential building permit if the dwelling
unit is a part of a subdivision or short plat that submitted an application
after 1990 and that has undergone the analysis mandated by the state
subdivision act, Revised Code of Washington 58.17.060 or 58.17.110; and
   B.   The following applications for a building permit must be accompanied by
a traffic impact analysis study prepared by the applicant:
      1.   Development that generates fifty (50) or more vehicle trips in the
peak direction of the peak hour on the adjacent streets and intersections; or
      2.   Development that generates twenty five percent (25%) or more of peak
hour traffic through a signalized intersection or the critical movement at an
unsignalized intersection.
A traffic impact report prepared for preliminary development approval or to
supplement an environmental checklist may be substituted for the traffic impact
analysis. Such traffic impact report must conform with guidelines referred to
in this section, must be prepared no earlier than two (2) years before
submitted, and must include an analysis of a traffic generation level not less
than ninety percent (90%) of that to be generated by the proposed development.
(Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-5-6: BUILDING PERMITS; FINDING OF CONCURRENCY:
   A.   The city shall make a finding of concurrency for each building permit
application that passes the concurrency test.
   B.   The finding of concurrency shall be valid for the same time period as
the underlying building permit, including any extensions thereof.
   C.   A finding of concurrency shall expire or be revoked if the underlying
building permit expires or is revoked by the city.
   D.   A finding of concurrency accompanying a building permit for a
particular parcel of property may be used by the heirs, executors, successors,
or assigns of the original applicant.
   E.   All building permits that require one or more transportation facilities
to be provided by the applicant shall be and are hereby conditioned upon an
appropriate financial commitment by the applicant which is binding upon
subsequent owners, heirs, executors, successors, or assigns, and upon the
completion of such transportation facilities in a timely manner, prior to the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy or prior to occupancy, unless stated
otherwise in writing by the city. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-5-7: FEES:
If the applicant requests an alternative calculation for the concurrency test,
or if the city determines that an alternative calculation is required due to
the size, scale, or other unusual characteristics of the proposed development,
a fee for the alternative calculation shall be paid by the applicant prior to
the initiation of review. The fee for conducting the review of the alternative
calculation shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00), unless otherwise
established by the city administrator. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-5-8: CONCURRENCY SYSTEM:
   A.   The city will provide, or arrange for others to provide, adequate
transportation facilities by constructing needed transportation facilities and
implementing transportation strategies within the six (6) year horizon line
that:
      1.   Eliminate LOS deficiencies for existing uses;
      2.   Achieve LOS standards for anticipated future development and
redevelopment resulting from previously issued building permits; and
      3.   Maintain existing facilities and repair or replace obsolete or worn
out facilities.
Improvements to transportation facilities and transportation strategies shall
be consistent with the city comprehensive plan.
   B.   The city shall allocate sufficient funds during the appropriate fiscal
year to meet the financial commitment for all transportation facilities
required to meet LOS standards, except the city may omit from its budget any
capital improvements for which a binding agreement has been executed with
another party. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-5-9: MONITORING TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM:
The city shall, on an annual basis, review and update its capital facilities
plan and transportation element and shall identify those facilities necessary
to achieve transportation concurrency. At a minimum, this review will include
updates, as needed, to the city's traffic model, a comparison of actual and
forecast traffic volumes, and an examination of conformances with the adopted
level of service standards. In addition to annual reviews, emergency review of
the concurrency management system shall be conducted whenever traffic analysis
reveals that fifty percent (50%) of the projected six (6) year capacity of any
transportation facility or concurrency district has been assigned in any one
year. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
10-5-10: INTERGOVERNMENTAL COORDINATION:
   A.   The city may enter into agreements with other local governments,
transit districts, and the state of Washington to coordinate imposition of LOS
standards, collection of impact fees, and implementation of transportation
strategies.
   B.   The city may apply LOS standards, fees, and other mitigation measures
to developments in the city that impact other local governments and the state
of Washington. Development permits issued by the city may include conditions
and mitigation measures to be imposed on behalf of and implemented by other
local governments and the state of Washington.
   C.   The city may receive impact fees or other mitigation payments based on
or as a result of development proposed in other jurisdictions that impact the
city. The city may agree to accept such payments or may coordinate with other
jurisdictions to implement the appropriate mitigation measures. (Ord. 847, 8-
17-2009)
10-5-11: APPEALS:
   A.   Any applicant or any other aggrieved party withstanding in the matter
may appeal the approval or the denial of a finding of concurrency pursuant to
the procedures and requirements of section
11-2C-14 of this code, and by paying the applicable appeals fee.
   B.   The appeal on a finding of nonconcurrency will not be conducted if the
applicant refuses to pay the transportation impact fees required by the city
unified development code. However, such appeal shall be conducted if the full
fees owing are paid under protest. (Ord. 847, 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 6
UNFIT DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Findings
10-6-2: Designation Of Authority
10-6-3: Declaring A Building Or Premises Unfit For Human Habitation Or Other
Use
10-6-4: Procedure To Abate Unsafe Or Unfit Structures Or Premises
10-6-5: Corrective Action
10-6-6: Standards For Repair Or Demolition
10-6-7: Other Powers Reserved
10-6-1: FINDINGS:
It is found that there exist in the City of Long Beach, dwellings and other
buildings, structures, and premises that are unfit for human habitation and
that are unfit for other uses due to dilapidation; disrepair; structural
defects; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other
calamities; inadequate drainage; overcrowding; or other conditions contrary to
the health and welfare of the City's residents. It is the intent of this
chapter to incorporate the provisions of chapter 35.80 Revised Code of
Washington to clarify and strengthen the City's procedures for abating such
unsafe or unfit dwellings, buildings, structures, or premises. (Ord. 927, 3-7-
2016)
10-6-2: DESIGNATION OF AUTHORITY:
   A.   The Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall have
the full scope of authority granted to the public officer under chapter 35.80
Revised Code of Washington and this chapter.
   B.   The hearing examiner is designated as the City's Appeals Commission and
shall have the full scope of authority granted to that commission under chapter
35.80 Revised Code of Washington. (Ord. 927, 3-7-2016)
10-6-3: DECLARING A BUILDING OR PREMISES UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION OR OTHER
USE:
   A.   The Community Development Director or designee has the authority to
determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or premises or portions thereof
is unfit for human habitation or other use if the Community Development
Director finds that conditions exist that are potentially dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of the occupants, the occupants of
neighboring dwellings or structures, or other residents of the City of Long
Beach.
   B.   A dwelling, building, structure, or premises or portions thereof is
potentially dangerous or injurious when one or more of the following conditions
exist:
      1.   It is vacant for an extended period, generally in excess of six (6)
months, and persistently or repeatedly becomes unprotected or unsecured;
      2.   It has conditions that pose a hazard or attractive nuisance, such
as, but not limited to, sinkholes; exposed underground vaults, pipes, or wires;
trenches; unstable slopes; or hazardous materials;
      3.   It is currently or frequently occupied by unauthorized persons for
illegal purposes;
      4.   The owner or occupant(s) of the structure has not provided minimum
safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire;
      5.   It contains unsafe equipment, as determined by the Community
Development Director or designee;
      6.   It has inadequate drainage, severe uncleanliness, overcrowding, or
inadequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or
      7.   It is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation that it presents a danger of
structural collapse or a hazard of fire or accident. (Ord. 927, 3-7-2016)
10-6-4: PROCEDURE TO ABATE UNSAFE OR UNFIT STRUCTURES OR PREMISES:
   A.   The Community Development Director or designee shall have the power to
investigate property conditions in the City and to enter upon premises, with
consent of the occupant, for the purpose of making examinations when the
Community Development Director or designee has reasonable grounds for believing
a dwelling, building, structure, or premises are unfit for human habitation or
for other use; provided, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. In the
event that entry is denied or resisted, the Community Development Director or
designee has the power to seek an order from a court of competent jurisdiction
that authorizes entry, as provided in Revised Code of Washington 35.80.030(3).
   B.   Upon making a determination that a dwelling, building, structure, or
premises is unfit, the Community Development Director or designee shall, as
outlined in Revised Code of Washington 35.80.030(1)(c), serve the complaint and
set a hearing to be held before the Community Development Director at a
specified time and place, between ten (10) and thirty (30) days of service of
the complaint. A copy of the complaint shall also be filed with the Pacific
County auditor.
   C.   All persons having any interest in the subject property shall have the
right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by
representative and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint.
At the hearing, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to
administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence. The
rules of evidence shall not apply in hearings before the Community Development
Director.
   D.   In determining the fitness of a dwelling, building, structure, or
premises, the Community Development Director shall reference title 5, 10, 11,
or 12 of this Code, the Building Code, the Fire Code, or any other pertinent
provisions, in accordance with Revised Code of Washington 35.80.030(1)(d) and
(e). As set forth in Revised Code of Washington 35.80.030(1)(f), upon entering
a finding that a dwelling, building, structure, or premises is unfit, the
Community Development Director shall state in writing his or her findings of
fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner or party in interest thereof, and shall post in a conspicuous
place on the property, an order that: 1) requires the owner or party in
interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve
such dwelling, building, structure, or premises to render it fit for human
habitation; and/or 2) to vacate and close the dwelling, building, structure, or
premises, if such course of action is deemed proper; and/or 3) requires the
owner or party in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove
or demolish such dwelling, building, structure, or premises, if such course of
action is deemed proper.
   E.   If no appeal is filed pursuant to subsection F of this section, a copy
of the Community Development Director's order shall be filed with the Pacific
County auditor.
   F.   The Community Development Director's order may be appealed to the
hearing examiner by filing a notice of appeal with the Community Development
Director within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of service and posting
as required in subsection D of this section.
   G.   All matters submitted to the hearing examiner must be resolved within
sixty (60) days from the date of filing therewith, and a transcript of the
hearing examiner's findings of fact shall be made available to the owner or
other party in interest upon demand. The decision of the hearing examiner shall
be served and posted in the same manner as the decision of the Community
Development Director as set forth in subsection D of this section.
   H.   Any person affected by a final order issued by the hearing examiner to
repair, alter, improve, vacate, close, remove, and/or demolish a dwelling,
building, structure, or premises may petition to the Pacific County Superior
Court as provided in Revised Code of Washington 35.80.030(2). (Ord. 943, 8-21-
2017)
10-6-5: CORRECTIVE ACTION:
   A.   If the owner or party in interest, following exhaustion of his or her
rights to appeal, fails to comply with the order to repair, alter, improve,
vacate, close, remove, and/or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or
premises, the Community Development Director or designee may direct or cause
such dwelling, building, structure, or premises to be repaired, altered,
improved, vacated, closed, removed, and/or demolished.
   B.   It is a gross misdemeanor if the owner or party of interest, following
exhaustion of his or her rights to appeal, fails to comply with the order to
repair, alter, improve, vacate, close, remove, and/or demolish the dwelling,
building, structure, or premises. Furthermore, the Community Development
Director or designee may direct or cause such dwelling, building, structure, or
premises to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated, closed, removed, and/or
demolished.
   C.   Whenever a building or premises is found to be unsafe or unfit and the
cost of demolition or other abatement must be incurred by the City, there shall
be charged against the property the costs of all administrative proceedings
before the Community Development Director and the hearing examiner including,
but not limited to, salaries, wages, benefits, material, equipment rental, and
other expenses incurred for inspecting, conducting hearing, or otherwise
determining the status of the property.
   D.   In accordance with Revised Code of Washington 35.80.030(1)(h), the cost
of abatement by the City shall be assessed against the real property upon which
such cost was incurred, which assessment the County Treasurer shall enter upon
the tax rolls against the property for the current year and to become a part of
the general taxes for that year to be collected at the same time and with
interest at such rates and in such manner as is provided in Revised Code of
Washington 84.56.020 for delinquent taxes, and when collected to be deposited
to the credit of the City's General Fund. The assessment shall constitute a
lien against the property which shall be of equal rank with State, County, and
Municipal taxes.
   E.   Materials from any dwelling, building, structure, or premises removed
or demolished by the Community Development Director or designee, shall, if
possible, be salvaged and sold as if the materials were surplus property of the
City, and the funds received from the sale shall be credited against the cost
of the removal or demolition; and if any balance remains, it shall be paid to
the parties entitled thereto, as determined by the Community Development
Director after deducting the costs incident thereto. (Ord. 943, 8-21-2017)
10-6-6: STANDARDS FOR REPAIR OR DEMOLITION:
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Community
Development Director and the hearing examiner in ordering repair, remediation,
vacation, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, structures, or premises:
   A.   If the dangerous or unfit dwelling, building, structure, or premises
can reasonably be repaired or remedied so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered repaired or
remedied.
   B.   If the dangerous or unfit dwelling, building, structure, or premises
cannot reasonably be repaired or remedied so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be demolished.
   C.   If the estimated cost of repairing the conditions causing a dangerous
or unfit dwelling, building, or structure to be unsafe or unfit for human
habitation or other use exceeds approximately fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement value of a dwelling, building, or structure of similar size,
design, type, and quality as determined by the Long Beach building inspector,
it shall be demolished.
   D.   If the dangerous or unfit dwelling, building, structure, or premises is
or presents a fire hazard as determined by the Long Beach building inspector,
it shall be demolished or abated, provided the fire hazard is not eliminated by
the owner within a reasonable time as determined by the City. (Ord. 927, 3-7-
2016)
10-6-7: OTHER POWERS RESERVED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of
the courts or of the City to enforce any provisions of its ordinances or
regulations or to prevent or punish violations thereof; the powers conferred by
this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by
any other law. The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent the City or any
other governmental unit from taking any action, summary or otherwise, necessary
to eliminate or minimize imminent danger to the health or safety of any person
or property. (Ord. 927, 3-7-2016)
TITLE 11
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Authority
11-1-3: Severability
11-1-4: Applicability
11-1-5: Purpose And Intent
11-1-6: Minimum Requirements
11-1-7: Interpretation; Definitions
11-1-8: Computation Of Time
11-1-9: Withdrawal Of Applications And Refund Of Fees
11-1-10: Security Agreement
11-1-11: Vesting Of Applications
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the LONG BEACH UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE, hereinafter referred to as "this title". (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
11-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted pursuant to authority contained in the following
provisions of Revised Code Of Washington:
   Chapter 35A.63, planning and zoning in code cities
   Chapter 35A.58, boundaries and plats
   Chapter 36.70A, growth management act
   Chapter 86.16, floodplain management
   Title 58, boundaries and plats
and any other appropriate state regulations. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-1-3: SEVERABILITY:
Should any chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
of this title be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this title.
(Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Application To Land Development: Except as specifically provided in
this title, the provisions of this title apply to all land development in the
city. No development may be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to
this title.
   B.   Exceptions: Exceptions include previously issued/vested development
permits. The provisions of this title and any amendments to it will not affect
the validity of any lawfully issued and effective development permit, if both:
      1.   The development activity authorized by the permit began before the
effective date of this title or any amendment to it, or will begin after the
effective date hereof, but within six (6) months of issuance of the building
permit; and
      2.   The development activity continues without interruption until the
development is complete. If the development permit expires, any further
development on that site may occur only in conformance with the requirements of
this title or any amendment to it.
   C.   Compliance With Title: No building or structure may be erected,
demolished, remodeled, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or relocated, and no
building, structure, or premises may be used in the city after the effective
date hereof, except in compliance with the provisions of this title and then
only after securing all required permits and licenses.
   D.   Conformance With Comprehensive Plan: Nothing in this title authorizes
development that is inconsistent with and does not further the framework and
policy direction provided for in the city's adopted comprehensive plan pursuant
to Revised Code Of Washington chapter 36.70A. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-1-5: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purposes of this title are to:
   A.   Establish regulatory procedures and standards for review and decision
making of all proposed development in the city.
   B.   Foster and preserve public health, safety, comfort, and welfare, and to
aid in the harmonious, orderly, aesthetically pleasing, and socially beneficial
development of the city, in accordance with the comprehensive plan.
   C.   Adopt a development review process that is efficient, effective, and
equitable.
   D.   Prohibit or condition incompatible land uses by regulating density and
dimensional aspects of development.
   E.   Ensure that new development(s) install all private and public
infrastructure necessary to serve the new development and protect
environmentally sensitive areas.
   F.   Implement the comprehensive plan of the city.
   G.   Regulate the subdivision of land to ensure that:
      1.   Adequate utility and public facilities are provided in developing
portions of the city;
      2.   Land development is coordinated; and
      3.   Uniform monumenting of land subdivisions and conveyance by accurate
legal description is achieved.
   H.   Provide for a penalty for the violation of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
11-1-6: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In interpretation and application, requirements set forth in this title are
considered the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the purposes of
this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-1-7: INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Language Construction: The following rules of construction apply to the
text of this title:
      1.   The words "must", "shall", and "will" are always mandatory and not
discretionary. The words "should" and "may" are permissive and are
discretionary.
      2.   Words used in the present tense include the future; and words used
in the singular number include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless
the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      3.   A "building" or "structure" includes any part of a building or
structure.
      4.   The word "person" includes an individual or any organized group of
individuals, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, a
limited liability corporation, or any other similar entity.
      5.   The word "includes" does not limit a term to the specified examples,
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances
of like kind or character.
      6.   The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to be
gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   B.   Zoning Map: This unified development code consists of the text of this
title, together with a zoning map, which is on file at the office of the city
clerk-treasurer, showing the boundaries of different zoning districts.
Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts will be made in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any street
will be construed as following the centerline of the street.
      2.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted
lot line or other property line will be construed as following such line.
      3.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section
lines, half section lines, or quarter section lines will be construed as
following such lines.
      4.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following natural
features will be construed as following such features.
      5.   Vacated streets and alleys will assume the zone classification of
abutting property with the former centerline as the new boundary.
      6.   When any uncertainty exists as to zone boundaries, the planning
commission and/or city council may require the interested parties to determine
the location of boundaries by survey.
   C.   Right Of Way:
      1.   Except when such areas are specifically designated on the zoning map
as being classified in one of the zones provided in this title, land contained
in rights of way for streets or alleys will be considered unclassified.
      2.   Within street or alley rights of way, uses will be limited to street
purposes as defined by law.
      3.   Where a right of way is vacated, the vacated area will have the zone
classification of the adjoining property with which it is first merged. (Ord.
848, 8-17-2009)
   D.   Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used
in this title shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this title its most reasonable application. For
purposes of this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
designated in this section:
    ABUT: Located adjacent to.
   ACCESS: A way or means of approach to provide physical entry to a property
or facility. Alternatively stated as "ingress".
   AGGRIEVED PARTY: An individual whose legal rights have been violated or
whose financial interests have been directly affected by a city decision.
   AMENDMENT: A change in wording, context or substance.
   ANNEXATION: Incorporation of a land area into the corporate boundaries,
resulting in a change in the boundaries of the city.
   APPEAL: A challenge of a city decision by a party of record. Decisions by
the city administrator or community development director are appealable to the
hearing examiner; decisions by the hearing examiner or planning commission are
appealable to the city council; decisions by the city council are appealable to
the Pacific County superior court or the growth management hearings board.
   BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT: Legal method of relocating a property line.
   CERTIFICATION: Verification of facts.
   CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted in one or more zoning classifications as
defined by title 12, "Zoning Regulations", of this code, that because of
characteristics peculiar to it, or because of size, technological processes, or
types of equipment, or because of the exact location with reference to
surroundings, streets and existing improvements or demands upon public
facilities, this use requires a special degree of control to make such use
consistent with and compatible to other existing or permissible uses in the
same zone or zones, and to assure that such use shall not be counter to the
public interest.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: Documented evidence of authority granted by the
hearing examiner to establish a conditional use at a particular location.
   DEDICATION: Gift or donation of private property by the owner to a public
body. A dedication is completed through the conveyance of written deed or title
and a formal acceptance by the public body.
   DRIVEWAY: A private roadway providing access to a street or highway.
   EASEMENT: The grant of one or more specific air, surface, or subsurface
property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a
corporation, or another person or entity, and recorded according to law or on
the plat of the property.
   EGRESS: A way or means of approach to provide physical exit from a property
or facility.
   EROSION: The gradual transport of materials. For example, the movement of
dirt by rain runoff.
   EROSION CONTROL: Measures taken to avoid or reduce erosion, such as hay
bales, hydroseeding, corrective grading, detention, etc.
   EXEMPT: An action or proposal not subject to the requirements of this title.
   FINDINGS: Written explanations of why, legally and factually, a public
entity makes a particular decision.
   FLOOR AREA/GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal area of all
enclosed floors of a building, excluding basements, vents, shafts, light
courts, elevators and equipment penthouses, and any area having a ceiling
height of less than six feet six inches (6'6"), measured from the exterior face
of exterior walls or from the centerline of a common wall separating two (2)
buildings.
   HEARING: A noticed public meeting whereby individuals may present their
input regarding a proposal.
   HEARING EXAMINER: An official appointed by a government agency to conduct an
investigation or administrative hearing so the agency can exercise its
statutory powers.
   INGRESS: See definition of Access.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any human activity that results in a change in the
natural ground cover or topography. Land disturbing activities have the
potential to cause or contribute to sedimentation.
   LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (LID): A special assessment district established
to finance a public improvement benefiting those located within the boundaries
of the district.
   NOTICE: Published information regarding an impending meeting, proceeding, or
hearing giving at least the time, date, place, and purpose of the meeting.
   ORDINANCE: Statute enacted by a city government. Typically, statutes command
or prohibit something, or declare policy.
   PARTY OF RECORD: Those who request to be kept informed regarding a city
action or those who provide written original comments (but not form letters or
petitions) or who testify at a public hearing on a city action. Being a party
of record entitles a person to appeal a city decision.
   PLAT: A subdivision map.
   PLAT, FINAL: An approved subdivision map filed with Pacific County. Final
plat approval is usually given upon completion of improvements or posting of a
bond guaranteeing construction of improvements.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY: Draft map showing the proposed layout of a subdivision
submitted to the staff and the platting authority for preliminary approval.
   PLAT, SHORT: A process to subdivide land into four (4) or fewer parcels or
lots, any one of which is less than five (5) acres.
   PREAPPLICATION: Activities that occur prior to a formal development permit
application being submitted. For example, a preapplication meeting or
conference between the applicant and city staff is typical.
   RECURRENCE INTERVAL/RECURRENCE LEVEL: The average number of years between
the occurrence of two (2) floods with the same level of discharge.
   REVIEW, ADMINISTRATIVE: An approval review that may require some discretion
on the part of the reviewer, usually the planning staff. The approval may be
outright, as conditioned or modified, or denied based upon the applicable laws
and regulations and the discretion of the reviewing entity. Administrative
reviews may require notification of adjacent property owners and environmental
review, but do not require a hearing. Examples of administrative reviews
include, and are not limited to, short plats, design review for signs, and
administrative shoreline permits.
   REVIEW, HEARING EXAMINER: An approval review that involves the exercise of
discretion through the hearing process. The approval may be outright, as
conditioned or modified, or denied based upon the applicable laws and
regulations and the discretion of the reviewing entity. Hearing examiner
procedures require public notice. Examples of hearing examiner review include,
and are not limited to, conditional use permits, appeals of administrative
reviews, and variances.
   REVIEW, LEGISLATIVE: An approval process that involves a substantial amount
of discretion. The approval may be outright, as conditioned or modified, or
denied based upon the discretion of the reviewing entity, and possibly upon the
applicable laws and regulations. Where other review processes (ministerial,
administrative, hearing examiner) involve a measure of entitlement of property
rights or presumed entitlement on the part of the applicant, legislative review
may involve the conveyance of such rights and may be entirely discretionary.
Legislative review requires public notice. Legislative review begins with
review by the planning commission, which establishes a record and a
recommendation for the city council. Examples of legislative review include,
and are not limited to, rezones, changes to the comprehensive plan, or changes
to the city codes.
   REVIEW, MINISTERIAL (Minor Administrative Review): A subset of
administrative review (see definition of Review, Administrative), an approval
review for a proposal that is permitted outright in the codes, and does not
require discretion on the part of the reviewer. Minor administrative reviews
may not require any notice to surrounding property owners. Examples of minor
administrative (ministerial) reviews include, and are not limited to, building
permits and nonconforming use determinations. While minor in nature, these
permits can require considerable research.
   REVIEWING AUTHORITY: The agency, board, group, official or other legally
designated entity that has been charged with the review and approval of plans
and applications.
   RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, utility,
pedestrianway or similar uses.
   SEDIMENTATION: The transport from the site of its origin and redeposition of
solid particulate matter, mineral or organic, by water, air, gravity, or ice.
   SEWER, SANITARY: A wastewater conveyance system that transports sewage from
homes and businesses to a wastewater treatment plant.
   SEWER, STORM: A system of inlets, ditches and pipes that collects storm
runoff from roads and open areas and carries stormwater to holding areas called
detention or retention basins. From these basins, runoff is released downstream
at a controlled rate to minimize the potential for flooding.
   SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM: Both a policy and regulatory program for the
conservation and development of coastal areas, described by a plan that
includes the following elements: economic development; public access;
recreation; circulation; land use; conservation; history, culture, science, and
education; and flooding.
   STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT (SEPA): SEPA requires Washington state and
local agencies to consider the likely environmental consequences of a proposal
before approving or denying the proposal.
   STREET: Any vehicular way that is: 1) an existing state, county or municipal
roadway; 2) shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law; 3) approved by other
official action; 4) shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the county assessor; or 5) shown on the official map or adopted plan. It
includes the land between and beyond the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved. A street affords the primary means of access to abutting property.
   STREET, PRIVATE: A street that has not been accepted by or dedicated to the
city but is used for the primary means of access to abutting properties within
a development. Such streets are typically constructed and maintained by those
parties who own, use or benefit from the street.
   STREET, PUBLIC: A street that has been accepted by or dedicated to the city.
   SUBDIVISION: The division of a single piece of property into smaller,
separate pieces or lots.
   URBAN GROWTH AREA (UGA): Those areas abutting city limits designated for
urban growth, and which may be annexed into the city.
   UTILITY: An organization that maintains the infrastructure for a public
service. Also, the public service infrastructure itself, such as the electric
power and telephone systems.
   VACATION (Of A Street): A process whereby the public interest in a street
right of way is removed.
   VARIANCE: An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of
this title to a particular piece of property which because of special
circumstances applicable to it, is deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by
other properties in the same vicinity and zone and for which adjustment
remedies the disparity in privileges.
   VESTING: A land use application is considered under only the land use
statutes and ordinances in effect at the time the city deems the application
complete.
   ZONE: An area accurately defined as to the boundaries and location on an
official map and within which area only certain types of land uses are
permitted, and within which other types of land uses are excluded, as set forth
in title 12, "Zoning Regulations", of this code. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009; amd.
Ord. 890, 4-13-2013; Ord. 919, 8-3-2015)
11-1-8: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be
done will be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the
last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day will be excluded
from the computation of time. Any illegal activities, or unauthorized work, or
effort spent by the city to address same shall not count toward the city's
obligation for timely action. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-1-9: WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATIONS AND REFUND OF FEES:
Once an application is made and fee paid, an application may be withdrawn. If
at the time of withdrawal public notice of the application has not yet
occurred, the city may refund up to fifty percent (50%) of the application fee.
Once public notice of the application or public hearing is published as set
forth in section
11-2C-9 of this title, the city will retain the entire fee and refund shall not
occur. (Ord. 869, 4-4-2011)
11-1-10: SECURITY AGREEMENT:
   A.   Information Required: In each case where a security is posted, the
applicant and the clerk-treasurer must sign a notarized security agreement,
approved in form by the city attorney. This agreement must be recorded with the
Pacific County auditor. The agreement must provide the following information:
      1.   A description of the work or improvements covered by the security.
      2.   The period of time covered by the security.
      3.   The amount and nature of the security and the amount of the cash
deposit.
      4.   The rights and duties of the city and the applicant.
      5.   An irrevocable license to run with the property to allow employees,
agents, or contractors of the city to go on the subject property for the
purpose of inspecting and, if necessary, performing work or making improvements
covered by the security.
      6.   The mechanism by and circumstances under which the security shall be
released.
   B.   Release Of Security Mechanism: Upon release of any recorded security
mechanism, a copy of the letter of release must be filed with the Pacific
County auditor. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-1-11: VESTING OF APPLICATIONS:
   A.   This section applies in the context of building permit applications 1 ,
short subdivision and subdivision applications 2 , and development agreements 3
.
   B.   An application described herein utilizing vested rights shall be
subject to all land use and development statutes, regulations, and ordinances
in effect on the vesting date.
   C.   Applications shall be considered vested on the date a written
determination of completeness is mailed (postmarked) or hand delivered to the
applicant or the applicant's designee. The community development director's
issuance of a written determination of completeness pursuant to section
11-2C-8 of this title, or the failure of the community development director to
provide such a written notice within twenty eight (28) days of the date it is
mailed or hand delivered, shall cause an application to be conclusively deemed
vested. The applicable date is known as the vesting date.
   D.   Supplemental information required after vesting of a complete
application shall not affect the validity of vesting for such application
unless the information is requested because incorrect information is submitted
by the applicant and the incorrect information would materially affect the
final decision on the application.
   E.   Modifications required by the community development director to a
pending application, other than those set forth in subsection D of this
section, shall not be deemed a new application and shall not affect vesting.
   F.   An applicant requested modification occurring either before or after
issuance of the permit shall eliminate vesting, when such modification would
result in a substantial change in a project's review requirements, as
determined by the community development director. Under such a condition, the
application will be deemed a new application. Examples of a substantial change
include modifications resulting in a different type of decision (e.g.,
administrative to hearing examiner), or a change requiring a new SEPA threshold
determination. Modifications that reduce the scope of a proposal or reduce
environmental impacts would not be considered a substantial change.
   G.   An application that is deemed complete is vested for the specific use,
density, and physical development that is identified in the application
submittal.
   H.   Building permits that may subsequently be required to construct or
complete a vested land use project shall be considered new applications under
the building code and shall be subject to the edition of the building code in
place at the time application is made.
   I.   Nothing herein shall restrict the community development director's
authority to impose conditions on project permits pursuant to the state
environmental policy act (SEPA), chapter 43.21C Revised Code Of Washington and
chapter 197-11 Washington administrative code.
   J.   Nothing herein shall be construed to restrict the community development
director's ability, to the extent otherwise permitted by law, to apply new
regulations to a project permit or project permit application upon a finding
that a change in conditions creates a serious threat to the public health and
safety.
   K.   If the application expires, a new application may be filed with the
city but will not be considered vested under the expired application and
instead shall be subject to the development regulations in effect on the date
of the new application. (Ord. 919, 8-3-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 19.27.095.
2 2. RCW 58.17.033.
3 3. RCW 36.70B.180.
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY
SECTION:
11-2A-1: City Council
11-2A-2: Community Development Director
11-2A-3: Hearing Examiner
11-2A-1: CITY COUNCIL:
In addition to other powers and duties prescribed in this code, the city
council is vested with the authority to:
   A.   Approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny applications
for amendments to the comprehensive plan or this title, amendments to title 12,
"Zoning Regulations", of this code, rezones, and annexation by direct petition,
after considering the findings and recommendations of the planning commission.
   B.   Review findings and recommendations of the planning commission
regarding applications.
   C.   Base all decisions on the criteria established in this title or other
applicable laws.
   D.   Require any applicant granted final plat approval to post a bond or
other acceptable security with the city to assure the applicant and/or his
successors in interest shall adhere to the approved plat and all conditions
attached to the final plat approval.
   E.   Review and act upon any recommendations of the community development
director or planning commission for amendments to or revisions of the
comprehensive plan or the provisions of this title.
   F.   Perform other duties as outlined in the latest edition of the "City Of
Long Beach Shoreline Master Program" and the latest edition of the "City Of
Long Beach Comprehensive Flood Hazard Management Plan".
   G.   Perform other duties as outlined in this title. (Ord. 919, 8-3-2015)
11-2A-2: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR:
   A.   The community development director or his/her designee is vested with
overall administrative responsibility of this title.
   B.   The duties and responsibilities of the community development director
include the following:
      1.   Establish procedures and prepare forms necessary for administration
of this title.
      2.   Advise interested citizens and applicants of regulations and
procedures set forth in this title.
      3.   Make administrative decisions and interpretations of regulations set
forth in this title.
      4.   Determine a complete application for development and all other
required materials are provided by an applicant.
      5.   Compile an official file on each application submitted.
      6.   Review all information submitted by an applicant and prepare a
report which summarizes his/her findings, conclusions, and recommendations
involving an application.
      7.   Approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny permits
and development approvals as provided in this title.
      8.   Require any applicant granted site plan approval to post a bond or
other acceptable security with the city to assure the applicant and/or his/her
successors in interest will adhere to the approved plan and all conditions
attached to the approved site plan.
      9.   Assure proper notice is given to relevant persons, agencies, and the
public for all hearings.
      10.   Investigate, develop, and propose amendments to this code as deemed
necessary.
      11.   Seek remedies for alleged violations of this title, or of
conditions of any approved permit issued by the city, including citations
issued under this title and title 12, "Zoning Regulations", of this code.
      12.   Coordinate information with other departments of the city and
relevant agencies. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2A-3: HEARING EXAMINER 1 :
   A.   The hearing examiner is vested with authority to approve, approve with
conditions or modifications, or deny applications for long plats, binding site
plans, variances, conditional use permits, shoreline substantial development
permits, and site plan review. The hearings examiner is also vested with the
authority to hear appeals of administrative decisions as set forth in this
title.
   B.   Duties and responsibilities of the hearing examiner include the
following:
      1.   Make administrative decisions and interpretations of the regulations
set forth in this title.
      2.   Determine a complete application for development and all other
required materials are provided by an applicant.
      3.   Review all information submitted by an applicant and prepare a
report which summarizes his/her findings, conclusions, and recommendations
involving an application.
      4.   Assure proper notice is given to relevant persons, agencies, and the
public for all hearings.
      5.   Conduct hearings under rules and procedures designed to do
substantial justice to all interested parties. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 1, chapter 8 of this code.
ARTICLE B. PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
11-2B-1: Commission Established, Organization, Terms
11-2B-2: Meetings And Rules
11-2B-3: Powers And Duties
11-2B-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED, ORGANIZATION, TERMS:
   A.   Membership; Appointment:
      1.   The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) regular members
and one (1) alternate.
      2.   Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation
by the City Council.
      3.   The alternate member shall serve only in the event any regular
member is absent or not otherwise available for any reason. The alternate shall
have all the powers of a regular member. The alternate shall be subject to the
same attendance requirements as regular board members. In the event a regular
position on the board is declared vacant, the alternate shall be deemed to fill
such vacancy for the remainder of his/her unexpired term, and the next
appointed member shall become the alternate.
   B.   Residency: Members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the
City, except the Mayor may, but is not required to, appoint a maximum of one
(1) nonresident member, provided such person resides within the City's urban
growth area.
   C.   Qualifications: It is the intent of this section to maintain a
diversified representation of occupations and experience on the Planning
Commission.
   D.   Term: In order to provide for continuity, member terms shall be
staggered by position. The initial expiration date of each position's term is
set forth below, with subsequent terms being for a duration of four (4) years
each, or until a successor is appointed and confirmed:
 
Position(s)   Initial Expiration Expiration Of Subsequent Term
1 and 5       2006               2010
2, 3 and 4    2008               2012
6 (alternate) 2010               2014
 
   E.   Election Of Officers: The Planning Commission shall, at the first
regular meeting in the calendar year, elect from its membership a Chairperson
and a Vice Chairperson, whose terms of office in such capacities shall be for
one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. If an officer ceases to be a
member of the Planning Commission, a new election shall take place for the
unexpired term at the next regular meeting, provided a quorum is present. (Ord.
848, 8-17-2009)
11-2B-2: MEETINGS AND RULES:
   A.   Meetings: The Planning Commission shall meet on the second Tuesday of
each month at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. at the Long Beach City Hall, or at a
date and time set by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may hold
special meetings upon the request of the Chairperson or of a majority of the
Planning Commission, provided all State law notice requirements for a special
meeting are met.
   B.   Rules And Regulations: The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for
the transaction of business and keep a written record of its meetings,
resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which shall be a
public record. In addition:
      1.   The meetings of the Planning Commission are open to the public and
tape recorded, except for executive sessions, as may be authorized by law; and
      2.   Any member of the planning commission must disqualify him/herself
from any planning commission action in which the member has a financial
interest, other conflict of interest, or in violation of Revised Code of
Washington chapter 42.36, "Appearance Of Fairness". The chairperson or vice
chairperson may request an opinion from the city attorney regarding whether or
not a member should be disqualified from participating in a particular matter.
The member must abide by the opinion of the city attorney.
   C.   Quorum: A majority of the members constitutes a quorum for the
transaction of business. Any action taken by a majority of those present, when
those present constitute a quorum, will be the action of the planning
commission.
   D.   Authority To Convene: Any number less than a quorum is authorized to
convene a regular or special meeting at the time set and to adjourn, recess, or
continue the regular or special meeting to a date and time certified and
entered upon the minutes without the necessity of further notice. (Ord. 848, 8-
17-2009; amd. Ord. 935, 3-20-2017; Ord. 1044, 8-18-2025)
11-2B-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning commission has authority and duties as follows:
   A.   Exercise all of the powers of a planning commission as authorized in
Revised Code of Washington chapters 58.17, 35A.63, and other provisions of
state law.
   B.   Make studies and recommendations to the city council concerning goals,
objectives, and policies governing all elements of the comprehensive plan,
including whether to approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny
applications for comprehensive plan map amendments and zoning map amendments
and the other applicable provisions of this title or title 12, "Zoning
Regulations", of this code regarding development in the Long Beach corporate
area and urban growth area.
   C.   Develop and make recommendations to the city council concerning
policies, ordinances, administrative procedures, and any other means for
carrying out comprehensive plan elements in a coordinated and efficient manner.
   D.   Perform other duties as assigned by the city council. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
ARTICLE C. ADMINISTRATION OF DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-2C-1: Applicability And Purpose
11-2C-2: Administration
11-2C-3: Permit Processing Procedures
11-2C-4: Project Review Procedures
11-2C-5: Preapplication Conference
11-2C-6: Optional Consolidated Permit Processing
11-2C-7: Project Permit Application
11-2C-8: Determination Of Completeness
11-2C-9: Notice Of Application
11-2C-10: Consistency With Existing Plans And Regulations
11-2C-11: Public Hearing Procedures
11-2C-12: Report Of Decision
11-2C-13: Administrative Interpretation
11-2C-14: Appeals
11-2C-15: Fees For Applications, Permits And Appeals
11-2C-16: Official Files
11-2C-17: Application Time Limit
11-2C-18: Application Withdrawal And Reactivation
11-2C-1: APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Applicability: The provisions of this article apply when processing
development applications subject to this title. The provisions of this article
shall control all land use permit applications, except where excluded by this
title or unless a section of this code addressing a specific type of permit
sets forth other provisions.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to comply with state guidelines
for combining and expediting development review and for integrating
environmental review and land use development plans as required by Revised Code
of Washington chapter 36.70B. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2C-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The community development director is responsible for ensuring that provisions
of this article are carried out. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2C-3: PERMIT PROCESSING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Permit Application Process: The following actions or a subset thereof
(depending on the approval sought) shall be the permit processing procedure for
the city for submitted applications for development:
      1.   Determination of completeness;
      2.   Notice of application;
      3.   Optional consolidated project permit review processing, except as
provided in Revised Code of Washington 36.70b.140;
      4.   Public hearing;
      5.   Report stating all decisions and recommendations made as of the date
of the report that do not require an open record hearing;
      6.   Notice of decision; and
      7.   Completion of project review within applicable time periods
(including a 120 day permit processing time).
   B.   Actions Subject To Permit Application Process: Permits that are subject
to environmental review under SEPA 1 , or permits/approvals for which
environmental review has been completed in connection with other project
permits including, and not limited to, short plats, preliminary plats,
shoreline substantial development permits, variances, conditional use permits,
or activities that are not otherwise categorically exempt from environmental
review under SEPA shall be subject to the permit application processing
procedures of the city as described in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Administrative Actions Exempt From Permit Application Process: Pursuant
to Revised Code Of Washington 36.70B.140(2), building permits, boundary line
adjustments, and other construction permits, or similar administrative
approvals that are categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA 2
, or permits/approvals for which environmental review has been completed in
connection with other project permits are exempt from the permit processing
procedures described in subsection A of this section.
   D.   Legislative Actions Exempt From Permit Processing Procedures: The
following legislative actions are exempt from the permit processing procedures
of the city: 1) zoning code text amendments; 2) adoption of or amendment to
development regulations; 3) area wide rezones to implement new city policies;
4) annexations; 5) adoption of or amendment to the comprehensive plan; 6)
landmark designations; and 7) street vacations. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 43.21C.
2 2. RCW ch. 43.21C.
11-2C-4: PROJECT REVIEW PROCEDURES:
The community development director shall have authority to classify any permit
not expressly classified or indicated by this title. Review of a proposed
action shall be by one of the following procedures, in increasing order of
discretion utilized: minor administrative (ministerial), administrative,
hearing examiner, or legislative.
   A.   Ministerial review (minor administrative review) shall be conducted for
any proposal permitted outright in the codes and exempt from environmental
review. No or minimal discretion shall be exercised on the part of the
reviewer.
   B.   Administrative review shall be conducted for administrative actions
including, and not limited to, the following: administrative nonconforming use,
minor amendments, shoreline substantial development permit minor amendments,
site development permits, right of way permits, lot consolidations, boundary
line adjustments, code interpretations, short plats, and short plat
alterations. Minimal to moderate discretion may be exercised by the reviewer.
Administrative review shall be subject to all permit processing procedures
described in subsection 11-2C-3A of this article.
   C.   Hearing examiner review shall be conducted for administrative actions
including, and not limited to, the following: preliminary plats, conditional
uses (including shorelines), variances (including shorelines), shoreline
substantial development permits, binding site plans, site plan review, as well
as appeals of administrative decisions as specified in this chapter. Moderate
to substantial discretion may be exercised by the reviewer. Hearing examiner
review shall be subject to all permit processing procedures described in
subsection 11-2C-3A of this article. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
   D.   Legislative review shall be conducted in those circumstances where the
city council is exercising its authority as a quasi-judicial decision making
body for actions including, and not limited to, final plats, changes to codes,
and rezonings. Substantial to complete discretion may be exercised by the city
council as reviewer. Legislative review shall be subject to all permit
processing procedures described in subsection 11-2C-3A of this article. (Ord.
919, 8-3-2015)
11-2C-5: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
Applicants are encouraged, but not required, to request a preapplication
conference with the community development director prior to filing a project
permit application. The purpose of a preapplication conference is to discuss
requirements and the review process, and to identify any potential development
related issues. Any comments concerning the proposed development during the
preapplication conference should not be construed as approval or denial of the
proposal. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2C-6: OPTIONAL CONSOLIDATED PERMIT PROCESSING:
An applicant may submit complete construction permit applications (building
and/or engineering) simultaneously with a required land use approval
application. When an applicant elects to submit a land use approval application
together with construction applications, the applications will be reviewed and
processed as one application and subject to all notices, review and appeals as
if one consolidated and integrated application 1 . (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 36.70B.060(3), 36.70B.120.
11-2C-7: PROJECT PERMIT APPLICATION:
Applications for land use permits shall be submitted upon forms provided by the
city. An application must contain all materials required by the applicable
development regulations, and must include the following general information:
   A.   A completed project permit application form.
   B.   A verified statement by the applicant that property affected by the
application is in the exclusive ownership of the applicant, or that the
applicant has submitted the application with the consent of all the owners of
the affected property.
   C.   A property and/or legal description of the site for all applications,
as required by the applicable development regulations.
   D.   Designation of a single person/entity and address to receive
determinations and notices required by this article.
   E.   The applicable fee; provided, however, if substantially revised, any
additional costs shall be borne by the applicant.
   F.   Evidence of adequate water supply, as required by Revised Code of
Washington 19.27.097.
   G.   Evidence of sewer availability and provisions for ensuring continued
delivery.
   H.   SEPA checklist if required. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2C-8: DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS:
   A.   Within twenty eight (28) days after receiving a project permit
application, the city must mail or provide in person a written determination to
the applicant, stating either:
      1.   The application is complete. An application is complete when it
meets requirements of this title as determined by the community development
director and is sufficient for continued processing, even though additional
information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken
subsequently.
      2.   The application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the
application complete. The applicant then has ninety (90) days to submit the
additional information to the city. If the applicant submits the necessary
additional information within ninety (90) days, the applicant must be notified
within fourteen (14) days that the application is complete. If the applicant
fails to submit the required additional information within ninety (90) days,
the application will lapse, and the applicant shall be notified pursuant to the
procedures in section
11-2C-17 of this article 1 .
   B.   An application will be deemed complete if the city does not provide a
written determination to the applicant that the application is incomplete
within twenty eight (28) days. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 36.70B.070.
11-2C-9: NOTICE OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Actions Subject To Notice Procedures: Permits subject to notice
requirements of this section are short plats, preliminary plats, shoreline
substantial development permits, variances, conditional use permits, activities
not categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA, or other permits
determined by the community development director to be subject to the city's
permit processing procedures.
   B.   Exemptions: A notice of application is not required for the following
actions, which are categorically exempt from SEPA, or for which environmental
review has been completed:
      1.   Application for all administrative approvals except short plats,
which include:
         a.   All administrative interpretations and determinations;
         b.   Boundary line adjustments;
         c.   Building permits;
         d.   Preliminary SEPA threshold determination (EIS required);
         e.   Shoreline exemptions, extensions and minor amendments; and
         f.   Sign permits.
   C.   Contents; Timing; Distribution: Once an application has been deemed
complete, the city shall provide public notice for the project. Notice of
application may be combined with notice of public hearing if the hearing date
has been set. If notices are combined, the notice requirements of section
11-2C-11 of this article must also be met.
      1.   Contents: The notice of application must contain the following
information:
         a.   The date of the application, the date of issue of the
determination of completeness, and the date of the notice of application;
         b.   A description of the proposed project;
         c.   A list of the project permits included in the application;
         d.   Identification of other permits not included in the application,
to the extent known by the city;
         e.   Identification of existing environmental documents and studies
that evaluate the proposed project and the location where they can be reviewed;
         f.   The dates of the public comment period, which must be not less
than fourteen (14) nor more than thirty (30) days following the date of notice
of application;
         g.   A statement of the right of any person to comment on the
application, receive notice of any hearings, submit oral or written comments at
any hearings, and request a copy of the decision once made;
         h.   A statement of any appeal rights and limitations;
         i.   The date, time, place, and type of hearing, if applicable, and if
already scheduled, by the date of the notice of application; and
         j.   Any other information determined appropriate by the city, in
accordance with Revised Code of Washington 36.70B.110.
      2.   Timing: The notice of application must be provided:
         a.   Within fourteen (14) days after a determination of completeness;
         b.   If any open record predecision hearing is required for the
requested project permit(s), the notice of application must be provided at
least fifteen (15) days before the open record hearing, in accordance with
Revised Code of Washington 36.70B.110.
      3.   Distribution:
         a.   On or before the date of publication under subsection C3c of this
section, the community development director must mail by first class mail a
copy of the notice of application to other known agencies with jurisdiction and
the neighboring real property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the
boundaries of the subject property (as listed on the records of the Pacific
County assessor). If the notice of application also serves as the notice of
public hearing, the notice must be mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to
the hearing.
         b.   The city must erect a sign containing the notice 1  on the
subject property. The sign must remain on the property until the conclusion of
the hearing.
         c.   The notice of application must be published in the official city
newspaper (Chinook Observer).
      4.   Time Limit, Public Comment Period: All written public comments
received on the notice of application must be received by the city by four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. on the last day of the comment period. Comments should be
as specific as possible. Nothing in this section shall preclude a person who
has not previously provided written comment from appearing at the public
hearing and providing comment.
      5.   Time For Determinations: The city shall not make a SEPA
determination of nonsignificance or issue a decision or a recommendation on a
project permit until the expiration of the public comment period identified in
the notice of application. A SEPA determination of significance may be made
before the expiration of the public comment period. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 36.70B.110(4)(a).
11-2C-10: CONSISTENCY WITH EXISTING PLANS AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Fundamental land use planning choices made in adopted comprehensive
plans and adopted development regulations will serve as the foundation for
review of project permit applications. During project review, the city must
determine whether items listed in this section are defined in the development
regulations applicable to the proposed project or in the comprehensive plan.
This determination of consistency includes:
      1.   Type of land use permitted at the site, including uses that may be
allowed under certain circumstances, such as conditional uses, if the criteria
for their approval has been satisfied.
      2.   The level of development, such as units per acre, density of
residential development in the urban growth area, or other measures of density.
      3.   Availability and adequacy of public facilities and services
identified in the comprehensive plan, if the plan or development regulations
provide for funding of these facilities as required by Revised Code of
Washington chapter 36.70A.
      4.   Character of the development 1 .
   B.   During project review, the reviewing authority shall not reexamine
alternatives to, or hear appeals on, the factors identified in subsection A of
this section, except for issues of title interpretation.
   C.   The reviewing authority may determine that requirements for
environmental analysis and mitigation measures in its development regulations,
comprehensive plan, and other applicable laws provide adequate mitigation for
some or all of a project's specific adverse environmental impacts.
   D.   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city to approve,
condition, or deny a project as provided in its development regulations and in
its SEPA policies. Project review will be used to identify specific project
design and conditions relating to the character of development (such as details
of site plans, curb cuts, drainage swales, etc.).
   E.   Nothing in this section requires documentation of or dictates the
city's procedures for considering consistency or limits the city from asking
more specific or related questions with respect to the factors identified in
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 36.70B.030, 36.70B.040.
11-2C-11: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.   One Hearing: The reviewing authority will hold no more than one open
record hearing in relation to a given project permit application, including a
consolidated permit application.
   B.   Predecision Hearing, Time: A predecision open record hearing pertaining
to project permit application must not occur prior to fifteen (15) days after
issuance of any threshold SEPA determination related to the given application.
   C.   Combining Hearings: The city may combine a hearing on a project permit
with a hearing that may be held by another local, state, regional, federal, or
other agency, provided the joint hearing is held within the city. The applicant
may request that hearings be combined as long as the joint hearing can be held
within the time periods specified in subsection B of this section. The
applicant may agree to a different schedule in the event that additional time
is needed in order to combine hearings.
   D.   Publish And Mail Notices: The notice of public hearing may be combined
with the notice of application, as required by section
11-2C-9 of this article. Prior to the public hearing, the community development
director must:
      1.   Publish notice of the hearing in the newspaper of legal record. The
city shall publicize said hearing notice for two (2) consecutive weeks in the
newspaper of record; and
      2.   At least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing, mail by
first class mail notice of the hearing to the neighboring real property owners
within three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the subject property (as
listed on the records of the Pacific County assessor).
   E.   Contents Of Notice: Notices of public hearings under subsection D of
this section must include:
      1.   A brief description of the project;
      2.   The project location;
      3.   The permit(s) required;
      4.   The time, date, and place of the hearing, and closing date for
comments;
      5.   The location where further information can be obtained; and
      6.   A statement of the right of any person to submit oral or written
comments at the hearing.
   F.   Conduct Of Hearing; Procedures: Public hearings must be conducted in
accordance with the following procedures:
      1.   The hearing body is subject to the code of ethics 1 , prohibitions
on conflict of interest 2 , the open public meetings act 3 , and the appearance
of fairness doctrine 4 , the same as now exist or may later be amended.
      2.   The applicant bears the burden of proof and must demonstrate that
his/her application conforms to applicable elements of the city's development
regulations and comprehensive plan and that any significant adverse
environmental impacts have been adequately addressed.
      3.   The hearing body may recess a public hearing in order to obtain
additional information. Upon recessing for this purpose, the hearing body shall
announce the time and date when the public hearing will be resumed.
   G.   Agenda: The agenda of the open record public hearing will generally
observe the following sequence of events:
      1.   Determination of disqualification(s) of members of the hearing body.
A member of the hearing body who is disqualified must be counted for purposes
of forming a quorum. A disqualified member must make full disclosure on the
record, must not participate in discussion of the matter, and must abstain from
voting on the proposal.
      2.   City staff presentation, including submittal of any administrative
reports. Members of the hearing body may ask questions of the staff.
      3.   Applicant's presentation, including submittal of any materials
supplementary to the application. Members of the hearing body may ask questions
of the applicant.
      4.   Testimony or comments by the public relevant to the matter. The
chair will prohibit anonymous public comment. Questions from the public
directed to the staff or the applicant will be posed by the chair at its
discretion.
      5.   Rebuttal, response, or clarifying statements by the applicant and
the city staff.
   H.   Submitting Letters: For those members of the public who are unable to
attend the open record public hearing but wish to comment, letters may be
submitted for the record prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 35A.42.020.
2 2. RCW 35A.42.020, ch. 42.23.
3 3. RCW ch. 42.30.
4 4. RCW ch. 42.36.
11-2C-12: REPORT OF DECISION:
   A.   Content; Distribution:
      1.   For all permit applications, the reviewing authority as identified
by this title must adopt a single report stating the decision(s) on the
application(s). The report will serve as the permit(s). The report must state
applicable findings of fact and conclusions of law. The report must state any
mitigation required under the development regulations or under the city's SEPA
program. The report must describe applicable deadlines for and methods of
appeal. The report must be provided to the applicant and to any person who,
prior to the adoption of the report, requested notice of the decision or is a
party of record having submitted comments on the application. The report must
be issued within the time limit described in subsection B of this section.
      2.   For all permit applications, the city must publish a summary of the
report of decision in the official city newspaper.
   B.   Timing:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection B2 of this section, once
a project permit application is complete, a final decision must be issued
within one hundred twenty (120) days. In determining the number of days that
have elapsed, the following periods are excluded:
         a.   Any period during which the applicant has been requested to
correct plans, perform required studies, or provide additional required
information.
         b.   Any period during which an environmental impact statement is
being prepared following a determination of significance.
         c.   Any period during a pending administrative or judicial appeal of
an SEPA mitigated determination of nonsignificance (MDNS), a determination of
nonsignificance (DNS), or of the sufficiency of an environmental impact
statement (EIS).
         d.   The period from the filing of an administrative appeal through
final disposition of the appeal.
         e.   Any extension of time mutually agreed upon by the applicant and
the city.
      2.   The time limits established by subsection B1 of this section do not
apply if a project permit application:
         a.   Requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan or a development
regulation;
         b.   Requires approval of the siting of an essential public facility
as provided in Revised Code Of Washington 36.70A.200; or
         c.   Is substantially revised by the applicant, in which case the time
period will start from the date at which the revised project application is
determined to be complete under section
11-2C-8 of this article.
      3.   If the city is unable to issue its final decision within the time
limits provided in this section, the community development director must
provide written notice of this fact to the project applicant. The notice must
include a statement of reasons why time limits have not been met and an
estimated date for issuance of the notice of final decision.
      4.   The city is not liable for damages under this article if it fails to
make a final decision within the one hundred twenty (120) day period following
notification to the applicant that his/her application is complete.
Additionally, should the applicant substantially revise the proposal, the
applicant will be responsible for any additional associated costs. (Ord. 848,
8-17-2009)
11-2C-13: ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATION:
Any project permit applicant, Long Beach resident, owner of real property in
Long Beach, or party of record may request an interpretation of the meaning or
application of the city's development regulations applicable to project permit
applications. A request must be written and must concisely identify the issue
and desired interpretation. The community development director must provide a
written administrative interpretation within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
request. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2C-14: APPEALS:
   A.   Notice Of Appeal: Any aggrieved person who is a party of record may
file an appeal of a final decision made by the city of Long Beach under this
code. A written notice of appeal must be filed with the city clerk within
fourteen (14) days after the date of the issuance of the decision or
interpretation being appealed. The notice of appeal shall contain a concise
statement identifying:
      1.   The decision or interpretation being appealed;
      2.   The name and address of the appellant and appellant's standing;
      3.   The specific reason(s) why the appellant asserts the decision is in
error; and
      4.   The desired outcome or change(s) to the decision.
   B.   Appeal Filing Fee: Upon filing an appeal, an appellant must pay a fee
as set forth by the city council. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
   C.   Time Limit; Report: Within ninety (90) days of the filing of an appeal
under this section, the appeal proceeding body shall adopt a single report
declaring its decision on the appeal. The report shall be provided to the
applicant, the appellant, and to any person who, prior to the adoption of the
report, requested notice of the decision. The ninety (90) day time period may
be extended upon mutual agreement of all parties to the appeal. (Ord. 890, 4-
13-2013)
   D.   Administrative Decisions: An aggrieved person who is a party of record
may appeal any final decision of an administrative official to the hearing
examiner. The appeal must be in writing in accordance with this title and shall
be filed with the city clerk within twenty one (21) calendar days of the date
of the action being appealed. If an open record public hearing was not held as
part of the administrative approval, then the hearing examiner shall conduct an
open record hearing. Otherwise, the appeal to the hearing examiner shall be a
closed record appeal.
   E.   Planning Commission Decisions: An aggrieved person who is a party of
record may appeal a planning commission decision to the hearing examiner. The
appeal must be in writing in accordance with this title and shall be filed with
the city clerk within twenty one (21) calendar days of the date of the action
being appealed. If an open record public hearing was not held as part of the
planning commission decision, then the hearing examiner shall conduct an open
record hearing. Otherwise, the appeal to the hearing examiner shall be a closed
record appeal.
   F.   Hearing Examiner Decisions: An aggrieved person who is a party of
record may appeal a hearing examiner decision to the Pacific County superior
court or to the appropriate shorelines hearings board or growth management
hearings board. The appeal must be in writing in accordance with this title and
shall be filed with the court clerk within twenty one (21) calendar days of the
date of the action being appealed. If an open record public hearing was not
held as part of the hearing examiner decision, then the Pacific County superior
court shall conduct an open record hearing. Otherwise, the appeal proceeding of
the Pacific County superior court shall be a closed record appeal. In the case
of appeals from administrative decisions, all decisions under the shorelines
management act, and any other decision of the hearing examiner that is
designated in this code as a final action, the appeal is to:
      1.   Pacific County superior court if it is subject to the land use
petition act 1 ;
      2.   The shorelines hearings board if it is a shorelines management act
decision; or
      3.   To the appropriate growth management hearings board if it is an
action subject to the growth management act 2 . (Ord. 919, 8-3-2015)
   G.   City Council Decisions: City council decisions that are considered a
"final action" must be appealed to either Pacific County superior court if it
is a city council action subject to the land use petition act 3  or to the
appropriate growth management hearings board if it is a council action that is
subject to the growth management act 4 . Any appellant is encouraged to review
state law in order to determine the method and manner of perfecting an appeal
of a city council action. The appeal must be filed in the time limits specified
by state law.
      1.   Closed Record Appeals: Closed record appeals from a final decision
of the city council under this article must be made to Pacific County superior
court within fourteen (14) days of the date the decision or action became
final.
      2.   Procedure: The procedure for judicial appeals is as provided in the
land use petition act 5  and Washington state court rules. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2013)
   H.   Closed Record Appeal Proceedings: Any appeal proceeding where an open
record predecision hearing was held on the project permit shall be conducted as
a closed record appeal proceeding whereby the appeal is heard by the proceeding
body on the permit decision record as reported in the official file 6  and no
new evidence or testimony is allowed. (Ord. 890, 4-13-2013)
   I.   Cost Borne By Appellant: The cost of transcribing and preparing all
records ordered certified by the court or desired by the appellant for such
appeal will be borne by the appellant. The appellant must post an advance fee
deposit (in the amount specified by the city clerk-treasurer) with the city
clerk-treasurer prior to the preparation of any records. Any overage will be
refunded to the appellant within ten (10) days of filing the certified records
with the superior court.
   J.   Stay Of Decision: The filing of an appeal within the time limits
specified by this section shall stay the decision of the city until such time
as the appeal has been adjudicated or withdrawn. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW 36.70C.
2 2. RCW 36.70A.
3 3. RCW ch. 36.70C.
4 4. RCW ch. 36.70A.
5 1. RCW ch. 36.70C.
6 2. See section
  11-2C-16 of this article.
11-2C-15: FEES FOR APPLICATIONS, PERMITS AND APPEALS:
Fees for applications, permits and appeals shall be set by resolution of the
city council. No permit shall be issued, application accepted or determined
complete, or appeal filed, without payment of the applicable fee as established
in the city's fee schedule. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2C-16: OFFICIAL FILES:
   A.   Files Required; Contents: After a project permit application has been
deemed complete according to section
11-2C-8 of this article, the community development director will begin
compiling an official file on each project permit application received by the
city. An official file contains the following:
      1.   The application materials submitted by the applicant;
      2.   Documentation of public notice;
      3.   The city's report, which summarizes the community development
director's findings, conclusions, and recommendations involving a project
permit application;
      4.   Any other staff reports prepared;
      5.   All written testimony received on the matter;
      6.   The electronic recording and minutes of any public hearing or review
on the matter;
      7.   The recommendation of the planning commission on the permit or
application, if applicable;
      8.   The decision of the reviewing authority;
      9.   Any other information relevant to the matter; and
      10.   Certification of publication of legal notices, a copy of the mailed
notification of application, and the date of mailing.
   B.   Public Record: The official file is a public record. It is available
for inspection and copying at city hall during regular business hours.
Availability may be temporarily restricted during or prior to public hearings
while staff is preparing for the hearing.
   C.   Retention Of Files: Official files will be kept in accordance with the
provisions of Revised Code Of Washington chapter 40.14, the public records act.
(Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2C-17: APPLICATION TIME LIMIT:
The city may consider an application to be moot if the applicant fails to make
the application complete by the end of a continuous ninety (90) day period. In
such an event, the city may serve notice on the applicant by certified letter
that the application will be terminated in thirty (30) days unless the
applicant responds by return mail that the application remains an active,
ongoing concern. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2C-18: APPLICATION WITHDRAWAL AND REACTIVATION:
The community development director, planning commission, hearing examiner, or
city council, as appropriate, may permit the withdrawal of any application
filed under the provisions of this title provided that any hearing must be held
for which notice has been given. An application that has been withdrawn may
only be reactivated and considered upon receipt of a new complete application
by the city and payment of new fees by the applicant as required by this
chapter. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
ARTICLE D. SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-2D-1: Variances
11-2D-2: Conditional Use Permits
11-2D-1: VARIANCES:
   A.   Hearing Examiner Authority, Title 12 Variances: The hearing examiner
shall have authority to grant a variance from provisions of the development
standards of title 12, "Zoning Regulations", of this code, when conditions as
set forth in subsection B of this section have been found to exist; provided,
that any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure
the adjustment meets the conditions of subsection B of this section. No
variance shall be granted that would result in a use otherwise not permitted in
the zone district in which the subject property is situated. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
   B.   Required Showings, Title 12 Variances: Before any variance may be
granted, it shall be shown:
      1.   Strict application of the bulk, dimensional or performance standards
set forth in this title precludes or significantly interferes with a reasonable
use of the property not otherwise prohibited.
      2.   Need for the variance is directly related to the property, and is
the result of unique conditions such as irregular lot shape, size, or natural
features and the application of the zoning regulations and not, for example,
from deed restrictions or the applicant's own actions.
      3.   The design of the project is compatible with other permitted
activities in the area and will not cause adverse effects to adjacent
properties.
      4.   The requested variance does not constitute a grant of special
privilege not enjoyed by other properties in the area, and is the minimum
necessary to afford relief.
      5.   The public interest will not suffer any substantial detrimental
effect.
      6.   To grant a variance from the city's design requirements in title 12,
chapter 10 of this code for additions or modifications to existing
nonresidential buildings that do not conform to the design requirements, the
hearing examiner must also take the following into consideration:
         a.   The hearing examiner must make an affirmative finding that a
strict enforcement of the design requirements would result in a building
appearance or site condition substantially incompatible with the existing
building.
         b.   No variance from the city's design requirements shall be granted
to any nonconforming use.
         c.   No variance from the city's design requirements shall be granted
to any structure that is in violation of any bulk, density, or setback
standard.
         d.   No variance from the city's design requirements shall be granted
for accessory structures on a single property.
         e.   Any proposed addition shall contain at least one common wall to
the existing structure.
      7.   No variance from the city's design requirements shall be granted if:
         a.   For buildings with an existing floor of one thousand (1,000)
square feet or less, the addition exceeds five hundred (500) square feet; or
         b.   For buildings with an existing floor area greater than one
thousand (1,000) square feet, the proposed addition is greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the existing building. (Ord. 919, 8-3-2015)
   C.   Procedure For Approval, Title 12 Variances:
      1.   Application: A request for a variance may be initiated by a property
owner or his/her authorized agent by filing an application with the city on
forms prescribed by the city. The application shall be accompanied by a site
plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed
development and its relationship to the surrounding property, building
elevations and floor plans if applicable, and a written narrative describing
the development standards from which relief is requested, the extent of the
requested relief, and a statement of how the applicant believes the standards
of subsection B of this section are met. Each application shall be accompanied
by a receipt indicating payment of fees, as established by the city council.
      2.   Notice Of Application: Notice of application shall be provided as
set forth in section
11-2C-9 of this chapter.
      3.   Public Hearing: Before a request for a variance is acted upon, it
shall be considered at a public hearing.
      4.   Notice Of Public Hearing: Notice of public hearing shall be provided
as set forth in section
11-2C-11 of this chapter.
      5.   Recess Of Hearing: The hearing examiner may recess a hearing on a
request for a variance in order to obtain additional information. Upon
recessing for this purpose, the hearing examiner shall announce the time and
date when the hearing will be resumed.
      6.   Final Action:
         a.   The hearing examiner shall cause written notification of his
action to be mailed to the applicant for a variance within ten (10) days after
the decision has been rendered.
         b.   The applicant or any other aggrieved party with standing in the
matter may appeal the decision of the hearing examiner to city council in
accordance with the provisions of section
11-2C-14 of this chapter.
   D.   Hearing Examiner Authority, Title 10 Variances: The hearing examiner
shall have authority to grant a variance from provisions of title 10, chapter
4, "Flood Damage Prevention", pursuant to section
10-4-14 of this code. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2D-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   City Action; Conditions For Approval: The hearing examiner may approve,
approve with modifications, or deny an application for conditional use
authorized by title 12, "Zoning Regulations", of this code. In determining the
impacts a proposed use may have on surrounding properties and the community,
the examiner shall make the following determinations. The hearing examiner
shall approve an application that meets all of these requirements. The hearing
examiner may modify an approval with conditions that will ensure that the
following provisions are met:
      1.   The proposed use is permitted as a conditional use in the zone in
which the subject property is located.
      2.   The hours of operation, noise, lighting, odors, vibrations or other
impacts of the proposed use will not be disruptive to the neighborhood.
      3.   Local and area streets are capable of accommodating traffic
projected from the proposed use.
      4.   The proposed design of the site and the buildings therein meet city
design requirements.
      5.   Adequate provision has been made on site to accommodate parking and
loading needs of the proposed use.
      6.   The proposed use has access to an adequate potable water supply.
      7.   The proposed use will connect to a public sewer system with
sufficient capacity to accommodate the use and sufficient assurance of
continued availability.
      8.   The proposed use meets the requirements of other applicable
ordinances and regulations including, but not limited to, the comprehensive
plan, the shoreline master program, and the state environmental policy act 1 .
   B.   Bond: The city council may require the applicant for a conditional use
permit to furnish the city with a performance bond of up to one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the value of the cost of improvements to be guaranteed by
such bond, in order to assure the proper development of the conditional use
according to restrictions and conditions specified by the city council and as
set forth in section
11-1-10 of this title.
   C.   Procedure For Approval:
      1.   Application: A request for conditional use may be initiated by a
property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application with the city
on forms prescribed by the city. The application shall be accompanied by a site
plan, drawn to scale, showing dimensions and arrangement of the proposed
development and its relationship to surrounding property, building elevations
and floor plans if applicable, a written narrative describing the nature of the
proposed use, and a statement of how the applicant believes the standards of
subsection A of this section are met. Each application shall be accompanied by
a receipt indicating payment of fees.
      2.   Notice Of Application: Notice of application shall be provided as
set forth in section
11-2C-9 of this chapter.
      3.   Public Hearing: Before a request for a conditional use permit is
acted upon, it shall be considered at a public hearing.
      4.   Notice Of Public Hearing: Notice of public hearing shall be provided
as set forth in section
11-2C-11 of this chapter.
      5.   Recess Of Hearing: The hearing examiner may recess a hearing on a
request for a conditional use in order to obtain additional information. Upon
recessing for this purpose, the hearing examiner shall announce the time and
date when the hearing will be resumed.
      6.   Notice Of Action To Council: The hearing examiner shall cause
written notification of its action to the city council.
   D.   Time Limit: A conditional use permit is valid only if construction or
use has commenced within one year from the date of final approval. If
substantial construction or use has not commenced within one year of final
approval, the conditional use permit shall be null and void. A one year
extension may be granted by the city council if such extension is requested
prior to the expiration date.
      1.   The time limit for a conditional use permit issued as part of a
shoreline substantial development permit shall be that of the shoreline permit.
   E.   Discontinuance Of Use: A conditional use permit shall run with the
land. However, if a use for which a conditional use was granted is discontinued
for more than one year, the conditional use permit shall be considered void and
a new conditional use permit must be obtained prior to resuming such use.
      1.   A property owner or business owner may, for cause, request an
extension of not more than one additional year from discontinuation of the use.
Such request shall be made in writing to the community development director
prior to the end of the first year of discontinuation. The request shall
explain the need for additional time and provide a schedule for resumption of
the use. The city council will evaluate the request and direct the community
development director to issue a decision letter.
   F.   Expansion Of Use: A new conditional use permit shall be required if
there is any change or expansion of use greater than ten percent (10%). No more
than one increase of use greater than ten percent (10%) in aggregate shall be
permitted. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 43.21C.
ARTICLE E. ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-2E-1: Permit Suspension, Revocation Or Modification
11-2E-2: Violations; Defined
11-2E-3: Violations; Investigated
11-2E-4: Violations; Penalties
11-2E-1: PERMIT SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION:
   A.   Grounds: Any permit, variance, or other land use approval issued by the
city pursuant to this title may be suspended, revoked, or modified on one or
more of the following grounds:
      1.   The approval was obtained by fraud or material misrepresentation.
      2.   The approval was based on inadequate or inaccurate information
supplied by the applicant or the applicant's representative.
      3.   An error of procedure occurred which prevented consideration of the
interests of persons directly affected by the approval.
      4.   The approval or permit granted is exercised contrary to terms or
conditions of such approval or in violation of any statute, law, or regulation.
      5.   The holder of the permit or approval interferes with any authorized
city representative in the performance of his or her duties, relevant to the
permit or approval or implementation and review of the permit.
   B.   Council Authority: The city council may, after review and
recommendation by the planning commission, revoke or modify any land use
approval issued. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2E-2: VIOLATIONS; DEFINED:
No permit or approval in conflict with the provisions of this title, title 10,
"Building Regulations", or title 12, "Zoning Regulations", of this code, shall
be issued. Any permit issued or land use approved in violation of this title,
title 10, or title 12 of this code shall be void. Structures or uses which do
not conform to this title, title 10, or title 12 of this code, except approved
variances and legal nonconforming uses as specified in this title, title 10, or
title 12 of this code, are violations subject to enforcement, penalty, and
abatement provisions of this title and code. Violations include, and are not
limited to, the following:
   A.   Establishing a use not permitted in the zone in which it is located;
   B.   Constructing, expanding, or placing a structure in violation of
setback, height, and other dimensional standards;
   C.   Establishing a permitted use without complying with applicable
development standards set forth in other codes, regulations, ordinances, rules,
or laws;
   D.   Failing to carry out or observe conditions of land use or permit
approval, including contract development standards of property specific
agreements;
   E.   Failing to secure required land use or permit approval prior to
establishing a permitted use; and
   F.   Failing to maintain site improvements, such as landscaping, parking, or
drainage control facilities, as required in this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-2E-3: VIOLATIONS; INVESTIGATED:
The city administrator or his authorized agent shall investigate any charge of
violation of this title brought to the city administrator's attention. Upon
verifying a violation of this title, the city administrator shall serve notice
to the property owner to comply with city building regulations. The city
administrator or his authorized agent shall inspect the premises after serving
notice of violation and, if the violation is still in effect, may take any
action authorized in title 14, "Enforcement Procedures", of this code. (Ord.
848, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
11-2E-4: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be assessed and enforced
pursuant to title 14, "Enforcement Procedures", of this code. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009; amd. Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
CHAPTER 3
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-3-1: State Environmental Policy Act
11-3-2: Shoreline Master Program
11-3-3: Development In Flood Areas
11-3-4: Development In Critical Areas
11-3-1: STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT 1 :
   A.   Compliance With Rules And Regulations: See title 5, chapter 1 of this
code for SEPA rules and regulations.
   B.   Exemptions: The following are normally exempt from SEPA requirements:
      1.   Annexations.
      2.   Boundary line adjustments.
      3.   Short subdivisions.
      4.   Vacation of public rights of way. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 43.21C.
11-3-2: SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM:
   A.   City Shoreline Master Program: See shoreline master program and zoning
ordinances as adopted by the city.
   B.   Relation To Revised Code Of Washington Chapter 36.70B: Shoreline
substantial development permits, shoreline conditional use permits, and
shoreline variances are subject to the following procedures, which are outlined
in chapter 2, article C, "Administration Of Development Regulations", of this
title:
      1.   Determination of completeness;
      2.   Notice of application;
      3.   Optional consolidated project permit review processing, except as
provided in Revised Code of Washington 36.70B.140;
      4.   Joint public hearings (if applicable);
      5.   Single report stating all the decisions and recommendations made as
of the date of the report that do not require an open record hearing;
      6.   Notice of decision; and
      7.   Completion of project review within any applicable time periods
(including the 120 day permit processing time). (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-3-3: DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD AREAS:
   A.   City Comprehensive Flood Hazard Management Plan: The city of Long Beach
comprehensive flood hazard management plan (FHMP) was completed for the city in
1995. The FHMP sets forth the recommendations for land development within flood
areas in Long Beach and procedures for obtaining development permits or
approvals within flood areas.
   B.   Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance 1 : The flood damage prevention
ordinance sets up specific standards for structures located in areas subject to
the 100-year flood and specific provisions for substantial improvements to or
construction of new structures in areas subject to the 100-year flood.
   C.   Development In Flood Areas: Persons proposing development within flood
areas must comply with the requirements of the most recent edition of the FHMP,
the most recent update of the flood damage prevention ordinance, in addition to
the regulations of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10, chapter 4 of this code.
11-3-4: DEVELOPMENT IN CRITICAL AREAS:
   A.   City Critical Areas Ordinance: See the critical areas ordinance as
adopted by the city.
   B.   Compliance Required: All of the city of Long Beach is located within an
environmental critical area, and development proposals, unless exempted, are
subject to all or a portion of the requirements of the critical areas
ordinance, including preparation of a critical areas checklist, preparation of
a critical areas report, preparation and compliance with a mitigation plan.
Critical areas review is an element of the development permit process of the
city. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 4
LAND DIVISION
ARTICLE A. LAND DIVISION IN GENERAL
SECTION:
11-4A-1: Purposes
11-4A-2: Authority
11-4A-3: Applicability
11-4A-4: Exemptions
11-4A-5: Preapplication Conference
11-4A-6: Plat Approval Or Disapproval; Time Limit; Extension
11-4A-7: Subdivision Development Standards
11-4A-1: PURPOSES:
The purposes of this chapter, including articles A through E, are to regulate
subdivision of land and to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare in accordance with standards established by the state. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
11-4A-2: AUTHORITY:
These regulations are established pursuant to provisions of Revised Code Of
Washington chapter 58.17 and should not preclude full compliance with same.
(Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4A-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Every subdivision and short subdivision must comply with provisions of
this chapter, including articles A through D.
   B.   No person may subdivide or develop land within the city except in
accordance with provisions contained in this title, unless specifically
exempted from such provisions.
   C.   No development permit will be issued for any parcel of land developed
or divided in violation of the city shoreline master program.
   D.   A building or development permit must be obtained before construction
or development begins within any area of special flood hazard, in accordance
with title 10 of this code. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4A-4: EXEMPTIONS:
In accordance with Revised Code Of Washington chapter 58.17, provisions of this
chapter, including articles A through D, do not apply to:
   A.   Cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose.
   B.   Divisions of land into lots or tracts each of which is 1/128 of a
section of land or larger, or five (5) acres or larger if the land is not
capable of description as a fraction of a section of land.
   C.   Divisions made by testamentary provisions or by laws of descent.
   D.   A division made for the purpose of alteration by adjusting boundary
lines between platted or unplatted lots or both, which does not create any
additional lot, tract, parcel, site, or division, nor result in any lot, tract,
parcel, site, or division which does not meet minimum requirements for width
and area for a building site.
   E.   Divisions made for mobile home parks.
   F.   A division made under the provisions of the horizontal properties
regimes act, condominiums 1 , except that all condominium divisions made under
said statute shall have their conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs)
reviewed and approved by the community development director to assure
compliance with this code prior to executing and filing such CC&Rs and other
enabling documents with Pacific County.
   G.   Assessors' plats, provided they contain a survey of subdivision and
contain permanent control monuments as required by Revised Code Of Washington
chapter 58.17. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 64.32.
11-4A-5: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
An applicant may request a preapplication conference with the community
development director prior to filing an application to discuss requirements and
the review process, in accordance with section
11-2C-5 of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4A-6: PLAT APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL; TIME LIMIT; EXTENSION:
   A.   Preliminary Plats: Preliminary plats will be approved, disapproved, or
returned to the applicant for modification or correction within ninety (90)
days from date of filing, unless the applicant consents to an extension of such
time period or the ninety (90) day limitation is extended to include up to
twenty one (21) days as specified under Revised Code Of Washington 58.17.095
(3).
   B.   Environmental Impact Statement: If an environmental impact statement is
required as provided in Revised Code Of Washington 43.21C.030, the ninety (90)
day period will not include the time spent preparing and circulating the
environmental impact statement.
   C.   Final Plats And Short Plats: Final plats and short plats shall be
approved, disapproved, or returned to the applicant within thirty (30) days
from the date of filing, unless the applicant consents to an extension of such
time period.
   D.   Final Plat Submittal To Council: A final plat meeting all requirements
of this article must be submitted by the applicant to the city council for
approval within five (5) years of the date of preliminary plat approval.
   E.   Extension: The city council may extend a preliminary plat approval for
an additional year, if the approval for extension of time is granted prior to
the original expiration date. No more than one extension shall be granted. In
considering a request for extension, the city council shall consider whether
the map presently conforms to the requirements of the city and whether:
      1.   The extension is necessary to secure needed approvals from other
agencies;
      2.   The extension is necessary to comply with conditions of the original
approval of this title and other ordinances; or
      3.   The applicant has demonstrated a good faith attempt to finalize the
plat within the prescribed time. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4A-7: SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following requirements apply to all plats, including final and short plats,
and shall be recorded on each property deed:
   A.   Lot Standards:
      1.   No lot shall be established that is in violation of this code.
      2.   Lot shapes shall be designed to avoid awkward configuration.
      3.   Each lot shall have sufficient width, area/size and frontage to
comply with the minimum requirements established in each zoning district.
      4.   The building envelope shall be shown on all lots.
      5.   All lots shall have direct access to a public or private street,
private driveway or access easement, constructed to city standards.
   B.   Easements:
      1.   Public and/or private easements for access and for the construction
and maintenance of utilities and public facilities shall be granted to provide
and maintain access and adequate utility service to each lot and adjacent
lands.
      2.   An easement, tract or area shall be granted as deemed appropriate by
the city where preservation of an environmentally sensitive area benefits the
public health, safety and welfare. Such benefits may include, and are not
limited to, surface water and erosion, visual buffering and protection of plant
and animal habitat. Such easement shall impose upon all present and future
owners and occupiers of land subject to the easement, the obligation to leave
undisturbed all trees and other vegetation within the easement, except that
area required for future construction of multipurpose low impact trails and
city approved utilities. The vegetation within the easement may not be cut,
pruned, covered by fill, removed, damaged or enhanced without express written
permission from the city.
      3.   Placement of any building on or over an easement for utility mains
or lines shall be prohibited.
   C.   Water Supply: All lots shall be served by the city water system unless
this requirement is waived pursuant to subsection
11-5-3C of this title. The water supply system serving those lots shall be
designed and constructed according to all applicable provisions of this code
and the public works development design standards. For short plats, the
applicant must at a minimum provide a connection to the city's water main,
constructed to city standards and dedicated to the city.
   D.   Sewage Disposal: All lots shall be served by the city sanitary sewer
system unless this requirement is waived pursuant to subsection
11-5-3C of this title. Except for private side sewers, any common sanitary
sewer system serving more than one lot shall be provided by the applicant and
dedicated to the city. Such sewer systems shall be designed and constructed
according to all applicable provisions of the public works development design
standards. For short plats, the applicant must at a minimum provide a
connection to the city's sewer main, constructed to city standards and
dedicated to the city.
   E.   Storm Drainage:
      1.   All lots shall be provided with adequate storm drainage connected to
the city storm drainage system, where so served, or another system approved by
the city engineer.
      2.   Where a public street is to be dedicated or improved by the
applicant as a condition of preliminary approval, the applicant shall provide
and dedicate any required storm drainage system in the right of way.
      3.   Where appropriate, storm drainage facilities shall include suitable
on site detention and/or retention facilities. Low impact development
techniques are encouraged.
      4.   Storm drainage shall be provided in accordance with the city's
"Development Guidelines And Public Works Standards" or other standards and
specifications approved by the city engineer.
   F.   Streets:
      1.   Subdivisions shall provide direct access to at least one existing
improved and publicly dedicated street. In the case of short plats, there must
be recorded against each parcel's deed the language that the owner of the
parcel must pay his/her fair share of the street when either the street is
built or application is made for a building permit.
      2.   Dead end streets shall be local streets only and shall terminate in
a cul-de-sac or hammerhead sufficient in size to allow emergency vehicles to
turn around. Streets that dead end, and that would normally be continued if the
adjacent property were developed, shall be shown as temporary turnarounds.
      3.   The street system for subdivisions shall connect to the existing
city street system and be designed to provide safe and efficient traffic
movement, to reduce conflicts between various types of land uses and
transportation modes, and to coordinate the location of proposed buildings with
parking, loading and other transportation related facilities.
      4.   Streets shall be designed in accordance with the public works
development design standards or other standards and specifications approved by
the city engineer.
      5.   Dedication of rights of way, consistent with the functional
classification of the road serving the property, shall be required where
necessary.
      6.   Streetlights shall be required, one light per three hundred (300)
linear feet of street frontage, and provided in accordance with the public
works development design standards or other standards and specifications
approved by the city engineer.
      7.   For lots fronting an unimproved right of way, the applicant must
provide one-half (1/2) street improvements, constructed to city standards.
   G.   Sidewalks:
      1.   Subdivisions shall provide sidewalks or other city approved
pedestrian facilities separate from the traveled way and safe for pedestrians.
      2.   Pedestrian accommodations may be incorporated into other trails or
paths designed for nonmotorized transportation, such as, and not limited to,
bike paths. (Ord. 869, 4-4-2011)
ARTICLE B. SHORT SUBDIVISION
SECTION:
11-4B-1: Submitting Application, Related Materials And Fee
11-4B-2: Determination Of Completeness
11-4B-3: Development Standards
11-4B-4: Notice To Surrounding Property Owners
11-4B-5: Distribution Of Application
11-4B-6: Community Development Director's Decision
11-4B-7: Redivision Of Short Plats
11-4B-8: Filing And Distribution Of Approved Short Plats
11-4B-9: Appeals
11-4B-1: SUBMITTING APPLICATION, RELATED MATERIALS AND FEE:
Persons requesting short plat approval must submit the following to the
community development director, in accordance with section
11-2C-7 of this title:
   A.   A completed application form furnished by the city.
   B.   Three (3) copies of the plat, with additional information specified by
the application form.
   C.   An application fee. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4B-2: DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS:
The community development director will notify the applicant that the
application has been received and that it is complete or incomplete, in
accordance with section
11-2C-8 of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4B-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Access to a short subdivision, including, but not limited to, surface
material and width, shall be constructed according to the city's adopted
development guidelines and public works standards or other standards and
specifications approved by the city engineer.
   B.   When access to a short subdivision is by public right of way,
streetlights shall be installed, one light per each three hundred (300) linear
feet of street.
   C.   When access to a short subdivision is by private right of way or
driveway, a maneuvering radius or hammerhead that can accommodate emergency
vehicles shall be constructed at the most distant point on the access. (Ord.
848, 8-17-2009)
11-4B-4: NOTICE TO SURROUNDING PROPERTY OWNERS:
Upon submittal of a completed application for short subdivision, the community
development director shall send out a notice of the application to all property
owners within three hundred feet (300') of the property proposed for
subdivision as described in section
11-2C-9 of this title. Surrounding property owners will have fourteen (14) days
to provide comment to the community development director regarding the proposed
subdivision. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4B-5: DISTRIBUTION OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Agency Review: The community development director will forward as
circumstances dictate, one copy of the proposed short plat to the following:
      1.   City engineer.
      2.   City administrator.
      3.   Fire marshal.
      4.   Superintendent of schools.
      5.   Police chief.
      6.   Other agencies, as may be warranted.
   B.   Department Of Transportation Notification: Whenever the city receives
an application for approval of a short plat of a short subdivision that is
located adjacent to the right of way of a state highway, the community
development director must give written notice of the application, including a
legal description of the short subdivision and a location map, to the district
manager of the department of transportation. The district manager will submit
to the community development director any information the district manager
deems relevant regarding the proposed short subdivision upon legal access to
the state highway, the carrying capacity of the state highway, and the safety
of users of the state highway.
   C.   Transmittal Of Review Comments: The community development director will
allow fourteen (14) calendar days for transmittal of review comments from
individuals and agencies listed in subsections A and B of this section. (Ord.
848, 8-17-2009)
11-4B-6: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR'S DECISION:
   A.   Criteria For Consideration:
      1.   Criteria Listed: In reviewing the application for short plat
approval, the community development director will consider the following
criteria:
         a.   Whether the short plat meets applicable zoning and other land use
regulatory requirements of the city and state. No short plat will be approved
unless it is found to be in compliance with applicable zoning requirements.
         b.   Whether the proposed short subdivision is adequately served by
sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for
students who walk to and from school and others who may use sidewalks.
         c.   Whether the design, shape, size, and orientation of the proposed
short subdivision are appropriate to the proposed use for which the lots are
intended and are compatible with the character of the area in which they are
located.
         d.   The recommendations of the city engineer and other agencies and
personnel listed in section
11-4B-5 of this article, if they gave recommendations.
         e.   Whether easements are provided and conveyed where necessary for
utility installation and maintenance, public access, drainage, and buffer strip
or protective easements.
         f.   When only a portion of an entire tract is proposed to be short
subdivided, the community development director shall consider how the proposed
lots and improvements will eventually relate and coordinate with the entire
tract when fully platted.
      2.   Written Decision: The decision of the community development director
must be in writing and must include findings of fact and conclusions to support
the decision.
   B.   Report Of Decision: The community development director shall provide
the mayor a single report stating the decision on the short subdivision in
accordance with section
11-2C-12 of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4B-7: REDIVISION OF SHORT PLATS:
   A.   Land contained within a short subdivision, as shown on an approved
short plat, may not be further divided within a period of five (5) years,
unless a final plat is filed and approved in accordance with procedures
established in this article. Not more than four (4) parcels may be created
within five (5) years without going through the preliminary/final plat process
described in articles C and D of this chapter.
   B.   If an approved short plat contains fewer than four (4) parcels,
however, nothing in this section prevents the owner who filed the short plat
from filing an alteration within the five (5) year period to create up to a
total of four (4) lots within the original short plat boundaries. (Ord. 848, 8-
17-2009)
11-4B-8: FILING AND DISTRIBUTION OF APPROVED SHORT PLATS:
   A.   The original of any approved short plat must be signed by the mayor.
The plat must contain all requirements and certification statements as set
forth in subsections 11-4D-2A through Q, and T and U of this chapter, plus the
following city approval certification statement:
The city of Long Beach has reviewed the final plat for compliance with the
standards of the city's subdivision ordinance, the record of decision, and
required letters of recommendation, and approves the subdivision on this       
day of                , 20    .
      Mayor
      ATTEST:
      City Clerk-Treasurer
   B.   The signed short plat must be filed for record by the applicant with
the Pacific County auditor. Pursuant to Revised Code of Washington 58.17.065,
the final short plat will not be deemed approved until filed with the Pacific
County auditor.
   C.   One paper copy of the recorded short plat will be furnished to the city
and one reproducible copy will be furnished to the city engineer.
   D.   One paper copy of the recorded short plat will be filed with the
Pacific County assessor if so required by that office.
   E.   Paper copies of the recorded short plat will be provided to such other
agencies as may be required by the community development director. (Ord. 848,
8-17-2009)
11-4B-9: APPEALS:
The decision of the community development director on short plat approval may
be appealed to the hearing examiner in accordance with section
11-2C-14 of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
ARTICLE C. PRELIMINARY PLAT
SECTION:
11-4C-1: Application For Preliminary Plat Approval
11-4C-2: Determination Of Completeness
11-4C-3: Notice Of Application
11-4C-4: Public Hearing Notice
11-4C-5: Distribution Of Application
11-4C-6: Hearing Examiner Review And Decision
11-4C-7: Criteria For Consideration
11-4C-8: Dedications
11-4C-9: Report Of Decision
11-4C-10: Appeals
11-4C-1: APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL:
   A.   A preliminary plat is a conceptual plan for a development. It shows the
proposed development and amenities. To be considered for preliminary plat
approval, the applicant must submit the following to the community development
director, in accordance with section
11-2C-7 of this title:
      1.   A completed application form, as provided by the city.
      2.   Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat, with additional information
as specified by the application form.
      3.   SEPA environmental checklist.
      4.   SEPA EIS, if applicable.
      5.   An erosion control plan, in accordance with subsection 11-5-4D of
this title.
      6.   An application fee.
   B.   An applicant for preliminary plat approval may elect to process all
related project permit applications together in accordance with section
11-2C-6 of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4C-2: DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS:
The community development director must notify the applicant that his/her
preliminary plat application has been received and that it is complete or
incomplete, in accordance with section
11-2C-8 of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4C-3: NOTICE OF APPLICATION:
The community development director must provide a notice of application in
accordance with section
11-2C-9 of this title. In addition:
   A.   Notice of the filing of a preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision
located in the city and adjoining the municipal boundary will be given to
appropriate county officials.
   B.   Notice of the filing of a preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision
located adjacent to the right of way of a state highway or within two (2) miles
of the boundary of a state or municipal airport will be given to the district
manager, Washington state department of transportation. The district manager
must respond to the city within fifteen (15) days of such notice as to the
effect that the proposed subdivision will have on the state highway or state or
municipal airport. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4C-4: PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE:
Upon notification from the community development director that the preliminary
plat application is complete, notice of a hearing examiner public hearing will
be given in accordance with section
11-2C-11 of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4C-5: DISTRIBUTION OF APPLICATION:
   A.   After a preliminary plat application has been deemed complete according
to section
11-2C-8 of this title, the community development director will forward one copy
of the preliminary plat to each of the following for their comments and
recommendations:
      1.   City administrator.
      2.   City engineer.
      3.   Fire marshal.
      4.   Superintendent of schools.
      5.   Police chief.
      6.   Water and wastewater supervisor.
      7.   Streets and stormwater supervisor.
   B.   Each preliminary plat submitted for approval of the hearing examiner
will be accompanied by recommendations for approval or disapproval by the
individuals listed in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4C-6: HEARING EXAMINER REVIEW AND DECISION:
   A.   Upon receipt of the application from the community development
director, the hearing examiner will conduct a public hearing on the preliminary
plat application, pursuant to the procedures set forth in section
11-2C-11 of this title, at which he/she will consider the application, related
materials, SEPA determinations, comments made at the hearing by the applicant,
adjoining property owners, and other interested parties.
   B.   Based on results of the public hearing, the hearing examiner will make
a decision on the preliminary plat. The examiner will consider criteria in
sections
11-4A-7 of this chapter and
11-4C-7 of this article in making his/her recommendation.
   C.   The hearing examiner may not, as a condition to the approval of any
subdivision, require a release from damages to be procured from other property
owners. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4C-7: CRITERIA FOR CONSIDERATION:
The hearing examiner will consider all relevant evidence to determine whether
the preliminary plat should be approved or disapproved. In accordance with
Revised Code of Washington chapter 58.17, such evidence will include:
   A.   Whether the proposed subdivision is in conformance with the city's
comprehensive plan.
   B.   Whether appropriate provisions have been made for, but not limited to,
the public health, safety, and general welfare regarding open spaces,
drainageways, streets or roads, alleys, other public ways, transit stops,
potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds,
schools and school grounds.
   C.   Whether sidewalks and other planning features assure safe walking
conditions for people who use them.
   D.   Whether capital facilities to be provided by the city can be provided
concurrently with the expected development, in accordance with the
comprehensive plan.
   E.   Whether the public interest will be served by the subdivision and
dedication.
   F.   The physical characteristics of the proposed subdivision, including
flood, inundation, or wetland conditions (which are grounds for disapproval).
No plat will be approved if it covers any land situated in a flood control zone
as provided in Revised Code of Washington chapter 86.16 without the prior
written approval of the department of ecology of the state of Washington.
   G.   Any information provided as a result of compliance with the state
environmental policy act 1 . (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. RCW ch. 43.21C.
11-4C-8: DEDICATIONS:
   A.   Dedication of land to the city and/or provision of public improvements
to serve the subdivision may be required as a condition of subdivision
approval. Dedications must be clearly shown on the final plat.
   B.   No dedication or provision of public improvements will be allowed that
constitutes an unconstitutional taking of private property. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
11-4C-9: REPORT OF DECISION:
The hearing examiner shall adopt a single report stating the decision on the
preliminary plat application in accordance with section
11-2C-12 of this title, including findings of fact and conclusions to support
the decision. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4C-10: APPEALS:
The decision of the hearing examiner on the preliminary plat may be appealed to
the Pacific County superior court in accordance with section
11-2C-14 of this title. (Ord. 919, 8-3-2015)
ARTICLE D. FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
11-4D-1: Application For Final Plat
11-4D-2: Requirements And Certification Statements
11-4D-3: Title Insurance Report
11-4D-4: Improvements
11-4D-5: Maintenance Security
11-4D-6: Procedure And Criteria For Council Approval
11-4D-7: Filing And Distribution Of Approved Final Plats
11-4D-1: APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT:
   A.   An applicant for final plat must submit:
      1.   A completed application form, furnished by the city;
      2.   Ten (10) copies of the final plat with all required data per section
11-4D-2 of this article;
      3.   The application fee; and
      4.   One reduced scale reproducible copy of the final plat.
   B.   Failure of an applicant to submit all required application materials
shall constitute a lack of compliance with this article, and the community
development director may suspend the application until all required materials
are submitted.
   C.   The complete final plat shall be submitted within five (5) years of the
date of approval of the preliminary plat, as set forth in section
11-4A-6 of this chapter. Failure to submit a complete application for a final
plat within that time will result in expiration of the preliminary plat. (Ord.
848, 8-17-2009)
11-4D-2: REQUIREMENTS AND CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS:
Every final plat submitted for approval must conform to requirements listed in
subsections A through M of this section and all required information must be
clearly shown. The final plat must show the certification statements listed in
subsections N through U of this section, with appropriate signatures and seals
before the subdivision is approved and recorded.
   A.   The plat must consist of one or more pages of a size acceptable to the
city council. The plat must be clearly and legibly drawn on stable base
polyester film or equivalent approved material. All drawing and lettering must
be in permanent black ink, or an approved equivalent.
   B.   The perimeter of the subdivision must be depicted with heavier lines
than appear elsewhere on the plat. The scale must be one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'), unless the community development director approves
another scale. A marginal line must be drawn completely around each sheet,
leaving an entirely blank margin of three inches (3") on the left side and one
inch (1") on the remaining sides.
   C.   The name of the subdivision, the graphic scale, and the north point.
   D.   An accurate map of the subdivided land, based upon a complete survey by
a licensed surveyor.
   E.   All section, township, municipal and county lines lying within or
adjacent to the subdivision.
   F.   The location of all monuments or other evidence used as ties to
establish the subdivision's boundaries, and all permanent monuments with linear
dimensions.
   G.   The boundary of the subdivision with complete bearings and linear
distances.
   H.   The length and bearings of all straight lines and the radii arcs and
semitangents of all curves.
   I.   The length of all lot lines, together with bearings and other data
necessary for the location of any lot line in the field.
   J.   The location, right of way width, pavement width, centerline and name
or number of all streets and alleys within and adjoining the subdivision.
   K.   Numbers assigned to all lots, indication of the acreage and/or square
footage of each lot, and letters assigned to all blocks within the subdivision.
A house address system will be provided by the city; provided, however, that an
index system will be shown on the plat to allow assignment of house numbers by
the city.
   L.   Building envelopes, wetlands, buffers, sensitive areas and other areas
that affect the location of development on the site.
   M.   Notations of any survey discrepancies.
   N.   Legal description and owner's statement, as follows:
Know all men by these presents that I, or we, the undersigned owner, or owners,
in fee simple and encumbrances of the land hereby platted, declare that the
subdivision as described by the following legal description has been made with
the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owner, or owners:
                                                                                
   Name of owner        Name of owner
   State of Washington    )
      ) ss.
   County of Pacific   )
This is to certify that on the        day of                , A.D., 20      ,
before me the undersigned, a notary public, personally appeared
                    , to me known to be the person(s) who executed the
foregoing dedication and acknowledged to me that                      signed
and sealed the same as                 free and voluntary act and deed for the
use and purpose mentioned.
Witness my hand and official seal the day and year above written.
                                   
NOTARY PUBLIC in and for the State of Washington, residing at
                    .
O.   Dedication, as follows:
Know all men by these presents that I, or we, the undersigned, owner(s) in fee
simple of the land hereby platted, hereby declare this plat and dedicate to the
public forever all roads, easements, and rights of way over and across any lots
or lots where water might take a natural course, and the original reasonable
grading of the roads and rights of way shown hereon.
Following the original reasonable grading of the roads and rights of way shown
hereon, no drainage waters on any lot or lots may be diverted or blocked from
their natural course so as to discharge upon any public rights of way or to
hamper proper drainage. Any enclosing of drainage waters in culverts or drains
or rerouting thereon across any lots, as may be undertaken by or for the owner
of any lot, must be done by and at the expense of such owner.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have set our hands and seals.
P.   Registered land surveyor's certification, as follows:
I, a registered land surveyor, do hereby certify that the plat of
                is based on actual survey and subdivision of section       ,
Township        North, Range       East, that the distances and courses and
angles are shown thereon correctly and that proper monuments have been set and
lot block corners staked on the ground as shown on the lot.
                                            
         Registered Land Surveyor
Q.   County treasurer's certification, as follows:
I certify that all property taxes on the land described hereon have been fully
paid to and including the year         .
                                            
         Pacific County Treasurer
R.   City engineer approval, as follows:
I, the city engineer for the city of Long Beach, Washington, have reviewed the
plat and have found it to comply with the provisions of the approved
preliminary plat and the requirements and standards of the city's subdivision
code, and therefore recommend approval on this          day of                ,
20      .
                                            
         City Engineer
S.   City council approval, as follows:
The city council has reviewed the final plat for compliance with the approved
preliminary plat requirements and standards of the city's subdivision
ordinance, and required letters of recommendation, and approve the subdivision
on this        day of                , 20      .
                                            
         Mayor
         ATTEST:
                                       
         City Clerk-Treasurer
T.   County assessor approval, as follows:
Examined and approved this        day of                , 20      .
                                            
         Pacific County Assessor
U.   County officer of records certificate (to be signed at the time of
recording the approved final plat):
Filed for record at the request of                             , this       
day of                   , 20       at           minutes past           
o'clock      M, and recorded in Volume        of plats, on page       ,
recorded of Pacific County, Washington.
                                            
         Pacific County Auditor
                                            
         Deputy Auditor
   (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4D-3: TITLE INSURANCE REPORT:
The applicant for final plat approval must submit a title insurance report
confirming the title of the land in the proposed subdivision is vested in the
name of the owners whose signatures appear on the plat's certificate. (Ord.
848, 8-17-2009)
11-4D-4: IMPROVEMENTS:
To file a final plat, a developer must construct all required improvements of
the preliminary plat, repair existing streets and other public facilities
damaged in the development of the subdivision, and submit a final plat for
approval before filing with the county auditor. As built drawings for all
improvements shall be submitted to the city within ninety (90) days of their
completion. City council may authorize the execution of a security agreement
pursuant to the requirements of section
11-1-10 of this title for improvements or repairs not completed prior to final
plat approval. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4D-5: MAINTENANCE SECURITY:
   A.   Types Of Security: All required minimum improvements within any
subdivision may be subject to a maintenance bond or other approved surety
guaranteeing to the city the successful operation of improvements for a period
of two (2) years. The subdivider must file with the final plat one of the
following:
      1.   A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact
business in the state of Washington in a form approved by the city attorney.
      2.   A personal bond approved by the city attorney cosigned by at least
one additional person together with evidence of financial responsibility and
resources of those signing the bond sufficient to provide reasonable assurance
of ability to proceed in accordance with the agreement.
      3.   Cash.
      4.   A letter of credit approved by the city attorney from a financial
institution stating that money is held for the purposes of development of the
stated project.
   B.   Amount: The bond or other approved surety will be for twenty percent
(20%) of the estimated value of all required improvements as determined by the
city clerk-treasurer.
   C.   Authorize Release Of Bond Or Surety: Upon the termination of the
warranty period, and upon restoration of the improvements to successful
operation and the repair of any defects or damage in the improvements, the city
clerk- treasurer will authorize release of the maintenance bond or surety.
   D.   Withhold Release Of Bond Or Surety: The city clerk- treasurer may
withhold release of the bond or surety up to one year from the date of any
restoration or repairs to ensure that restoration or repairs were adequate.
   E.   Security Agreement: The city clerk-treasurer and the applicant must
sign a notarized security agreement, approved in form by the city attorney, in
accordance with section
11-1-10 of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4D-6: PROCEDURE AND CRITERIA FOR COUNCIL APPROVAL:
   A.   Council Agenda: Upon receipt by the community development director of a
completed application for final plat that requires city council approval, the
community development director will notify the city administrator to place the
final plat application on the city council's agenda for its next regular
meeting not sooner than ten (10) days after receipt.
   B.   Criteria For Consideration: The council shall consider the following
criteria when it reviews a final plat for approval:
      1.   The final plat conforms to the proposed preliminary plat and any
conditions imposed.
      2.   The maintenance security assures successful operation of
improvements.
      3.   The final plat conforms to the city's zoning regulations and all
other applicable land use regulations.
   C.   Written Approval: When the city council finds that the subdivision
proposed for final plat approval conforms to all terms of the preliminary plat
approval, and that said subdivision meets the requirements of Revised Code of
Washington chapter 58.17, other applicable state laws, this code, and other
applicable local laws, the mayor or other designated member of the city council
will suitably inscribe and execute his/her written approval on the face of the
final plat.
   D.   Findings To Support Decision: All findings of fact and conclusions
supporting the city council's action on the final plat must be recorded in the
minutes of the meeting during which the action was taken. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4D-7: FILING AND DISTRIBUTION OF APPROVED FINAL PLATS:
   A.   The original of any approved final plat will be filed for record with
the Pacific County auditor.
   B.   One paper copy will be furnished to the city and one reproducible copy
will be furnished to the city engineer.
   C.   One paper copy will be filed with the Pacific County assessor if so
required by that office.
   D.   Paper copies will be provided by the community development director to
such other agencies as may be required. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
ARTICLE E. BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
11-4E-1: Description
11-4E-2: Preapplication Conference
11-4E-3: Submitting Application, Related Materials And Fee
11-4E-4: Community Development Director Review And Decision
11-4E-5: Record Boundary Line Adjustment
11-4E-6: Appeals
11-4E-1: DESCRIPTION:
   A.   A boundary line adjustment is a legal method of moving a property line.
For purposes of this title, consolidating two (2) or more lots into one legal
lot, termed a lot consolidation, is a form of boundary line adjustment.
   B.   The purpose of a boundary line adjustment is to accommodate a transfer
of land between adjacent legally created lots in order to correct property line
or setback encroachments, create better lot design, or improve access, without
creating substandard lots or substandard yard or setback areas.
   C.   It is not the purpose of a boundary line adjustment to create
additional building lots.
   D.   A boundary line adjustment is exempt from most procedures in chapter 2,
article C of this title, as explained in subsection 11-2C-3C of this title.
   E.   A boundary line adjustment does not allow for any physical development,
cannot result in an impact to the environment, and is exempt from SEPA
requirements. (Ord. 869, 4-4-2011)
11-4E-2: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
An applicant may request a preapplication conference with the community
development director prior to filing a boundary line adjustment application to
discuss requirements and the review process, in accordance with section
11-2C-5 of this title. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4E-3: SUBMITTING APPLICATION, RELATED MATERIALS AND FEE:
Persons requesting a boundary line adjustment must submit the following to the
community development director, in accordance with section
11-2C-7 of this title:
   A.   A boundary line adjustment application form, provided by the city,
accompanied by a scaled map of the properties involved in the boundary line
adjustment showing the existing and proposed boundaries, existing and proposed
lot dimensions, existing and proposed lot areas, and existing improvements.
   B.   Title certificates indicating the ownership of the real property
parcels which are to be included in the boundary line adjustment request. All
persons and entities having a title interest in the property to be adjusted are
required to sign all documents relating to the request. The applicant must also
provide proof that all past due property taxes are paid.
   C.   An application fee. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4E-4: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR REVIEW AND DECISION:
   A.   The community development director will evaluate the boundary line
adjustment request in relation to the current comprehensive plan and zoning
district requirements in making his/her decision. The director may approve an
application for a boundary line adjustment, provided the following criteria are
met:
      1.   The proposed adjustment shall meet the exemption requirements of
Revised Code Of Washington 58.17.040(6);
      2.   The boundary line adjustment shall not result in creation of any
additional tract, lot, parcel, site or division;
      3.   The property being transferred within the boundary line adjustment
shall be combined with the benefiting parcel and shall not be a separate
parcel;
      4.   The lots, tracts or parcels resulting after the boundary line
adjustment shall meet all dimensional requirements specified for the applicable
zone as pursuant to title 12, "Zoning Regulations", of this code;
      5.   All lots modified by the boundary line adjustment procedures shall
have legal access meeting city standards;
      6.   The boundary line adjustment shall not violate any requirement or
condition of a previous land use action, subdivision, short subdivision or
binding site plan;
      7.   All boundary line adjustments shall be recorded surveys consistent
with requirements of Revised Code Of Washington 58.09 and Washington
administrative code 332-130. All lot lines being adjusted shall be surveyed and
newly established lot corners shall be staked.
   B.   The decision of the community development director must be written and
include findings of fact and conclusions to support the decision. (Ord. 848, 8-
17-2009)
11-4E-5: RECORD BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   The applicant must record the boundary line adjustment approval with
Pacific County and must transmit a copy of the survey map to the Pacific County
assessor's office in order for the tax records to be adjusted.
   B.   A copy of the survey map approval showing that it has been recorded
must be returned to the city. The approval will not be deemed final until the
applicant has complied with requirements of this section. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-4E-6: APPEALS:
The community development director has final approval authority on boundary
line adjustments. Decisions of the community development director may be
appealed to the hearing examiner. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; STREETS, UTILITIES AND DRAINAGE
SECTION:
11-5-1: Streets
11-5-2: Utilities
11-5-3: Sewer And Water
11-5-4: Drainage, Erosion Control, Stormwater Management
11-5-1: STREETS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to define requirements for
street planning and construction to be followed in development, review, and
approval of site plans, subdivisions, and short subdivisions, as well as new
development on existing plats.
   B.   Construction Standards And Specifications: Construction and design
standards and specifications for streets are contained in the document entitled
"Development Guidelines And Public Works Standards", and all streets must be
completed in accordance with these standards.
   C.   Right Of Way Permit Required: Prior to performing any work within a
right of way, the person performing the work must obtain a right of way permit
from the community development director, who may condition the permit as
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   D.   State Highway Access: Revised Code of Washington chapter 47.50 is
hereby adopted by reference to provide for regulation and control of vehicular
access and connection points of ingress to and egress from the state highway
system within the incorporated area of the city of Long Beach. In order to
implement requirements of Revised Code of Washington chapter 47.50, the
provisions of Washington administrative code chapters 468-51 and 468-52, as may
be amended, are adopted by reference, with the following exceptions and
standards:
      1.   Driveways accessing the state highway shall be located at least
twenty five feet (25') from street intersections.
      2.   There shall be no more than one driveway per property accessing the
state highway.
      3.   Wherever possible, access shall be from city side streets instead of
the state highway. The reviewing authority may grant access to the state
highway in addition to side street access if it is determined the size, type,
and intensity of use as well as traffic volumes are such that multiple
driveways are necessary.
      4.   Driveways accessing the state highway are also subject to the
driveway width requirements contained in title 12, chapter 12, "Off Street
Parking And Loading", of this code. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-5-2: UTILITIES:
   A.   Utility Ownership And Easement Rights: When a developer installs or
causes the installation of water, sewer, electrical power, telephone, cable
television, or other types of utility facilities and intends the facilities to
be owned, operated, or maintained by any party other than the developer, the
developer must transfer to such party the necessary ownership or easement
rights to enable the party to operate and maintain the facilities.
   B.   Right Of Way Permit Required: Prior to performing any work within a
right of way, the person performing the work must obtain a right of way permit
from the community development director in consultation with the streets and
stormwater supervisor, who may condition the permit as necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
   C.   Plan Approval Required: Prior to the installation of any new sewer
system or water system pipes, the developer must provide plans, prepared by a
licensed engineer, for review by the city.
   D.   As Built Drawings Required: Whenever a developer installs or causes to
be installed any utility within the city, or connects to existing facilities
within the city, the developer must, as soon as practicable after installation
is complete, and before acceptance of any utility by the city, furnish the city
with a copy of a drawing that shows the exact location of such utility. The
drawings must be verified as accurate by the utility service provider.
Compliance with this requirement is a condition of the continued validity of
the permit authorizing such development.
   E.   Utilities Consistent With Internal And External Development:
      1.   Whenever it can reasonably be anticipated that utility facilities
constructed in one development will be extended to serve other developments,
such facilities shall be located and constructed so that extensions can be made
conveniently, and without undue burden or expense or unnecessary duplication of
service. In all cases, utilities shall extend to the common property line(s) of
the subject property and the properties anticipated to be undergoing future
development.
      2.   All utility facilities shall be constructed in such a manner as to
minimize interference with pedestrian or vehicular traffic and to facilitate
maintenance without undue damage to improvements or facilities located within
the development. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-5-3: SEWER AND WATER:
   A.   Sewage Disposal Lines: All sewage disposal lines must be constructed in
accordance with the latest edition of the "APWA Standard Specifications", and
subject to inspection by the city.
   B.   Water Distribution Lines: All water distribution lines must be
constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the "APWA Standard
Specifications" and the "City Of Long Beach Conditions And Standards For
Extensions To The City Water System", and subject to inspection by the city.
   C.   Connection Required: All new construction shall be required to connect
to the city water and sewer systems, unless a waiver of the connection
requirement is granted by the city council. Any waiver granted shall require
the property owner to enter into an agreement with the city to connect the
property to the city water and/or sewer system at such time as services become
available at the lot and agreeing to join a local improvement district (LID),
if a district is formed that would serve the property.
   D.   Pressure Sewer Systems: Property owners in areas not served by city
sewer may connect to the city sewer system via private pressure systems.
Connection is subject to the property owner entering into a sewer connection
agreement, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   At the time an LID is formed to provide sewer service to the
property, the property owner shall not oppose creation of the LID and the
property owner shall agree to join the LID.
      2.   Once the new sewer system is installed, the pressure main connection
shall be abandoned and the property owner shall connect to the new system.
Unless granted approval by the city at time of connection to the new system,
all service lines for the pressure main shall be removed from city rights of
way when abandoned, at the property owner's cost. Removal of the pressure main
shall occur according to plans and specifications prepared by a licensed
professional engineer. The plans and specifications shall be approved by the
city prior to removal.
      3.   The property owner shall pay the full cost of a sewer connection fee
at the time of installation of the pressure main service. Installation of the
pressure main and its associated infrastructure shall be at the property
owner's expense. The property owner shall install a check valve at the property
line and at the main; the valve shall be as approved by the city's water and
sewer supervisor.
      4.   The property owner shall be responsible for installation and all
associated expenses, as established by the LID, at the time of permanent
connection.
      5.   The agreement shall run with the property, and shall be recorded
with the Pacific County assessor.
   E.   Responsibility To Maintain: Maintenance of sewer service lines (those
lines connecting the city's transport system and the source), water service
lines (those lines connecting the city's transport system and the user), and
private septic systems shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
   F.   Septic Systems: Septic systems are not allowed if city sewer is
available. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-5-4: DRAINAGE, EROSION CONTROL, STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
   A.   Natural Drainage System Utilized To Extent Feasible:
      1.   To the extent practicable, all development shall conform to the
natural contours of the land and natural and preexisting human made
drainageways must remain undisturbed.
      2.   To the extent practicable, lot boundaries shall be made to coincide
with natural and preexisting human made drainageways within subdivisions to
avoid the creation of lots that can be built upon only by altering such
drainageways.
   B.   Proper Drainage Required:
      1.   All developments must be provided with a drainage system that is
adequate to prevent undue detention or retention of surface water on the
development site. Surface water will not be regarded as unduly detained or
retained if:
         a.   The detention or retention results from a technique, practice or
device deliberately installed as part of an approved sedimentation or
stormwater runoff control plan; or
         b.   The detention or retention is not substantially different in
location or degree than that experienced by the development site in its
predevelopment state, unless such detention or retention presents a danger to
health or safety.
      2.   No surface water may be channeled or directed into a sanitary sewer.
      3.   To the extent practicable, the drainage system of a development must
coordinate with and connect to drainage systems or drainageways on surrounding
properties or streets.
      4.   Construction specifications for drainage swales are contained in
"Development Guidelines And Public Works Standards".
   C.   Stormwater Management: All developments must be constructed and
maintained so that adjacent properties are not unreasonably burdened with
surface waters as a result of such developments.
   D.   Sedimentation And Erosion Control: No permit shall be issued nor final
plat of a subdivision approved for any development that would cause land
disturbing activity unless the community development director has certified to
the city that an erosion control plan has been submitted to and approved by the
city administrator.
   E.   Stormwater System Design:
      1.   Storm sewers constructed within the street will be sized by the
developer's engineer and will consider all potential runoff requirements within
the site and upstream of the site. The storm sewer will be designed for a 100-
year mean recurrence interval. Spacing of catch basins along the street must
conform to published engineering recommendations, which consider profile and
width of the street.
      2.   On site detention may be required for new development where
downstream deficiencies exist or are anticipated to exist in the next five (5)
years. Recommended design criteria for a commercial or residential storm
drainage detention facility is a 10-year mean recurrence interval.
      3.   Erosion control and water quality control facilities for a project
that disturb over five (5) acres must apply to the state department of ecology
for an NPDES permit. Erosion control practices (e.g., straw bales, wattles,
etc.) are required for all plats and all projects that have site plan review.
Erosion control practices may include straw bales, hydroseeding, etc.
      4.   Low impact development techniques that will control drainage and
reduce runoff to public stormwater facilities are encouraged.
   F.   Illegal Discharge Of Materials Into Stormwater System: The discharge of
any material other than clean stormwater into the stormwater system is
prohibited and is a public nuisance pursuant to title 5, chapter 2 of this
code. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
   G.   Drainage Plans:
      1.   Permits/Approvals Requiring Drainage Plans: Any application for any
of the following permits or approvals shall be required to include a drainage
plan for review and approval by the city:
         a.   Short or long plat;
         b.   Any project located in the shoreline area west of the 1889
government meander line that would alter topography or the amount of impervious
cover; or
         c.   Any project where impervious cover exceeds forty percent (40%) of
a lot, including incremental additions or alterations.
      2.   Additional Information: Any drainage plan submitted shall be
supplemented with additional information at the request of the city.
      3.   Drainage Plan May Be Waived: Submission of a drainage plan may be
waived by the city or its designated representative when the applicant is able
to show proof that the runoff/drainage:
         a.   Will not seriously and adversely impact water quality conditions
of any affected receiving bodies of water; or
         b.   Will not alter drainage patterns, increase peak discharge, or
cause any other adverse effects in the drainage area.
      4.   Contents Of A Drainage Plan:
         a.   Background information shall be provided and proposed
improvements for handling future runoff shall be described in as much detail as
is required to make the drainage plan understandable and usable.
         b.   At a minimum, the following background information shall be
required:
            (1)   Depiction of the drainage area on a topographical map, with
acreage indicated;
            (2)   The peak discharge and amount of surface water currently
entering and leaving the subject property;
            (3)   The peak discharge and amount of runoff which will be
generated within the subject property if development as proposed is allowed to
proceed.
      5.   Computation Of Stormwater Runoff: The computation of stormwater
runoff from any property shall be determined by one of the following two (2)
methods:
         a.   Rational method, where Q = CIA.
 
Q = Peak runoff rate in cubic feet per second.
    Runoff coefficient which is the ratio of the maximum rate of runoff per
C = unit area to the average rate of rainfall over the duration of the design
    storm.
I = Average rainfall intensity for the duration of the design storm, expressed
    in inches per hour.
A = Drainage area in acres, including all of the tributary area above the point
    of interest.
 
         b.   Soil conservation service (SCS) curve number method, a
description of which is found in the "SCS National Engineering Handbook"
section 4, hydrology, August 1972.
      6.   Mandatory Requirements For All Drainage Plans And Improvements:
         a.   Surface water entering the subject property shall be received at
the naturally occurring location and surface water exiting the subject property
shall be discharged at the natural location with no diversion at any of these
points.
         b.   The peak discharge from the subject property may not be increased
due to the proposed development.
         c.   Detention facilities must be provided in order to handle all
surface water in excess of the peak discharge.
         d.   Where open channel construction is used to handle drainage within
the property, a minimum of fifteen feet (15') will be provided between any
structures and the top of the bank of the defined channel.
            (1)   In open channel work the water surface elevation shall be
indicated on the plan and profile drawings. The configuration of the finished
grades constituting the banks of the open channel shall also be shown on the
drawings.
            (2)   Proposed cross section of the channel will be shown with
stable side slopes with a maximum slope of two to one (2:1) unless paved.
            (3)   The water surface elevation of the design flow will be
indicated on the cross section.
         e.   Where a closed system is used to handle drainage within the
property, all structures will be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the closed
system.
         f.   Administrative variances from any or all of the foregoing
requirements may be permitted only after a determination by the city, employing
the following criteria:
            (1)   Capacity of downstream facilities;
            (2)   Acceptability of receiving bodies of water;
            (3)   Possibility of adverse effect of detention; and
            (4)   Capability of maintaining the system. (Ord. 890, 4-13-2013)
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS APPROVALS
ARTICLE A. ANNEXATION
SECTION:
11-6A-1: Purpose
11-6A-2: Development Of Uniform Criteria
11-6A-3: Goals And Policies
11-6A-4: Jurisdictional Cooperation
11-6A-5: Decision On Annexation
11-6A-6: Annexation Procedures
11-6A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to define the city's approach to annexation and
to identify those state regulations that define the legal procedures for
annexation. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6A-2: DEVELOPMENT OF UNIFORM CRITERIA:
The city should develop uniform criteria to use in evaluating annexations.
   A.   The city should evaluate all annexations on the basis of their short
and long term impact on the community.
   B.   Annexations shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan. Existing
zoning of the area may be honored, provided it is consistent with the
comprehensive plan.
   C.   The city shall assure adequate financial capability of the city and the
annexed area to support the service needs of the annexed area.
   D.   The city shall evaluate the existing and required condition and safety
of all streets, availability and condition of public utilities, and the demand
for emergency services (police, fire and medical) in an area proposed for
annexation.
   E.   Annexations shall be dependent upon the city's ability to provide or
acquire, operate and maintain general services and utility services. Annexation
should take place only after the city is satisfied that services and utilities
can be made available to the area proposed for annexation in a manner cost
effective to the city.
   F.   The city administrator or his designee shall perform the following:
      1.   Receive and process annexation requests;
      2.   Furnish the public and city officials with annexation information;
      3.   Prepare technical studies and assessments on the impacts of
annexation.
   G.   The city may require property owners within an annexing area to assume
a pro rata share of the city's bonded indebtedness existing at the time of
annexation.
   H.   The city may require impact fees and/or assessments as a condition of
annexation.
   I.   The city shall prepare or may require the applicant to prepare a report
assessing the probable short and long term financial, economic and social
impacts of annexation. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6A-3: GOALS AND POLICIES:
The city should consider annexations that best meet the growth goals and
policies of Long Beach.
   A.   The city may, by council approval, utilize extension of utilities and
services to encourage and guide needed and desirable urban growth; provided,
that:
      1.   The area served by water and/or sewer be subject to a contractual
arrangement wherein it is agreed that all utility improvements meet city
standards and that residents of the area will annex to the city at such time as
the city deems appropriate;
      2.   The owners of lands to be served by such water and/or sewer service
agree to participate, financially, to the extent and in the manner agreeable to
the city, in capital improvements taking place, or projected to take place;
      3.   The owners of lands to be served by such water and/or sewer service
provide, when requested, by local improvement district or other noncity funds,
specified water and/or sewer supply, transmission, distribution and storage
facilities, inter-tied with city systems. Ownership and control of such
facilities shall be transferred to the city following construction, inspection
and acceptance;
      4.   In those instances where extensions or improvements to city water
and/or sewer are provided, the city may waive all or any part of surcharges
and/or utility charges which might otherwise be applicable. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
11-6A-4: JURISDICTIONAL COOPERATION:
   A.   Prior to acting on any annexation, the city should confer with affected
special districts and other jurisdictions.
   B.   If an annexation is acceptable to the city, the city shall forward
reports, plans, studies and agreements to Pacific County. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6A-5: DECISION ON ANNEXATION:
   A.   The decision to annex a property is vested in the discretion of the
Long Beach city council. The acceptance of a notice of intent by the city
represents a commitment by the city to process an annexation consistent with
the requirements of Revised Code of Washington chapter 35A.14 as may be
amended, and consistent with the criteria and policies described in sections
11-6A-2 and
11-6A-3 of this article.
   B.   The decision to accept an annexation will depend upon the decision of
the council that the applicant has adequately satisfied the requirements of
Revised Code of Washington chapter 35A.14 and the annexation criteria and
policies described in sections
11-6A-2 and
11-6A-3 of this article. Final acceptance of the annexation is within the sole
discretion of the city upon a finding that the annexation, as proposed, is
beneficial to the city and consistent with the city's adopted plans and
policies at the time the annexation request was considered for approval. (Ord.
848, 8-17-2009)
11-6A-6: ANNEXATION PROCEDURES:
The allowed procedures for proposing and processing an annexation to the city
are those found at Revised Code of Washington chapter 35.14A, "Annexation By
Code Cities", as may be amended. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
ARTICLE B. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
11-6B-1: Purpose
11-6B-2: Initiation And Timing Of Text And Map Amendments
11-6B-3: Criteria For Amendment Procedure
11-6B-4: Filing Of Text And Map Amendments
11-6B-5: Consideration Of Comprehensive Plan Amendments
11-6B-6: Preparation Of Plan Text And Map Amendments
11-6B-7: Review Of Text And Map Amendments
11-6B-8: Public Participation
11-6B-9: Planning Commission Action
11-6B-10: City Council Action
11-6B-11: Final Filing With City Clerk
11-6B-12: Appeals Of Decisions
11-6B-1: PURPOSE:
The city may find instances in carrying out its comprehensive plan review
function where it is necessary to amend all or part of the comprehensive plan's
text and/or maps. The purpose of this article is to provide the procedural
steps needed to govern any amendments to the comprehensive plan text and/or
maps. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6B-2: INITIATION AND TIMING OF TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Initiation: The city's comprehensive plan shall be subject to
continuing evaluation and review by the city. Any amendment or revision to the
comprehensive plan shall conform to Revised Code of Washington chapter 36.70A.
Comprehensive plan amendments may be initiated by citizens, by the planning
commission, city staff, city council, or any other interested persons including
applicants, hearing examiners and staff of other agencies. The proposed
amendments or revisions to the comprehensive plan shall be docketed and
considered by the city no more frequently than once every year, except that
amendments may be considered more frequently under the following circumstances:
      1.   The initial adoption of a subarea plan.
      2.   The adoption or amendment of a shoreline master program under the
procedures set forth in Revised Code of Washington chapter 90.58.
      3.   The amendment of the capital facilities element of a comprehensive
plan that occurs concurrently with the adoption or amendment of a city budget.
   B.   Timing Of Review: All pending amendment proposals shall be considered
by the city concurrently so the cumulative effect of the various proposals can
be ascertained. However, the city may adopt amendments or revisions to its
comprehensive plan that conform with Revised Code of Washington chapter 36.70A
whenever an emergency exists or to resolve an appeal of a comprehensive plan
filed with the growth management hearings board or with a court.
   C.   Periodic Review: The city shall periodically review the densities
permitted within its boundaries, and to the extent to which urban growth has
occurred within the city according to the timetable established by the growth
management act. The city shall revise its projected population figures a
minimum of every ten (10) years to accommodate the urban growth projected to
occur in the city for the succeeding twenty (20) year period. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
11-6B-3: CRITERIA FOR AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
Criteria to be used to make recommendations and decisions on whether or not to
consider an amendment to the comprehensive plan include the following:
   A.   Conditions in the vicinity of the proposal have markedly changed since
the subject property was designated, and under those changed conditions, a plan
amendment is within the public interest.
   B.   The proposal is correcting an inconsistency within or is a
clarification of the plan.
   C.   The public interest is served by dealing with the proposal at the
present time rather than later.
   D.   The proposal bears a substantial relation to promotion and preservation
of the public health, safety and welfare.
   E.   The proposal will result in long term benefits to the community as a
whole and is in the best interest of the community. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6B-4: FILING OF TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Application: Written requests to amend the comprehensive plan, together
with all relevant supportive or explanatory material as determined to be
applicable by staff in the application packet, shall be submitted to the
community development department. A fee shall also be made in accordance with
the adopted fee schedule; notwithstanding the fee, the applicant shall be
responsible for all costs related to the comprehensive plan amendment request,
unless the community development director finds otherwise.
   B.   Call For Acceptance: The city shall establish a start and end date for
the call for acceptance of written requests, and such shall be advertised in
the local newspaper of record at least twice. All plan amendment requests shall
be docketed for possible consideration for inclusion in the comprehensive plan.
   C.   Consideration Of Requests For Amendment: The docketed list of proposed
amendments shall be presented to the planning commission within ninety (90)
days of the ending date. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to
the city council on whether or not to move forward on consideration of docketed
amendments within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6B-5: CONSIDERATION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS:
The city council, after a recommendation from staff and the planning
commission, can recommend that an amendment be processed in the current
amendment cycle, remain on the docket list for future consideration, or be
denied further consideration. The city council's decision as to disposition of
the amendment shall be final and is not appealable. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6B-6: PREPARATION OF PLAN TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS:
It is the responsibility of the planning commission to review and oversee
preparation of all materials to express, explain, or depict elements of the
text or map amendments, including documentation required by the state
environmental policy act (SEPA). The planning commission also has the
responsibility to approve all findings of fact and recommendations that are to
be transmitted to the city council for their consideration. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
11-6B-7: REVIEW OF TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS:
The city may request other governmental entities to provide comments and
recommendations on comprehensive plan amendments. Comments and recommendations
must be submitted to the city by the date of the planning commission's hearing
unless the city grants an extension of time. In proposing any changes to its
comprehensive plan, the city shall notify the department of community, trade
and economic development (CTED) of its intent to adopt such amendments at least
sixty (60) days prior to final adoption. The city shall transmit a complete and
accurate copy of its comprehensive plan to CTED in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6B-8: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION:
   A.   Processing Of Text And Map Amendments: The city may use any or all of
the following techniques to provide for early and continuous public
participation in the development and/or amendments of the city's comprehensive
plan:
      1.   Opportunity for written comments;
      2.   Public meetings;
      3.   Newsletter/newspaper articles;
      4.   Consideration of and response to public comments.
   B.   Comments: Comments expressing support or objection regarding a proposed
comprehensive plan amendment may be filed by any interested party. Comments
must be filed with the city by the date of the public hearing unless an
extension of time is granted. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6B-9: PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   Planning Commission Action: The planning commission shall conduct a
public hearing and make its findings of fact and recommendation on a proposed
amendment at the public hearing. Public notice of the hearing shall occur as
set forth in section
11-2C-11 of this title. The commission shall make one of four (4)
recommendations in considering text and map amendments:
      1.   Approval in the form submitted for public hearing;
      2.   Approval with changes;
      3.   Approval in part;
      4.   Disapproval.
   B.   Transmittal Of Decision: Staff shall transmit the planning commission's
recommendation to the city council as part of a staff report to the city
council within ninety (90) days. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6B-10: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   City Council Action: Upon receipt of the planning commission's findings
and recommendations on the comprehensive plan and map amendments, the city
council shall consider the proposed amendment at a public hearing prior to a
decision. Public notice of the hearing shall occur as set forth in section
11-2C-11 of this title. The city council in its consideration shall make one of
the following decisions:
      1.   Approval in accordance with the findings and recommendation
submitted by the planning commission;
      2.   Approval with modifications;
      3.   Approval in part;
      4.   Refer all or part of the plan text or map amendment proposal back to
the planning commission;
      5.   Disapprove.
   B.   City Council Decision: If the city council's decision is to refer the
amendment request back to the planning commission for reconsideration, the city
council must specify which matters it wishes reconsidered. The final form and
content of the comprehensive plan is determined by the city council. The
comprehensive plan shall be adopted by ordinance. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6B-11: FINAL FILING WITH CITY CLERK:
The comprehensive plan together with any and all amendments shall be provided
to the city clerk to be placed in a permanent file and made available for
public inspection. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6B-12: APPEALS OF DECISIONS:
All requests for review by the growth management hearings board shall be
initiated by filing a petition in accordance with Revised Code of Washington
chapter 36.70A, 90.58 or 43.21C. Only parties of record may initiate an appeal
of the city council's final decision. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
ARTICLE C. VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
11-6C-1: Petition By Owners Or Resolution By City
11-6C-2: Setting Date For Hearing
11-6C-3: Notice Of Hearing
11-6C-4: Hearing; Ordinance Of Vacation
11-6C-5: Streets Abutting Bodies Of Water, Limitations
11-6C-6: Title To Vacated Street Or Alley
11-6C-7: Zoning Of Vacated Street Or Alley
11-6C-8: Vested Rights Not Affected
11-6C-1: PETITION BY OWNERS OR RESOLUTION BY CITY:
   A.   The owners of an interest in any real estate abutting upon any street
or alley may petition the city council to make vacation, giving a description
of the property to be vacated.
   B.   The city council itself may also initiate by resolution a street
vacation procedure.
   C.   The petition or resolution must be filed with the city administrator.
(Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6C-2: SETTING DATE FOR HEARING:
If the petition is signed by the owners of more than two- thirds (2/3) of the
property abutting upon the street or alley sought to be vacated, the city
council shall by resolution set a date when the petition will be heard and
decided upon. The date shall be not more than sixty (60) days nor less than
twenty (20) days after the date of the passage of such resolution. (Ord. 848,
8-17-2009)
11-6C-3: NOTICE OF HEARING:
   A.   Post Notice; Contents Of Notice: Upon passage of the resolution, the
city administrator must post notice of the petition in three (3) public places
in the city and a notice in a conspicuous place on the street or alley sought
to be vacated. The notice must contain:
      1.   A statement that a petition has been filed to vacate the street or
alley described in the notice; and
      2.   A statement of the time and place fixed for the hearing of the
petition.
   B.   Mailing Notice: If the proceeding is initiated by resolution of the
city council and not by the property owners abutting the street or alley sought
to be vacated, the notice described in subsection A of this section must be
mailed to the owners of property abutting upon any street or alley or any part
of a street or alley sought to be vacated, as shown on the rolls of the county
treasurer, at least fifteen (15) days before the date fixed for the hearing.
Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as required in section
11-2C-11 of this title except notice shall only be provided to abutting
property owners.
   C.   Objections Filed: If fifty percent (50%) of the abutting property
owners file written objection to the proposed vacation with the city
administrator prior to the time of the hearing, the city will not proceed with
the resolution. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6C-4: HEARING; ORDINANCE OF VACATION:
   A.   Ordinance Required: The hearing on the petition must be held by the
city council. If the city council decides to grant the petition or any part of
it, the city council may by ordinance vacate the street or alley. The ordinance
may provide that it will not become effective until the owners of property
abutting upon the street or alley so vacated will compensate the city in an
amount which does not exceed one- half (1/2) the appraised value of the area so
vacated, except in the event the subject property was acquired at public
expense, compensation may be required in an amount equal to the full appraised
value of the vacation; provided, that the ordinance may provide that the city
retain an easement or the right to exercise and grant easements in respect to
the vacated land for the construction, repair, and maintenance of public
utilities and services.
      1.   The initiating party shall be responsible for the payment of all
costs associated with the vacation, including the appraisal of the property.
   B.   Record Ordinance: A certified copy of the ordinance must be recorded by
the city clerk-treasurer with the Pacific County auditor. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6C-5: STREETS ABUTTING BODIES OF WATER, LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Conditions For Allowing: The city may not vacate a street or alley if
any portion of the street or alley abuts a body of fresh or salt water, unless:
      1.   The vacation is sought to enable the city to acquire the property
for port purposes, beach or water access purposes, boat moorage or launching
sites, park, public view, recreation, or educational purposes, or other public
uses;
      2.   The city council by resolution declares the street or alley is not
presently being used as a street or alley and the street or alley is not
suitable for any of the following purposes: port, beach or water access, boat
moorage, launching sites, park, public view, recreation, or education; or
      3.   The vacation is sought to enable the city to implement a plan
adopted by resolution or ordinance, and the plan provides comparable or
improved public access to the same shoreline area as the vacated property.
   B.   City Actions Required: Before adopting a resolution vacating a street
or alley abutting a body of water under subsection A2 of this section, the city
shall:
      1.   Compile an inventory of all rights of way within the city that abut
the same body of water that is abutted by the street or alley sought to be
vacated;
      2.   Conduct a study to determine if the street or alley to be vacated is
suitable for use by the city for any of the following purposes: port, boat
moorage, launching sites, beach or water access, park, public view, recreation,
or education;
      3.   Hold a public hearing on the proposed vacation in the manner
required by this article, where, in addition to the normal requirements for
publishing notice, notice of the public hearing is posted conspicuously on the
street or alley sought to be vacated. The posted notice shall indicate the area
is public access, it is proposed to be vacated, and that anyone objecting to
the proposed vacation should attend the public hearing or send a letter to a
particular official indicating his/her objection; and
      4.   Make a finding that the street or alley sought to be vacated is not
suitable for any of the purposes listed under subsection B2 of this section,
and that the vacation is in the public interest.
   C.   Payment Of Fair Market Value; Use Of Funds: No vacation will be
effective until the fair market value has been paid for the street or alley
that is vacated. Money received from the vacation may be used by the city only
for acquiring additional beach or water access, acquiring additional public
view sites to a body of water, or acquiring additional moorage or launching
sites. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6C-6: TITLE TO VACATED STREET OR ALLEY:
If any street or alley is vacated by the city council, the property within the
limits so vacated will belong to the abutting property owners. (Ord. 848, 8-17-
2009)
11-6C-7: ZONING OF VACATED STREET OR ALLEY:
The zoning of vacated rights of way shall be the same as that of the abutting
property to which it will belong. (Ord. 848, 8-17-2009)
11-6C-8: VESTED RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED:
No vested rights are affected by the provisions of this article. (Ord. 848, 8-
17-2009)
TITLE 12
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; COMPLIANCE
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-3: Uses Of Land And Structures; Compliance Required
12-1-4: Severability
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LONG BEACH.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to promote public health, safety and general
welfare, encourage the orderly growth, protect and enhance property values,
minimize discordant, unsightly surroundings, avoid inappropriate design,
provide for environmental, aesthetic, health, safety and general welfare
objectives, while ensuring the comfort, prosperity, beauty and balance of the
community as a whole, to promote and enhance construction and maintenance
practices that will ensure visual quality throughout the city. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
12-1-3: USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or
structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land,
building, structure or premises be used or altered, for any purpose or in any
manner other than the use listed in this title as permitted in the use zone in
which such land, building, structure or premises is located. All land uses and
structures not specifically mentioned as a permitted use or structure,
accessory use or structure, or conditional use or structure shall be
prohibited.
   B.   The permitted uses of land or buildings are only those specifically
provided for in the sections describing each use zone and under the conditions
provided for, except for uses lawfully established prior to the effective date
hereof and within the limitations of chapter 16, "Nonconforming Uses And
Structures", of this title.
   C.   No building or lot or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other
than a use permitted hereinafter in the use zones in which such building, lot,
or tract of land (or portion thereof) shall be located. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this title are hereby declared to be severable. If any
section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this title is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Terms Defined
12-2-1: TERMS DEFINED:
Any term not herein defined shall have its customary or commonly accepted
meaning.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (dBA): The sound level in decibels as measured on a
sound level meter using the A-weighting network, which takes into effect the
manner in which the human ear perceives sound.
ACCESSORY: A use, a building or structure, or part of a building or other
structure, which is subordinate to and incidental to the use of the main
building, structure or use on the same lot, including a private garage. If an
accessory building is attached to the main building by a common wall or roof,
such accessory building shall be considered a part of the main building. All
accessory structures to be subordinate in size to the primary structure.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling unit added to a principal building or use
for occupancy by a resident manager or on site security personnel, where so
permitted by the underlying zoning.
ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS: Living quarters added to a principal building or
within an accessory building of an owner occupied dwelling for the sole use of
the family or of persons employed on the premises, or for the temporary use of
guests of the occupants of the premises. Such quarters have no kitchen
facilities and are not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.
The term “accessory living quarters” includes “guesthouse”.
ADDITION: An extension or increase in floor area or height of an existing
building or structure.
ADULT BUSINESS: See chapter 15 of this title for definitions.
ADULT FAMILY HOME: A residential home in which a person or persons provide
personal care, special care, room and board to more than one but not more than
six (6) adults who are not related by blood or marriage to the person or
persons providing the services, as regulated by Revised Code of Washington
chapter 70.128.
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT: Any dwelling unit required to be occupied by
qualified households as affordable housing, and subject to deed restrictions or
covenants requiring such dwelling units to be rented or sold at prices
preserving them as affordable housing for a specified time period.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing with a sales price or rental amount within the
means of a household that may occupy low, very low and extremely low income
housing. In the case of dwelling units for sale, “affordable” means housing in
which mortgage, amortization, taxes, insurance, and condominium or association
fees, if any, constitute no more than thirty percent (30%) of such gross annual
household income for a household of the size that may occupy the unit in
question. In the case of dwelling units for rent, “affordable” means housing
for which the rent and utilities constitute no more than thirty percent (30%)
of such gross annual household income for a household of the size that may
occupy the unit in question.
AGGRIEVED PARTY: An individual whose legal rights have been violated or whose
financial interests have been directly affected by a City decision.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare or way that affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property, and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATION: Regarding exterior building changes, the replacement of fifty one
percent (51%) or more of an exterior wall. Alteration is subject to the design
review process. Contrast to “maintenance and repair” as defined herein. See
also definition of Structural Alterations.
AMENDMENT: A change in the wording, context or substance of this title, the
adoption of a zoning map hereunder, or a change in the zone boundaries upon
zoning maps adopted hereunder.
AMUSEMENTS: Establishments engaged in providing entertainment or games for a
fee, such as bowling alleys, billiard and pool establishments, rinks,
racetracks, bumper cars or boats, go-carts, coin operated games, arcades,
rides, carnival type operations, horse rides and similar activities. Such
activities may occur indoors or outdoors, subject to the requirements of the
zone district in which it is located.
ANNEXATION: The incorporation of a land area into the existing corporate
boundaries, resulting in a change in the boundaries of the city.
ANTENNA: A device used in communications that transmits and/or receives radio,
television, or other electromagnetic signals, including, but not limited to,
dish, panel, parabolic and whip antennas.
APARTMENT: One or more rooms with a private bath and kitchen facilities
constituting an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in a building
containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building or a portion of a building designed for occupancy
by three (3) or more families living separately from each other and containing
three (3) or more dwelling units. See also definition of Dwellings, Types Of:
Multi-Family Dwelling.
APPEAL: A challenge of a city decision by a party of record. Decisions by the
city administrator or community development director are appealable to the
hearing examiner; decisions by the hearing examiner or planning commission are
appealable to the city council; decisions by the city council are appealable to
the Pacific County superior court or the growth management hearings board.
APRON: That portion of a driveway, whether paved or unpaved, that connects a
garage or carport to a street or way; also referred to as a garage approach.
AREA MEDIAN INCOME (AMI): A statistical number based on household size and
annual income for residents of Pacific County, in the annual schedule published
by the U.S. department of housing and urban development.
ATTACHED: A structure that shares at least one common wall or roof with another
structure.
AUTOMOBILE, BOAT AND TRAILER SALES AREA: An open area, other than a street,
used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles, boats or
trailers, and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of
automobiles, boats or trailers to be displayed, sold, or rented on the
premises.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKER: Any person, corporation or enterprise engaged in automobile
wrecking.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: Any dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles or trailers,
or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their
parts.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any premises devoted to “automobile wrecking” as the
term is defined herein.
AWNING: An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported by
the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or nonrigid
materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either permanent
or retractable, including such structures that are internally illuminated by
fluorescent or other light sources.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A lodging facility that contains a maximum of fifteen (15)
itinerant rental units, with the owner or manager living on the premises, and
that provides a morning meal for guests only. See also definition of Itinerant
Lodging.
BICYCLE PARKING: A facility that includes the necessary space and a secured
rack designed to hold a bicycle.
BLOCK: All property abutting upon one side of a street between intersecting and
intercepting streets, or between a street and railroad right of way, waterway,
terminus or dead end street, or city boundary line. An intercepting street
shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of the street which
it intercepts.
BOARD AND BATTEN: Exterior siding comprised of boards approximately eight (8)
to twelve inches (12") in width, installed vertically and with strips of wood
(battens) applied to cover the joints between the boards. Battens are typically
about two inches (2") wide but may be up to four inches (4"). Sheet siding such
as exterior grade plywood may be used in lieu of individual boards, with the
spacing of the battens simulating individual boards.
BUFFER STRIP: Open space, landscaped area, fences, wall, berm or any
combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property
from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights or other
nuisances.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average finished grade to the
highest point of the coping or parapet of a flat roof, or to the peak of the
highest gable of a pitch, gambrel or hip roof, or to the highest point on a
false wall on a building with a false front, or to the deck level on a mansard
roof. Average finished grade is determined by a simple average of the lowest
elevation point and the highest elevation point of the site’s grade within the
building’s footprint.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: The primary building or other structure on a lot or
building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the
premises are devoted. Where a permissible use involves more than one building
or structure designed or used for the primary purpose, as in the case of group
houses, each such permissible or other structure on a lot or building site as
defined by this title shall be construed as comprising a principal building or
structure.
BUSINESS OR COMMERCE: The purchase, sale, offering for sale, or other
transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service,
substance or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management or occupancy
of the office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises; or the
maintenance and use of buildings, offices, structures or premises by
professions and trades or persons rendering services.
CAMPGROUND: A plot of ground on which two (2) or more campsites are located,
established or maintained for occupancy by tents, trailers, recreational
vehicles or similar structures as temporary living quarters for recreation,
education or vacation purposes. See also definition of recreational vehicle
park.
CAMPING: A temporary activity of living in a camp, campground, or vehicle.
Erecting a tent or shelter or arranging bedding or both for the purpose of, or
in such a way as will permit remaining overnight, or parking a trailer, camper,
RV, or other vehicle for the purpose of remaining overnight.
CANOPY: See definition of awning.
CARDROOM: A cardroom is a gaming establishment that exclusively offers card
games for play by the public. All uses under this definition, except parking
areas, shall be contained entirely within an enclosed building.
CARPORT: A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor vehicles
and enclosed on not more than three (3) sides.
CATEGORY: A broad generic group of types of uses such as agriculture,
residential, business, commercial, manufacturing and others, and which are
further refined into classifications distinguished principally by the degree of
intensity of use.
CHILD DAYCARE FACILITY: A building or structure in which an agency, person, or
persons regularly provide care for a group of children for periods of less than
twenty four (24) hours a day. Child daycare facilities include family daycare
homes, out of home child mini-daycare centers, and child daycare centers
regulated by the Washington state department of social and health services, as
presently defined and hereafter amended 1 .
CHURCH: An establishment, the principal purpose of which is religious worship
and for which the principal building or other structure contains the sanctuary
or principal place of worship, and including accessory uses in the main
building or in separate buildings or structures, including Sunday school rooms
and religious education classrooms, assembly rooms, kitchen, library room or
reading room, recreation hall, a one-family dwelling unit and residences on
site for nuns and clergy, but excluding facilities for training of religious
orders.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator of the city of Long Beach, or his or
her designee.
CITY COUNCIL: The elected legislative body of the city of Long Beach.
CIVIC CENTER: A building or complex of buildings that houses government offices
and services and that may include cultural, recreational, athletic, convention
and entertainment facilities.
CLASSIFICATION: A refined identification of uses which, either individually or
as to type, are identified as possessing similar characteristics or performance
standards and are permitted as compatible uses in a zone. A classification, as
the term is employed in this title, includes provisions, conditions and
requirements related to the permissible location of permitted uses.
CLOSED RECORD APPEAL: An appeal of a final decision made under the authority of
this code where a predecision open record hearing was held. A closed record
appeal is on the record of the permit decision and no new evidence or testimony
is allowed to be submitted.
CLUB: An association of persons for some common purpose, but not including
groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on
as a business.
CLUBHOUSE: A building, or portion thereof, providing a gathering place or space
for other activities provided as an amenity for the use of the residents of a
resort development, or associated with a recreational facility. A clubhouse may
include kitchen facilities, assembly halls, meeting rooms and locker
facilities, and where permitted by the underlying zone, retail, personal
services and eating and drinking establishments.
COMMISSION: City of Long Beach planning commission.
COMMUNITY CENTER:
A facility used for recreational, social, education and cultural activities.
COMMUNITY EVENT: An occurrence or activity open to the general public, and
organized by (or in cooperation with) a public agency, civic organization or
nonprofit organization.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive plan adopted by the city pursuant to the
state of Washington growth management act 2 .
CONCESSION: The limited sale of food and goods, the rental of sporting
equipment, or the provision of services such as instruction or guiding,
incidental to a recreational use or special event.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted in one or more classifications as defined by
this title but which use because of characteristics peculiar to it, or because
of size, technological processes or types of equipment, or because of the exact
location with reference to surroundings, streets and existing improvements or
demands upon public facilities, requires a special degree of control to make
such uses consistent with and compatible to other existing or permissible uses
in the same zone or zones, and to assure that such use shall not be inimical to
the public interest.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: The documented evidence of authority granted by the
hearing examiner to locate a conditional use at a particular location.
CONDOMINIUM(S): A building, or group of buildings, in which dwellings, units,
offices, or floor area is owned individually and the structure, common areas,
and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
A condominium, whether permanent or itinerant, is a form of property ownership
rather than a form of land use.
CONDOMINIUM HOTEL: A building constructed, maintained, and operated and managed
as a hotel in which some or all of the rooms are available to transients for
rent, and where the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all
the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. See also definition of Itinerant
Lodging.
CONFERENCE CENTER: A facility with meeting rooms used for conferences and
seminars, that may include accommodations for sleeping, food preparation and
eating, recreation, entertainment, resource facilities, and meeting rooms. A
fitness and health center, retail stores, and services may be provided as
accessory uses, for the primary use of conference center guests. A conference
center may also be part of a resort complex.
CONFORMING BUILDING: Any building or structure that is built to the standards
set forth in this title.
CONFORMING USE: An activity the nature and type of which is permitted in the
zone in which the property on which it is established is located.
CONVALESCENT CENTER: A facility that provides short term, primarily in-patient
care, treatment, and/or rehabilitation services for persons recovering from
illness or injury who do not require continued hospitalization. Such facility
may be combined with a nursing home or similar long term care facility. See
also definition of Nursing Home.
CONVENTION CENTER: A building or portion thereof designed to accommodate a
large group of people in assembly. A convention center may be combined with a
civic center or a community center. See also definition of Conference Center.
COURT: Any portion of the interior of a lot or building site which is fully or
partially surrounded by buildings or other structures and which is not a
required yard or open space.
CROSS GABLE: A secondary roof form, set perpendicular to the primary roof and
having its highest ridge at the same height or lower than the ridge of the
primary roof.
CUPOLA: A small roof tower, usually rising from the roof ridge.
DAY NURSERY: Any type of group child daycare program, including nurseries for
children of working mothers, nursery schools for children under minimum age for
education in public schools, privately conducted kindergartens when not a part
of a public or parochial school, and programs covering after school care for
school children; provided, that any such “day nursery” is licensed by the state
or county and conducted in accordance with state and local requirements.
DAYCARE CENTER: A childcare center providing care for seven (7) or more
children, and not located in the home of the provider. See also definition of
Child Daycare Facility.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units permitted per unit of land, usually
described as minimum lot area per unit or maximum number of units per acre.
DENSITY BONUS: An increase in the number of dwelling units permitted on a
property in order to provide an incentive for the construction of affordable
housing.
DESIGN REVIEW GUIDEBOOK: The city of Long Beach design review guidebook,
adopted by the city and as may be amended, containing guidelines defining
parameters to be followed in site and building design and development, for use
in conducting design review pursuant to the requirements of this title.
DETACHED: A structure that does not share any walls or roof with any other
structure.
DORMER: A projection from a sloping roof that typically contains a window.
DRIVE-THROUGH: An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service or
packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services or
obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles. A business with a drive-
through may also provide goods or services within a building or may operate
solely as a drive-through establishment, as permitted by the underlying zoning.
DRIVEWAY: A private roadway providing access to a street or highway.
DUMP: An open area devoted to the disposal of refuse, including incineration,
reduction, or dumping of ashes, garbage, combustible or noncombustible refuse,
but not including transfer stations.
DWELLING: A building or a portion of a building designed exclusively for
residential purposes, encompassing one-family, two-family and multiple-family
dwelling units, but not including hotels or motels units.
DWELLING UNIT: A house, an apartment, a mobile home, a group of rooms, or a
single room, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities, occupied as
separate living quarters.
DWELLINGS, TYPES OF:
   Attached Dwelling: The building encompassing a one-family dwelling unit with
ground floor outside access, that shares common walls with, and is connected
to, two (2) or more one-family dwelling units, but without openings or interior
connections between the separate dwelling units. An attached dwelling could
also be described as a townhouse.
   Detached Dwelling: A dwelling that is not attached to any other dwelling by
any means.
   Group Dwelling: Two (2) or more single-family dwellings on a single
property, each containing not more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet of living area. A group dwelling development may also be referred to as a
cottage development, and is distinguished by shared open space within the
project. It may include a shared community building and accessory uses as
amenities. Individual dwelling units may be condominiums, but the owner of each
dwelling unit does not individually own the land on which the unit is situated
and the open space and community building are owned in common by all owners.
   Multi-Family Dwelling: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling
units. A “group home” is not a “multi-family dwelling”.
   Seasonal Dwelling: A residential building that is not used as a principal
residence and may be occupied weekends and for other periods during the year.
In Long Beach many “summer homes” are seasonal dwellings.
   Semidetached Dwelling: A residential building with ground floor outside
access that shares a common wall, without openings, to another single-family
dwelling, but without openings or interior connections between the units. Each
unit is located on a separate lot.
   Single-Family Dwelling: A detached building designed exclusively for
occupancy by one family and containing one dwelling unit.
   Two-Family Dwelling Or Duplex: A building designed exclusively for occupancy
by two (2) families living independently of each other, having a common wall,
floor or roof, and containing two (2) dwelling units.
EASEMENT: The grant of one or more specific air, surface or subsurface property
rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or
another person or entity, and recorded by deed or on the plat of the property.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT: A retail establishment selling food and
drink for consumption on the premises. An eating and drinking establishment
serves alcoholic beverages, and may provide live entertainment and/or gaming.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: Elementary, junior high, high schools, junior
colleges, colleges or universities or other schools giving general academic
instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by the
education code of the state.
ELEVATION:
   A.   A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level; or
   B.   A fully dimensioned drawing of the front, rear, or side of a building
showing features such as windows, doors, roofs, and relationship of grade to
floor level.
ENTIRELY ENCLOSED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure so designed
and constructed that all exterior walls of the building or structure shall be
solid from the ground to the roofline and containing no openings except for
windows and doors which are so designed that they may be closed.
EQUIPMENT, HEAVY DUTY: High capacity mechanical devices for moving earth or
other materials, mobile power units, including, but not limited to, carryalls,
graders, loading and unloading devices, cranes, drag lines, trench diggers,
tractors, augers, caterpillars, concrete mixers and conveyors, harvesters,
combines or other major agricultural equipment and similar devices operated by
mechanical power as distinguished from manpower.
ERECTED: The construction of any building or structure, or the structural
alteration of a building or structure the result of which would be to change
the exterior walls or roof or to increase the square foot floor area of the
interior of the building or structure.
EXCEPTION: Permission to depart from or to be released from normally required
city regulation(s). An exception is dictated by specific circumstances unique
to a given situation that would make strict application of regulation(s) as
normally applied unnecessary or unreasonable. An exception may or may not
require a variance.
EXEMPTION: Waiver from regulations for a type or class of activity.
EXTREMELY LOW INCOME HOUSING: Housing that is affordable, according to the U.S.
department of housing and urban development, for either home ownership or
rental, and that is occupied, reserved, or marketed for occupancy by households
with a gross annual household income that is thirty percent (30%) or less of
the area median income for households of the same size within Pacific County.
FAR: See definition of Floor Area Ratio (FAR).
FACADE: The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view or that wall
viewed by persons not within the building.
FALSE FRONT: The vertical extension of the facade of a building to give the
appearance of an additional story or to conceal the roof from street view. A
“mansard roof” is not a “false front”.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage,
or domestic partners, or a group of not more than five (5) persons who are not
related by blood or marriage, living together in a dwelling unit. Exceptions to
the limits in this definition may be made at the city’s discretion.
FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A person regularly providing care during part of the
twenty four (24) hour day to six (6) or fewer children in the residence of the
person or persons under whose direct care the children are placed. See also
definition of Daycare Center.
FENCE: A barrier composed of posts connected by boards, rails, panels, or wire
or a masonry wall, erected for the purpose of enclosing space or separating
parcels of land. The term “fence” does not include “retaining wall”.
FENESTRATION: Windows or other openings on a building facade.
FINAL APPROVAL DATE: The date after which no appeal may be filed, or the date
upon which all appeals have been adjudicated.
FLOOR AREA/GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
enclosed floors of a building, excluding basements, vents, shafts, light
courts, elevators and equipment penthouses, and any area having a ceiling
height of less than six feet six inches (6'6"), measured from the exterior face
of exterior walls or from the centerline of a common wall separating two (2)
buildings.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): Ratio representing the gross floor area of all
buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area.
FRONTAGE: The length of a structure, business, or lot abutting a property line
along a street or private drive; the length of the front lot line.
FULL CUTOFF: Light fixture designed to fully shield the bulb, allowing no
emission of light above the horizontal plane drawn through the fixture; also
referred to as a “dark sky” light fixture.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the main
building, enclosed on not less than four (4) sides and designed and intended to
be used only for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or operated only by
the occupants of the main building or buildings.
GRADE: The vertical elevation of the ground surface.
GRADE, ARTIFICIAL: A manmade grade created by means of earthen terraces, berms,
fills or the like, specifically for the purpose of gaining a height advantage
or disguising the true height of a structure. Artificial grade shall not be
used to determine the permissible height of any building or structure.
GRADE, AVERAGE BUILDING FOOTPRINT: The average elevation of the building
footprint before clearing and grubbing for the building foundation determined
by averaging the highest and lowest elevation points within the building’s
footprint.
GRADE, FINISHED: The vertical elevation of the ground surface after
development.
GROUND COVER: Grasses and other plants used to provide a low growing carpet
between larger plants. Contrast with “mulch” as defined herein.
GROUP HOME: A nonprofit or for profit home for the sheltered care of persons
with special needs which, in addition to providing food and shelter, may also
provide some combination of personal care, social or counseling services, and
transportation. See also definition of Residential Care Facility.
HEIGHT: See definition of Building Height.
HOME OCCUPATION: A limited commercial activity carried out for gain by a
resident that results in a product or service, is conducted in the resident’s
dwelling unit, and is clearly subordinate to use of the premises as a
residence.
HOSPITAL: An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary and
emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to human patients and
licensed by state law to provide facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics
and general medical practice, as distinguished from the treatment of mental and
nervous disorders and alcoholics, but not excluding surgical and postsurgical
treatment of mental cases.
HOTEL: A facility offering itinerant lodging accommodations to the general
public, and which may include additional facilities and services such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, personal services, entertainment, and recreational
facilities. Provides onsite office personnel and management.
HOURS OF OPERATION: The actual hours when a business is open to serve
customers.
IMPERMEABLE: Not permitting the passage of water.
IMPERMEABLE SURFACE: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INSPECTOR: Includes any city employee working under the authority and direction
of the city administrator.
INTERPRETIVE FACILITY: An installation, structure(s), exhibit, series of
features or other elements intended to provide information and education
regarding cultural or historical persons, places or events, natural resources,
or other matters of significance or interest.
ITINERANT LODGING: A hotel, motel or other facility engaged in the rental or
provision of lodging facilities for periods of thirty (30) days or less. Also
refers to the actual facility for rent, including, and not limited to, bed and
breakfast rooms, condominium hotel units, hotel rooms, motel rooms, RV spaces,
camping spaces, timeshare units, and vacation rentals. All itinerant lodging is
subject to the city’s lodging tax, as required by title 3, chapter 6 of this
code. See also definitions of Bed And Breakfast, Condominium Hotel, Hotel,
Motel, Timeshare and Vacation Rental. Contrast to “long term lodging” as
defined herein.
JUNKYARD OR SALVAGE YARD: Any facility or area used for storing, selling,
dismantling, shredding, compressing, or salvaging scrap, discarded material, or
equipment.
KENNEL3: A place in which dogs, cats, or domesticated animals or any
combination thereof are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold, all
for a fee or compensation, but not including a small animal hospital or clinic.
KENNEL, PRIVATE: The keeping, breeding, raising, showing, or training of more
than four (4) dogs over six (6) months of age for personal enjoyment of the
owner or occupant of the property.
LANDSCAPING: An area of ground that consists of living plant material
including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, flowers,
gardens and vines. These natural materials may also be described as softscape.
Landscaping may also include limited amounts of hardscape such as mulch (beauty
bark, oyster shell, river rock, etc.), patios, and walkways, and may include
furnishings, sculptures, fountains, pools, lighting, fences and retaining
walls, as may be permitted by the provisions of this title. Landscaping does
not include off street parking spaces, driveways or similar areas.
LIVE-WORK: A dwelling unit, part of which is used as a business establishment
and wherein the business operator is the principal resident. Where permitted as
an accessory use in the underlying zone, live-work spaces are not subject to
the limitations of a home occupation, including, but not limited to, area,
number of employees and signage.
LIVING AREA: The amount of gross square footage in a residence, not including
garage, deck, unfinished basement, unfinished attic, or porch surface area.
LOADING SPACE: An on site space or berth on the same lot or site with the
buildings or use served, such space to serve for the temporary parking of a
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise, materials or passengers.
LONG TERM LODGING: A facility engaged in the rental or provision of lodging
facilities for periods of thirty one (31) days or more. Also refers to the
actual facility for rent. Contrast to “itinerant lodging” as defined herein.
LOT: A building site that is described by reference to a recorded plat, by
metes and bounds, or by section, township and range which has direct legal
access to a street or has access to a street over an easement approved by the
county.
LOT AREA/LOT SIZE AND DIMENSIONS:
   Lot Area/Lot Size: The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a
lot; provided, that the area of a public street or right of way is not included
within the area and is not used to compute lot area/lot size or available for
the satisfaction of any required yard. Nonbuildable critical areas within the
lot shall be included in the computation of lot area/lot size.
   Lot Depth: The horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front and
rear lot lines. In the case of a lot having a curved front line, the lot front
line, for purposes of this section, shall be deemed to be a line tangent to the
curve and parallel to a straight line connecting the points of intersection of
the lot side lines of the lot with the lot front line.
   Lot Width: The horizontal distance between the lot side lines measured at
right angles to the line comprising the depth of the lot at a point midway
between the lot front line and the lot rear line.
LOT COVERAGE: That net portion of the lot that is covered by buildings,
structures and impermeable surfaces, including driveways, walkways, decks and
patios.
LOT, FLAG: A lot with a narrow street frontage and extension, providing access
by a private driveway from the street to the main part of the lot, which is
located behind and separated from the street by another lot or lots.
LOT LINES:
   Lot Front Line: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot
from the street; in the case of a corner lot and reverse corner lot, the “lot
front line” shall be the line separating the narrowest street frontage of the
lot from the street. In case of corner lots or reverse corner lots having equal
street frontages, that property line, the prolongation of which creates the
front property line for the greatest number of interior lots in the same block,
shall be considered as the lot front line of such corner or reverse corner lot.
   Lot Rear Line: A lot line that is opposite and more distant from the lot
front line. For the purpose of establishing the “lot rear line” of a triangular
or trapezoidal lot, or of a lot where the rear line is formed by two (2) or
more lines, the following shall apply:
      A.   For a triangular or irregular shaped lot, a line ten feet (10') in
length within the lot and farthest removed from the lot front line and at right
angles to the line comprising the depth of such lot shall be used as the “lot
rear line”.
      B.   In the case of a trapezoidal lot, the rear line of which is not
parallel to the lot front line, the “lot rear line” shall be deemed to be a
line at right angles to the line comprising the depth of such lot and drawn
through a point bisecting the recorded “lot rear line”.
      C.   In the case of a pentagonal lot, the rear boundary of which includes
an angle formed by two (2) lines, the angles shall be employed for determining
the “lot rear line” in the same manner as prescribed for a triangular lot.
      D.   In no case shall the application of the above be interpreted as
permitting a main building to locate closer than five feet (5') to any property
line.
   Lot Side Line: Any lot boundary line not a lot front line or a lot rear
line.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT: Site development and construction practices that reduce
environmental impacts by managing rainfall at the source in a manner that
mimics the site’s predevelopment hydrology, primarily by using landscape
features. Low impact development (LID) uses design techniques that infiltrate,
filter, store, evaporate and detain runoff close to its source rather than
disposal through stormwater conveyance and treatment facilities.
LOW INCOME HOUSING: Housing that is affordable, according to the federal
department of housing and urban development, for either home ownership or
rental, and that is occupied, reserved, or marketed for occupancy by households
with a gross annual household income that is greater than fifty percent (50%)
but does not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the area median income for
households of the same size within Pacific County.
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR: Regarding exterior building changes, the replacement of
fifty percent (50%) or less of an exterior wall in a calendar year. Maintenance
and repair is not subject to the design review process. Contrast to
“alteration” as defined herein.
MANSARD ROOF: A hip roof where the lower slope on all four (4) sides is nearly
vertical and the upper slope of the roof has a minimum pitch. This roof will be
treated as a building wall during design review and the floor area of the
floors within the mansard roof walls will be included in the calculation of the
total floor area for the structure.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure intended for residential habitation that is
manufactured in one area, then transported to another area for occupation, and
that is consistent with the requirements of Revised Code Of Washington
35A.63.145(2).
MANUFACTURING: Establishment engaged in the transformation of materials or
substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the
creation of products, and the blending of materials, primarily carried on for
the wholesale market, although retail sales may occur in conjunction with the
manufacturing use.
MARQUEE: A permanent structure attached to, supported by and projecting from a
building and providing protection from the weather elements. This does not
include freestanding permanent rooflike structures providing protection from
the elements, such as a service station gas pump island.
MEDICAL-DENTAL BUILDING OR BUILDINGS: A building or group of buildings designed
for the use of, and occupied and used by, physicians and dentists and others
engaged professionally in such healing arts for humans as are recognized by the
laws of the state, including medical clinics; and including the installation
and use of therapeutic equipment, X-ray equipment or laboratories, chemical,
biochemical, and biological laboratories used as direct accessories to the
medical-dental profession; dental laboratories including facilities for the
making of dentures on prescription; pharmacies limited to the retail dispensing
of pharmaceutical and sick room supplies (but not room or orthopedic equipment
or furniture), provided there shall be no exterior display windows or signs
pertaining to such accessory uses other than a directory sign.
MIXED USE: A building or lot where more than one type of use occurs, i.e.,
commercial and residential, commercial and itinerant lodging.
MOBILE HOME: A factory built dwelling built prior to June 15, 1976, to
standards other than the code set forth by the United States department of
housing and urban development (HUD).
MODULAR HOME: A dwelling constructed in a factory in accordance with the
international building code and bearing the appropriate sign indicating such
compliance.
MOTEL: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual
itinerant sleeping units where a majority of such units open individually and
directly to the outside, and where a garage is attached to or a parking space
is conveniently located to each unit, all for use as itinerant lodging.
Provides onsite office personnel and management.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR OPERATION: A business involving the repair, overhaul, and/
or reconditioning of motor vehicles.
MULCH: Wood chips, oyster shells, river rock, plastic, or other nongrowing
material placed on the surface of the ground to retain moisture, prevent weeds,
hold soil in place, and add to the appearance of landscaping. Contrast with
“ground cover” as defined herein.
MULTI-FAMILY: A building or lot with three (3) or more dwelling units.
MULTIPLE-BUILDING COMPLEX: A group of structures housing at least one retail
business, office, commercial venture or independent or separate part of a
business, or a single structure containing more than one business with
separating walls and at least one outside access for each business, which
shares a common lot, access and/or parking facility.
MULTIPLE-TENANT COMPLEX: A single facility housing more than one retail
business, office or commercial venture, which does not incorporate a separate
outside access for each enterprise; but not including residential apartment
buildings.
MUSEUM: A building or institution operated by a public, nonprofit or private
entity, dedicated to the acquisition, conservation, study, exhibition and
educational interpretation of objects or subjects having scientific,
historical, cultural or artistic value.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: The erection of a building, structure or other improvements
on a property that is not attached to, nor an expansion of, an existing
building or structure.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any noise exceeding standards described in Revised Code Of
Washington chapter 70.107 and Washington administrative code chapter 173-60, as
measured at the receiving property line.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot whose area, dimensions or location was lawful at the
time it was platted but no longer conforms to the standards of the zone in
which it is located as defined by this title.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure that was lawful at the time it was
constructed, but no longer conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which
it is located as defined by this title.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which was lawfully established and maintained but
which, because of the application of this title, no longer conforms to the use
regulations of the zone in which it is located as defined by this title.
NURSING HOME: Any home, place or institution that operates or maintains
facilities providing convalescent or chronic care, or both, for a period in
excess of twenty four (24) consecutive hours for patients not related by blood
or marriage to the operator, who by reason of illness or infirmity, are unable
to properly care for themselves. Convalescent and chronic care may include, but
not be limited to, any or all procedures commonly employed in waiting on the
sick, such as administration of medicines, preparation of special diets, giving
of bedside nursing care, application of dressings and bandages, and carrying
out treatment prescribed by a duly licensed practitioner of the healing arts.
It may also include care of mentally incompetent persons. It may also include
community based care. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include
general hospitals or other places which provide care and treatment for the
acutely ill and maintain and operate facilities for major surgery or
obstetrics, or both. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include
any boarding home, guest home, hotel or related institution which is held forth
to the public as providing, and which is operated to give, only board, room and
laundry to persons not in need of medical or nursing treatment or supervision
except in the case of temporary acute illness. See also definition of
Convalescent Center.
OFF SITE IMPROVEMENT: An improvement required to be made off site as a result
of an application for development and including, but not limited to, water,
sewer and stormwater infrastructure, road improvements and construction,
pedestrian, bicycle and transit facilities, and streetlights.
OFF SITE PARKING: Parking provided for a specific use but located on a site
other than the property on which the specific use is located.
OFFICE: A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business,
profession, service, industry or government.
ON SITE: Located on the lot that is the subject of an application for
development.
OPEN RECORD HEARING: A public hearing conducted by a hearing body that creates
the city’s official record through testimony and submission of evidence and
information under the procedures described herein. An open record hearing may
be held prior to the city’s decision on a project permit, to be known as an
“open record predecision hearing”. An open record hearing may be held on an
appeal, to be known as an “open record appeal proceeding”, if no open record
predecision hearing has been held on the project permit.
OPEN SPACE, REQUIRED: A portion of the area of a lot or building site, other
than required yards, which area is required by this title, as set forth in the
different classifications contained herein, to be maintained between buildings,
between wings of a building, and between buildings and any portion of a
property boundary line not contiguous to a required front or side yard. Open
spaces, as in the case of required yards, are required to be free and clear of
buildings and structures and to remain open and unobstructed from the ground to
the sky.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING DISPLAY: Any card, paper, cloth, metal, glass, wooden or
other display or device of any kind or character whatsoever placed or painted
for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, fence,
rock, structure, building or thing whatsoever. See also the definitions under
Sign Types And Sign Definitions.
PARAPET: The extension of a building facade above the line of the structural
roof. A building’s height is calculated up to the highest point of a parapet.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: Area within property limits dedicated to the parking of
automobiles and other vehicles of occupants, employees or visitors to
dwellings, businesses and other establishments within the property, to which
these facilities are appurtenant.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: Area dedicated to the parking of automobiles and other
vehicles by the general public and not restricted to the use by occupants,
owners, employees or visitors of an establishment within or abutting the
property.
PARKING SPACE: An area accessible to vehicles, which area is provided,
improved, maintained and used for the sole purpose of accommodating a motor
vehicle.
PARTY OF RECORD: Those who request to be kept informed regarding a city action
or those who provide written original comments (but not form letters or
petitions) or who testify at a public hearing on a city action. Being a party
of record entitles a person to appeal a city decision.
PERFORMING ARTS CENTER: A facility designed for the performance of music,
theater, dance and other forms of live entertainment. Such facility may be
incorporated with other cultural, community and civic institutions and
facilities.
PERIMETER: The boundary lines used to define the extent of an area.
PERMEABLE PAVEMENT SYSTEM: An alternate supplemental stormwater management
system that creates voids through which water can percolate and that is used
for surfacing of driveways and parking lots, thereby reducing the amount of
impermeable surface within a development. See also definitions of Low Impact
Development and Pervious Surface.
PERMIT: Any form of certificate, approval, registration, license or other
written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, which is
required by law, ordinance or regulation to be obtained before engaging in any
activity.
PERSON: Means and includes an individual or any group of organized individuals,
firm, business entity, copartnership, association or corporation, and their
agents and assigns. Person also includes any governmental agency or political
subdivision, special district, agency, instrumentality or corporation of the
state.
PERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material that permits full or partial absorption of
stormwater into previously unimproved land. See also definitions of Low Impact
Development and Permeable Pavement System.
PET SHOP: An establishment dealing in buying and selling small animals and
birds such as are customarily or occasionally harbored in domestic
establishments as pets, such as fish, dogs, cats, parrots, canaries and other
song and decorative birds, monkeys, hamsters and similar animals, but
specifically excluding dangerous animals or dangerous or poisonous or
constricting reptiles, provided no boarding or veterinarian services are
rendered excepting bathing and clipping of dogs and cats.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The body appointed by the city council of the city of Long
Beach charged with the planning duties and responsibilities set forth in this
title and this code.
PREMISES: The real estate (as a unit) that is involved in the use regulated by
this title or this code.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: See definition of Building, Principal.
PRINCIPAL USE: The primary or predominant use to which the property is or may
be devoted, and to which all other uses on the premises are accessory.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES: Offices maintained and used as a place of business
conducted by persons engaged in the healing arts for human beings, such as
doctors and dentists (but wherein no overnight care for patients is given), and
by engineers, attorneys, realtors, architects, accountants, and other persons
providing services utilizing training in and knowledge of the mental discipline
as distinguished from training in the occupations requiring mere skill or
manual dexterity or the handling of commodities.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A private business organization such as a public service
corporation performing some public service and subject to special governmental
regulations, or a governmental agency performing similar public services, the
services by either of which are paid for directly by the recipients thereof.
Such services shall include, but are not limited to, water supply, electric
power, gas and transportation.
QUALIFIED HOUSEHOLD: A household that meets the income standards for occupancy
of affordable housing. When establishing affordability standards for low to
extremely low income families and individuals, the latest (2008) area median
income (AMI) levels established for Pacific County by the U.S. department of
housing and urban development apply as follows:
- Extremely low: 0 - 30 percent of AMI
- Very low: 31 - 50 percent of AMI
- Low: 51 - 80 percent of AMI
QUASI-PUBLIC: A use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious or charitable
institution for the purpose of providing programs and services similar in
nature to those that may be provided by government; a corporation or a special
district vested with municipal powers for the accomplishment of a limited
municipal purpose, such as fire protection, recreation or transit.
RECLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY: A change in zone boundaries upon the zoning map,
which map is part of this title when adopted in the manner prescribed by law.
RECLASSIFICATION OF USE: The assignment, by amendment of this title, of a
particular use to a different use classification than that in which the use was
originally permitted.
RECORDED: Means, unless otherwise stated, filed of record with the auditor of
Pacific County.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, MAJOR: For purposes of these regulations, “major
recreational equipment” includes boats and boat trailers, recreational vehicles
(RVs) and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational
equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports,
leisure time activities and programs. Such facility may be operated by a public
entity, a nonprofit or as a for profit business and may include clubhouses,
kitchen facilities, assembly halls, meeting rooms, locker facilities, etc.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): Any vehicular type of portable structure without
permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven, and is primarily
designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational and camping
purposes. Recreational vehicles (RVs) include, but are not limited to, travel
trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Any lot or parcel on which two (2) or more sites are
located, established or maintained for itinerant, short term or long term
occupancy by recreational vehicles or for their storage for a fee. Each
nonstorage site shall include individual connections for electricity and
sanitary services. A recreational vehicle park may also include amenities for
the use of the occupants, including, but not limited to, laundry, showers, game
room, recreation, or restaurant.
REMODELING: Construction of an addition to, or alteration of, the design or
layout of a building. Remodeling may include expansion of the structure or
building, and structural changes. See also definitions of Addition and
Alteration.
RESIDENCE: A building or structure, or portion thereof, which is designed for
and used to provide a place of abode for human beings, but not including hotels
or motel units having no kitchens. The term “residence” includes the term
“residential” as referring to the type of or intended use of a building or
structure. See also definition of Dwelling.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A residential facility that cares for at least five
(5), but not more than fifteen (15), functionally disabled persons. See also
definition of Group Home.
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY: Occupancy or use of a residence for a period of time
exceeding thirty (30) days in length.
RESORT COMPLEX: A development anchored by itinerant lodging that also contains
amenities for the use of visitors, including recreational activities and
facilities and commercial uses such as restaurants, shops and day spas. A
resort complex may also include a conference center. See also definition of
Conference Center.
REST HOME, HOME FOR THE AGED: A home operated similarly to a boarding house but
not restricted to any number of guests or guestrooms, and the operator of which
is licensed by the state or county to give special care and supervision to his
or her charges. Such facility shall not include a group home, “halfway house”
or any residence intended for use by persons with special needs. See also
definitions of Adult Family Home, Convalescent Center and Nursing Home.
RESTAURANT: An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and
consumed, mostly on the premises. A restaurant does not provide live
entertainment, and does not serve alcoholic beverages.
   Restaurant, Drive-Through: A restaurant that serves food and/or drink to
patrons in their vehicles, either through a drive-through window and with
service to the vehicle. Such restaurant may also have indoor service and/or
seating, or may serve food exclusively to customers in their vehicles, with no
indoor seating.
   Restaurant, Takeout: A restaurant where food and/or drink are sold in a form
ready for consumption, where all or a significant part of the consumption takes
place outside the confines of the restaurant. Service may occur through a walk-
up window, or at a drive-through. A takeout restaurant generally will not have
indoor seating but may have a limited number of outdoor tables.
RETAIL: A commercial establishment engaged in the selling or rental of goods
directly to the consumer for personal use or consumption. A retail
establishment may also render services incidental to the sale of such goods.
RETAINING WALL: Any wall used to resist the lateral displacement of any
material.
REVIEWING AUTHORITY: The agency, board, group, official or other legally
designated entity that has been charged with the review and approval of plans
and applications.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription
or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, utility, pedestrianway
or similar uses.
ROOF: A structural covering over any portion of a building or structure,
including the projections beyond the walls or supports of the building or
structure. An open work covering shall not be considered a roof if the upper
horizontal surface area of the component solid portions thereof measured on the
horizontal plane do not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of the
covering.
ROOF PITCH: The slope of a roof plane, described as the ratio of the number of
inches of vertical rise to each twelve inches (12") of horizontal run, i.e.,
five to twelve (5:12).
ROOFLINE: The top edge of a roof or parapet; the top line of a building
silhouette.
SATELLITE DISH: A parabolic antenna that receives or transmits electromagnetic
signals to and from another location.
SCALE: The relationship of a particular project or development in terms of its
size, height, bulk, intensity and aesthetics, to its surroundings and to
humans.
SCHOOLS, ELEMENTARY, MIDDLE, JUNIOR HIGH AND HIGH: Institutions of learning
offering instruction in the several areas of learning and study required by the
education code of the state to be taught in the public and private schools, but
does not include any residence used for home schooling.
SCREENING:
   A. The use of fences, walls, plants, berms, structures or other materials to
shield or buffer a use from adjacent properties or uses; or
   B. The use of mesh screens within window and door openings to allow air to
circulate but prevent insects from entering a space such as a porch.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR’S STANDARDS FOR THE TREATMENT OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES:
The secretary of the interior’s standards for the treatment of historic
properties, developed by the national park service, provide guidance and
articulate common sense principles against which project work on historic
buildings can be weighed. The secretary’s standards address the four (4)
treatments: preservation, restoration, rehabilitation and reconstruction; and
are used to evaluate projects subject to SEPA and section 106, as well as
federal tax incentive projects. They may also be used by the city, where
applicable, as alternate guidelines for design review. (Full title: “The
Secretary Of The Interior’s Standards For The Treatment Of Historic Properties
With Guidelines For Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring And Reconstructing
Historic Buildings”.)
SERVICE STATION, AUTOMOBILE: Any building, land area, or other premises, or
portion thereof, used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels,
the servicing and repair of automobiles, and including as an accessory use the
sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar vehicle
accessories.
SETBACK: A line parallel to its nearest property line, between which no
structure may be extended or be placed; the minimum or maximum distance
required between a structure and a lot line, or between structures on the same
lot. See also definitions under Yards, Types And Measurements.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: See chapter 15 of this title for definitions.
SHEET SIDING: Siding made to be installed in panels (“sheets”), such as
plywood, T1-11, or metal. Sheet siding is prohibited in most design review
areas, except where used as the base for board and batten.
SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure or part thereof, visible from
off premises, that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Painted
wall designs or patterns which do not represent a product, service or trademark
or which do not identify the user are not considered signs but may be subject
to other sections of this title.
SIGN TYPES AND SIGN DEFINITIONS:
   Abandoned Sign: Any sign or sign structure which has not been used for the
display of sign copy for more than thirty (30) days, or that no longer
identifies or advertises a location, product, or activity conducted on the
premises upon which the sign is located or, in the case of an off premises
sign, the business or activity the sign advertises.
   Advertising Vehicle: Any registered or unregistered vehicle or trailer
having attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device which
advertises a product, business, or service, or directs people to a business or
activity located on any premises. This definition does not include the
identification of a firm or its products on a vehicle operated during the
normal course of business. Franchised buses and taxis are specifically excluded
from this definition.
   Animated Sign: A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion.
“Animated signs”, which are differentiated from “changeable signs” as defined
and regulated by this title, include the following types:
   A.   Environmentally Activated: Animated signs or devices motivated by wind,
thermal changes, or other natural environmental input. Includes spinners,
pinwheels, pennants and pennant strings, and/or other devices or displays that
respond to naturally occurring external motivation.
   B.   Mechanically Activated: Animated signs characterized by repetitive
motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric
motors or other mechanically induced means.
   C.   Electrically Activated: Animated signs producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical, or electromechanical input and/or
illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
      1.   Flashing: Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign that exhibits
changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever.
      2.   Patterned Illusionary Movement: Animated signs or animated portions
of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement through
alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for the
purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form
of constant motion.
   Architectural Embossing: A decorated or marked surface with a slightly
raised or carved design or lettering.
   Architectural Projection: Any projection that is not intended for occupancy
and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building but that
does not include signs as defined herein. See also definitions of: Awning,
Cupola, Dormer; and see definitions of Back-Lit Awning, Canopy (Attached),
Canopy (Freestanding) under Sign Types And Sign Definitions.
   Awning Sign: A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning.
   Back-Lit Awning: An awning with a translucent covering material and a source
of illumination contained behind or within its framework.
   Banner: A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
   Banner Sign: A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
   Billboard: An off premises permanent or temporary sign and its supporting
structure erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment for the
purpose of the display of commercial or noncommercial messages.
   Canopy (Attached): A multisided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides.
   Canopy (Freestanding): A multisided overhead structure supported by columns,
but not enclosed by walls.
   Canopy Sign: A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
freestanding canopy.
   Changeable Sign: A sign with the capability of content change by means of
manual or remote input, including signs which are:
   A.   Manually Activated: Changeable sign whose message copy or content can
be changed manually.
   B.   Electrically Activated: Changeable sign whose message copy or content
can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching
combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display
surface.
   Copy: See definition of Sign Types And Sign Definitions: Sign Copy.
   Cutout Letter Sign: Sign copy consisting of the attachment of individual
letters to the building wall.
   Development Complex Sign: A freestanding sign identifying a multiple
occupancy development, such as a shopping center or planned industrial park
which is controlled by a single owner or landlord.
   Directional Sign: Any sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of
providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   Double Faced Sign: A sign with two (2) identical faces, back to back such
that only one side is visible from a single vantage point. Only one side of a
double faced sign is counted toward sign area.
   Electrical Sign: A sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring,
connections and/or fixtures are used for activation or illumination.
   Electronic Message Sign: An electrically activated changeable sign whose
variable message capability can be electronically programmed.
   Embossed Sign: A sign with a slightly raised or carved surface.
   Exterior Sign: Any sign placed outside a building.
   Externally Lighted Sign: Any sign with an illumination source outside of the
sign face or frame and pointing back to the sign.
   Fascia Sign: See definition of Sign Types And Sign Definitions: Wall Or
Fascia Sign.
   Feather: Also called a “pin”. A vertical, flexible staff or pole affixed to
the ground or a structure with cloth or other flexible material attached to its
length, a maximum of sixteen feet (16') tall and three feet (3') wide. Usually
constructed of brightly colored material intended to flutter in the breeze and
draw attention to a business establishment.
   Flag: Any piece of cloth or other flexible material, attached to a staff,
pole, or other structure, with distinctive colors, patterns, or symbolic
devices, used as a symbol for a government, corporation, or other organization,
public or private. Does not include “pins” or “feathers”.
   Flashing Sign: See definition of Sign Types And Sign Definitions: Animated
Sign, subsection C, “Electrically Activated”.
   Freestanding Sign: A sign principally supported by a structure affixed to
the ground, and not supported by a building, including signs supported by one
or more columns, poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground.
   Ground Sign: See definition of Sign Types And Sign Definitions: Monument
Sign.
   Historical Marker: A small sign attached to a building identifying a person
or event of historic significance related to the property.
   Illegal Sign: A sign erected without a permit, a sign not permitted by the
sign matrix and all other regulations in chapter 14 of this title, with the
exception of legal nonconforming signs, exempt signs, and temporary signs that
fulfill the regulations provided in section
12-14-10, “Temporary Signs”, of this title.
   Illuminated Sign: A sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
either projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated); or
reflecting off its surface(s) (externally illuminated).
   Individual Letter Signs: Signs that consist of individual letters that are
mounted to a wall, within the signable area, shall be considered individual
letter signs. The signable area of such signs shall be calculated as one-half
(½) of the entire area contained within a continuous rectilinear perimeter of
not more than eight (8) lines drawn with straight lines at perpendicular angles
to encompass the entire perimeter of the extreme limits of each line of text,
decorative artwork, logos, or other displayed information in each respective
line. See also definition of Sign Types And Sign Definitions: Signable Area.
   Inflatable Sign: A balloon or other gas filled figure.
   Information Sign: A sign which gives directional information or identifies
specific use areas and which is necessary to maintain the orderly internal use
of the premises, such as those signs which identify employee parking, shipping,
clearance or which restrict ingress and egress. Excluded from this definition
are signs which are not directly related to an identified need for orderly
internal use of the property and off premises or portable signs.
   Interior Sign: Any sign placed within a building, but not including “window
signs” as defined in this section. “Interior signs”, with the exception of
“window signs” as defined in this section, are not regulated by this title.
   Internally Illuminated Sign: Any sign with illumination inside the sign
including neon signs.
   Marquee Sign: See definition of Sign Types And Sign Definitions: Canopy
Sign.
   Menu Board: An exterior sign for a restaurant that advertises the takeout
menu items available, and which has no more than twenty percent (20%) of the
total area for such sign utilized for business identification.
   Monument Sign: A freestanding sign not more than six feet (6') in height,
which is attached to the ground by means of a wide base of solid appearance.
   Multiple Faced Sign: A sign containing three (3) or more faces.
   Off Premises Sign: A permanent or temporary sign (including the structure to
which it is attached) erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment
for the purpose of the display of commercial or noncommercial messages not
appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the
property upon which it is displayed.
   On Premises Sign: A sign (and the structure to which it is attached)
erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the
display of messages appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale or
lease of, the property on which it is displayed.
   Pin: See definition of Sign Types And Sign Definitions: Feather.
   Pole Sign: See definition of Sign Types And Sign Definitions: Freestanding
Sign.
   Political Sign: A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement,
cause, or candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor advertising sign
shall not be considered to be a political sign.
   Projecting Sign: A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or
projects more than eighteen inches (18") from a building face or wall or from a
structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign. A
projecting sign may be attached to the building at a single point, or two (2)
sign faces may be attached to the building no more than twenty four inches
(24") apart and joined at the farthest extent from the building, forming a
triangle, such that only one side of the sign copy is visible from a single
vantage point.
   Real Estate Sign: A portable or freestanding sign erected by the owner or
his agent advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located for rent,
lease or sale or directing to the property.
   Revolving Sign: A sign that revolves three hundred sixty degrees (360o)
about an axis. See also definition of Animated Sign, subsection B, Mechanically
Activated under Sign Types And Sign Definitions.
   Roof Sign: A sign mounted on, and supported by, the main roof portion of a
building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which
is wholly or partially supported by such building. Signs mounted on mansard
facades, pent eaves, and architectural projections such as canopies or marquees
shall not be considered to be “roof signs”.
   Sandwich Board Sign: A temporary sign made of metal, wood, chalkboard, or
whiteboard that is not permanently attached to the ground and is designed for
and oriented to pedestrians.
   Sign Area: The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the
combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face. The
area of any double sided sign shall be the area of the largest single face
only. The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a circle. The area
of all other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as fifty percent (50%) of
the sum of the area of all faces of the sign. In the case of back-lit or
internally illuminated signs or awnings, the sign area shall consist of the
entire illuminated area.
   Sign Copy: Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos, and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign that identify or promote
the sign user or any product or service; or that provides information about the
sign user, the building or the products or services available.
   Sign Face: The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is
displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of building or sign structures, nonstructural or decorative trim, or
any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which the sign
copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.
   A.   In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the sign face shall include
the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or face substrate upon which the
sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space between separate
panels or cabinets.
   B.   In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the sign
face shall include the entire area of the surface which is routed, except where
interrupted by a reveal, border, or a contrasting surface or color.
   C.   In the case of signs painted on a building, or graphic elements affixed
to a building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the sum of the
geometric figures or combination of regular geometric figures drawn closest to
the edge of the letters or separate graphic elements comprising the sign copy,
but not the open space between separate groupings of sign copy on the same
building or structure.
   D.   In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated
border, or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the
building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the area within the
contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
   Sign Height: The height of a sign as measured from the ground to the highest
point of the sign structure. For the purpose of chapter 14, “Signs”, of this
title, the definition of “ground” shall be the highest adjacent roadway or
sidewalk.
   Sign Structure: Any structure or framework supporting a sign.
   Signable Area (For Individual Letter Signs Only): An area of the facade of a
building, the boundaries of which shall form a square or a rectangle that is
free of windows, doors and all major architectural details, where an individual
letter sign may be installed. Only one signable area may be established for
each frontage. Parapets, pylons and equipment enclosures may be designated as
signable areas. Note: The following is for illustration purposes only and is
not intended to limit individual letter signs to the first floor of a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cb2b2a551d24f71b8ca6467b5f7c336616c9664f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1943.gif]
   Structural Alteration: Modification of a sign or sign structure that affects
size, shape, height, or sign location; changes in structural materials; or
replacement of electrical components with other than comparable materials. The
replacement of wood parts with metal parts, the addition of electric elements
to a nonelectrified sign would all be structural alterations. “Structural
alteration” does not include ordinary maintenance, repainting an existing sign
surface, including changes of message or image, exchanging painted and pasted
or glued materials on painted wall signs, or exchanging display panels of a
sign through release and closing of clips or other brackets.
   Temporary Sign: A sign intended to display either commercial or
noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature, such as a banner.
Portable signs, not including sandwich board signs, or any sign not permanently
embedded in the ground, or not permanently affixed to a building or sign
structure that is permanently embedded in the ground, are considered temporary
signs. Banners, balloons, and pennants are temporary signs, regardless of the
manner by which they are affixed to a building or to the ground.
   Under Canopy Sign Or Under Marquee Sign: A sign attached to the underside of
a canopy or marquee, as distinguished from a “projecting sign”.
   V Sign: Signs containing two (2) faces of approximately equal size, erected
upon common or separate structures, positioned in a “V” shape.
   Wall Bulletin: A sign painted directly upon the surface of a wall.
   Wall Or Fascia Sign: A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior
wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than eighteen inches
(18") from the building or structure wall, including signs affixed to
architectural projections from a building, provided the copy area of such signs
remains on a parallel plane to the face of the building facade or to the face
or faces of the architectural projection to which it is affixed.
   Way Finding Sign: A sign or series of signs located in a manner that
provides orientation and direction to a destination or destinations within a
specific geographic area.
   Window Sign: A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to and readable from the public way or from adjacent
property.
SMALL WIND TURBINE: On site wind energy based generator that generates between
two (2) and ten (10) kilowatts.
SOLAR PANEL: Solar photovoltaic modules or thermal collectors that convert
incoming solar radiation to either electricity or thermal energy.
SPECIAL EVENT: An occasion or period so designated by the city council,
including, but not limited to, festivals, holidays, activities or events of
interest to the public, and where by so designating a special event, certain
temporary uses associated with the event may be permitted that would not
otherwise be allowed.
SPECIAL EVENTS PROTECTED UNDER THE FIRST AND FOURTEENTH AMENDMENTS: Includes
any event involving political or religious activity intended primarily for the
communication or expression of ideas.
STACKED PARKING: See definition of Tandem Parking.
STORAGE:
   A. The use of a building, structure or site to store goods, materials or
equipment for use in a business. Such use would typically be accessory to the
business located on the property but may be the principal use, where permitted,
when the business is located elsewhere; or
   B. A building, structure or site containing separate, individual and private
storage space of varying sizes, available for lease or rent to store personal
property or household goods, also referred to as a self-storage facility.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor above it, then the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a
story. If the finished floor level directly above the basement or cellar is
more than six feet (6') above grade, such basement or cellar shall be
considered a story.
STREET: Any vehicular way that is: a) an existing state, county or municipal
roadway; b) shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law; c) approved by other
official action; d) shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the county assessor; e) shown on the official map or adopted plan. It includes
the land between and beyond the street lines, whether improved or unimproved. A
street affords the primary means of access to abutting property. See also
definition of Right Of Way.
STREET FRONTAGE: See definition of Frontage.
STREET LINE: The boundary line between a street and the abutting property.
STREET, PRIVATE: A street that has not been accepted by or dedicated to the
municipality or other governmental entity but is used for the primary means of
access to abutting properties within a development. Such streets are typically
constructed and maintained by those parties who own, use or benefit from the
street.
STREET, SIDE: A street that is adjacent to a corner lot or reverse corner lot
and that extends in the general direction of the line determining the depth of
the corner or reverse corner lot.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building or
structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof
joists, girders or rafters, or changes in the interior dimensions of the
building or structure, or increase in floor space. See also definitions of
Addition, Alteration, and Remodeling.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed in the ground, or anything erected that
requires location on the ground or water, or is attached to something having
location on or in the ground, but not including fences less than six feet (6')
in height, paths, trails or paved areas.
STUDIO APARTMENT: A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable
room, together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
SUPPORTIVE SERVICES: Services provided in combination with affordable housing
to help tenants with challenges that might otherwise cause them to become
homeless. Services may include, but are not limited to, counseling, case
management, education, training or treatment, according to the needs of the
tenants.
TANDEM PARKING: A parking configuration wherein one car is parked directly
behind another or others, either within a garage or along a driveway, and where
at least one vehicle must be moved in order to access the other vehicle.
TEMPORARY USE: A land use activity that occurs for a specific and limited
period of time, typically authorized by a special use permit.
THEATER: An establishment to provide entertainment through projection of motion
pictures on a screen or live performances on a stage for audiences.
THEATER, DRIVE-IN: An establishment to provide entertainment through projection
of motion pictures on an outdoor screen for audiences whose seating
accommodations are provided by their own motor vehicles parked in car spaces
provided on the same site with the outdoor screen.
TIMESHARE: A form of ownership of an itinerant lodging property in which
multiple parties hold rights to use the property and each sharer is allotted a
period of time or duration in which they may use the property. Such use may
also be referred to as fractional ownership or vacation ownership. See also
definition of itinerant lodging.
TINY HOMES: Please refer to the definition of a recreational vehicle (RV).
TO PLACE: The verb “to place” and any of its variants as applied to advertising
displays and outdoor advertising structures, includes maintaining, erecting,
constructing, posting, painting, printing, nailing, gluing or otherwise
fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever.
TRAILER PARK, TRAILER COURT, MOBILE HOME PARK OR PUBLIC TRAILER CAMP: Any area
or tract of land designed and used to accommodate two (2) or more mobile homes
or recreational vehicles. See also definition of recreational vehicle park.
TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS: Accommodations designed or used for occupancy of less
than thirty (30) days. See also definition of itinerant lodging.
TRASH CONTAINERS: Any garbage can, dumpster or other receptacle used for
disposal and/or storage of trash, rubbish, garbage, junk, scrap, debris,
refuse, recycling and other discarded materials.
UNLISTED USES: Uses that are not specifically named as permitted in any use
classification contained within this title.
URBAN GROWTH AREA (UGA): Those areas abutting City limits designated for urban
growth, and which may be annexed into the City.
USE: The nature of the occupancy, the type of activity, or the character and
form of improvements to which land is devoted or may be devoted.
VACATION RENTAL: The use of an approved vacation rental dwelling by any person
or group of persons who occupies or is entitled to occupy a dwelling for
remuneration for a period of less than 30 calendar days, counting portions of
days as full days. Does not have onsite office personnel and management.
VARIANCE: An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of this
title to a particular piece of property which, because of special circumstances
applicable to it, is deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same vicinity and zone and which adjustment remedies
disparity in privileges.
VEHICLE: All instrumentalities capable of movement by means of circular wheels,
skids or runners of any kind, along roadways or paths or other ways of any
kind, specifically including, but not limited to, all forms of automotive
vehicles, buses, trucks, cars and vans, all forms of trailers or mobile homes
of any size whether capable of supplying their own motive power or not, without
regard to whether the primary purpose of which instrumentality is or is not the
conveyance of persons or objects, and specifically including all such
automobiles, buses, trucks, cars, vans, trailers, and mobile homes even though
they may be at any time immobilized in any way and for any period of time of
whatever duration.
VERY LOW INCOME HOUSING: Housing that is affordable, according to the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, for either home ownership or
rental, and that is occupied, reserved, or marketed for occupancy by households
with a gross annual household income that is greater than thirty percent (30%)
but does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area median income for
households of the same size within Pacific County.
VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE (VCT): Area at the corner of an intersection of a
right-of-way with another right-of-way, alley or driveway, formed by measuring
a specific distance along each right-of-way, alley or driveway from the
property corner and connecting the two (2) end points to form a triangle. The
vision clearance triangle is maintained clear of landscaping, fences and other
obstructions of a certain height, generally the area between forty two inches
(42") to eight feet (8') above the adjacent street level, which would block the
visibility of vehicle, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic.
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cb2b2a551d24f71b8ca6467b5f7c336616c9664f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1945.gif]
 
VCT At Driveway:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cb2b2a551d24f71b8ca6467b5f7c336616c9664f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1947.gif]
WAREHOUSE: A building used primarily for the storage of large amounts of goods
and materials for distribution to another location and not intended solely for
the use of a business located on the site. Limited assembly or repackaging may
occur as part of the warehouse activity.
WHOLESALE: A business primarily engaged in selling goods and materials to other
businesses, or from which a bulk material such as propane is distributed to
individual customers.
WINERIES OR BREWERIES: Means a winery or brewery for processing and
manufacturing purposes only, with limited wholesale trade incidental to the
primary use.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (WCF): A facility that transmits, receives or
relays voice and data signals from various wireless communication devices and
equipment. It includes antennas, microwave dishes and other types of equipment
for the transmission or receipt of such signals, wireless communication towers
or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings and
cabinets, parking areas, and other facilities accessory to the use.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY, COLLOCATED: A wireless communication facility
comprised of a single wireless communication tower or building supporting two
(2) or more antennas owned or used by more than one public or private entity.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER: A support structure such as a mast, pole,
monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower or freestanding tower designed and
primarily used to support antennas.
YARD: An open space that lies between the property line and a building or
structure that is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward unless
specifically otherwise permitted in this title. See also definition of setback.
YARD, REAR LINE OF REQUIRED FRONT: A line parallel to the lot front line and at
a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard, and
extending across the full width of the lot.
YARDS, TYPES AND MEASUREMENTS:
   Front Yard: An area extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the lot front line and a line drawn parallel thereto, and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required front yard depth as prescribed in each
classification. “Front yards” shall be measured by a line at right angles to
the lot front line, or by the radial line or radial line extended in the case
of a curved lot front line. For a “flag lot”, the front yard shall be measured
across the lot line of the entire width of the property that is parallel to the
street from which access occurs, excluding the flag extension to the street.
   Rear Yard: An area extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the lot rear line and a line drawn parallel thereto, and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required rear yard depth as prescribed in each zoning
district. “Rear yards” shall be measured by a line at right angles to the lot
rear line, or by the radial line or radial line extended in the case of a
curved lot rear line.
   Side Yard: An open area measured from the lot side line toward the center of
the lot and extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or for the
lot front line if there is no required front yard, toward the lot rear line to
a point measuring two-thirds (2/3) of the depth of the lot, except that on the
side street side of corner lots and reverse corner lots the required side yard
shall extend to the rear line of the lot. The width of the side yard shall be
measured horizontally from, and be parallel to, the lot side line from which it
is measured.
ZONE: An area accurately defined as to the boundaries and location on an
official map and within which area only certain types of land uses are
permitted, and within which other types of land uses are excluded, as set forth
in this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 870, 4-4-2011; Ord. 890, 4-13-
2013; Ord. 891, 4-13-2013; Ord. 912, 8-3-2015; Ord. 959, 10-15-2018; Ord. 997,
11-15-2021; Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024; Ord. 1046, 9-15-2025)
 
Notes
1 See also definitions of Daycare Center or Family Daycare Home.

2 The comprehensive plan provides a vision of the future for the city, and
  includes the goals and their implementing strategies that guide development
  and city policies regarding development.
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-3-1: Administration And Enforcement Officials
12-3-2: Permits
12-3-3: Amendments
12-3-4: Appeals
12-3-5: Violations; Investigation
12-3-6: Violations; Penalties
12-3-1: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
   A.   Administrative Official: The city administrator or his authorized agent
shall have the power and duty to administer the provisions of this title. The
city administrator shall adopt, and revise as required, such instructions and
forms as are necessary to serve the public and carry out the provisions of this
title.
   B.   Enforcement: The city council, city administrator, or other duly
authorized agents shall have the power and duty to enforce this title through
proper legal channels. They shall approve no plans and shall issue no permits
unless such plans and intended use of such activities conform in all respects
with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-3-2: PERMITS:
   A.   Authorization To Issue: The city administrator or his agent shall be
authorized to issue permits and to receive fees and/or funds required under
this title.
   B.   Compliance Required:
      1.   No city official or employee shall issue a permit or give other
authorization for any use that would not be in full compliance with this title.
      2.   Any permit or other authorization in violation of this title shall
be void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation or
nullification, and any work undertaken pursuant to such permit or other
authorization shall be unlawful, and no action taken by any elected or
appointed official of the city shall validate any such work, permit, or other
authorization.
      3.   Variances from the requirements of this title shall be subject to
the provisions of section
11-2D-1 of this code.
      4.   The issuance of permits for conditional uses that may be allowed by
this title shall be subject to the provisions of section
11-2D-2 of this code. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-3-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authorization To Initiate Amendments: An amendment to the text or map
of this title may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or
by application of a property owner or his authorized agent. No amendment shall
be approved unless the planning commission and city council make affirmative
findings that the amendment is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan
and the requirements of this title.
   B.   Application And Fee: An application for amendment to this title by a
property owner or his authorized agent shall be filed with the city on forms
prescribed by the city. Each application shall be accompanied by a receipt
indicating payment of a fee, charged according to a schedule of fees as
established by the city council.
   C.   Public Hearing Required: Before action is taken on a proposed amendment
to the zoning map or the text of this title, notice shall be given and the
planning commission and the city council shall hold public hearings thereon
consistent with the provisions of section
11-2C-11 of this code, except notice by mail, as described in subsection 11-2C-
11D of this code, shall be given not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
date of the public hearing(s). Notice for the planning commission and city
council hearing may be combined, except, if the planning commission
recommendation is not received by the commencement of the city council public
hearing, such hearing shall not be held, a new city council hearing date shall
be set and new notice shall be mailed notifying all parties of the new city
council hearing date. The planning commission and city council may conduct a
joint public hearing, when it is determined the public interest will be served
and all rights of due process will be protected.
   D.   Decision Criteria: The criteria that will be used to make
recommendations and decisions on whether or not to approve an amendment to the
text of this title or a reclassification of a property on the official zoning
map include the following:
      1.   The text amendment or reclassification is substantially related to
the public health, safety, or welfare; and
      2.   The text amendment or reclassification is warranted due to changed
circumstances, or due to the need for additional land supply in the proposed
land use zone classification, or the proposed zoning classification is
appropriate for reasonable development of the subject property; and
      3.   The affected property is suitable for development in general
conformance with zoning standards under the proposed zoning text amendment or
land use zone classification; and
      4.   The text amendment or reclassification will not be materially
detrimental to uses or properties in the immediate vicinity of the subject
property or incompatible with such uses; and
      5.   The text amendment or reclassification has merit and value for the
community as a whole; and
      6.   The text amendment or reclassification is in accord with the
comprehensive plan; and
      7.   The text amendment or reclassification complies with all other
applicable criteria and standards of this code.
   E.   Time Period For Action:
      1.   Recess Of Hearing: The planning commission may recess a hearing on
an amendment to this title in order to obtain additional information. Upon
recessing for this purpose, the planning commission shall announce the time and
date when the hearing will be resumed.
      2.   Planning Commission Recommendation: The planning commission shall
make its decision on an amendment to this title and forward their
recommendation to the city council within ninety (90) days of the time the
amendment was requested for the final decision.
      3.   City Council Decision: Following a separate public hearing, the city
council shall act on the proposed amendment within sixty (60) days of receipt
of the recommendation of the planning commission, except that the time for
final decision may be extended if the zoning amendment is being considered
concurrently with a comprehensive plan amendment or if required state review of
the proposed amendment is not complete.
   F.   Withdrawal And Renewal: The planning commission or city council, as
appropriate, may permit the withdrawal of any application filed under the
provisions of this title; provided, that any hearing must be held for which
notice has been given. An application that has been previously withdrawn shall
not be scheduled for reconsideration unless a new application has been
submitted and a fee paid as required by subsection B of this section.
   G.   Map Change: Following approval of a reclassification of property, the
city shall amend the zoning map of the city to reflect the change in land use
zone.
   H.   Development Agreement: The city may require that the applicant enter
into a development agreement as authorized by Revised Code of Washington
36.70B.170 with the city as a condition of the reclassification, and may,
through that agreement, impose development conditions designed to mitigate
potential impacts of the reclassification and development pursuant thereto.
   I.   Time Limitation For Approval Of Rezone: The city may, in the ordinance
approving the reclassification, establish a timeline within which development
of the subject property must begin. If the city has established such a time
limitation, the reclassification may be revoked, upon application of the city
for reclassification, if the applicant has not applied for a building permit or
other necessary development permit and completed substantial construction by
the specified date.
   J.   Time Limitation For Rerequest: No request for an amendment to the text
or the zoning map or this title shall be considered by the city within the
twelve (12) month period immediately following a previous denial of such
request, except that the planning commission may consent to a new hearing, if,
in the opinion of the planning commission, new evidence or a change of
circumstances warrant it. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-3-4: APPEALS:
Appeals of all decisions pertaining to this title are governed by the
provisions of section
11-2C-14 of this code. (Ord. 912, 8-3-2015)
12-3-5: VIOLATIONS; INVESTIGATION:
The city administrator or his authorized agent shall investigate any charge of
violation of this title brought to the city administrator's attention. Upon
verifying a violation of this title, the city administrator shall serve notice
to the property owner to comply with city building regulations. The city
administrator or his authorized agent shall inspect the premises after serving
notice of violation and, if the violation is still in effect, may take any
action authorized in title 14, "Enforcement Procedures", of this code. (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
12-3-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Penalties for violations of this title shall be assessed and enforced pursuant
to title 14, "Enforcement Procedures", of this code. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd.
Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
12-4-1: Classification Of Zones
12-4-2: Zone Boundaries; Map
12-4-3: Divided Lot; Less Restrictive Zone Governs
12-4-4: Zoning Of Annexed Areas
12-4-5: Use And Development Standards Applicable To All Districts
12-4-1: CLASSIFICATION OF ZONES:
For the purpose of this title, the following zoning districts are hereby
established in the city:
Residential:
    Single-family residential district
    Single-family residential restricted district
    Two-family residential district
    Two-family residential restricted district
    Multi-family residential district
    Multi-family residential restricted district
Visitor commercial and mixed use:
    Old town district
    Old town west district
    Residential commercial district
    Accommodations district
Commercial and industrial:
    Commercial district
    Commercial retail warehouse district
    Light industrial district
Shoreline:
    Shoreline single-family residential district
    Shoreline multi-family residential district
    Shoreline resort district
    Shoreline resort restricted district
    Shoreline resort mixed use district
Public and open space:
    Public district
    Parks and recreation district
    Shoreline conservancy district
 
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-4-2: ZONE BOUNDARIES; MAP:
The boundaries for zones listed in this title are indicated on a map entitled
"Zoning Map Of The City Of Long Beach, Washington", which is hereby adopted by
reference. The boundaries shall be modified in accordance with zoning map
amendments which shall be adopted by reference. Where any conflict may exist
between the zoning map and the comprehensive plan, the comprehensive plan shall
control. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-4-3: DIVIDED LOT; LESS RESTRICTIVE ZONE GOVERNS:
Where a lot is divided by a zoning boundary, the requirements of the less
restrictive zone shall govern; provided, that access to the property is
provided exclusively through the less restrictive zone. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-4-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS:
Zoning regulations applicable to an area shall continue to be applied until a
zone change has been adopted by the city council. It is the intent of the city
to adopt zoning in annexed areas, consistent with the comprehensive plan,
concurrently with annexation whenever possible. The city council shall have the
right to declare a moratorium on construction or development in annexed areas
until zoning is adopted. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-4-5: USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Principal Building Or Use Required: Construction of the principal
building or use shall commence prior to the construction of any accessory
structure or use. There shall be no accessory structures erected on an
otherwise vacant lot, except a storage shed used for storing tools and
equipment to maintain the property that is not served by utilities, and with a
gross floor area of no more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet, will be
allowed.
   B.   Single-Family Dwelling: Not more than one single-family dwelling shall
be placed upon any lot where such use is permitted, except as permitted in
mobile home parks or where group dwellings are allowed.
   C.   Multiple Principal Buildings: Multiple principal buildings shall not be
permitted in any single-family residential zone (R1, R1R, S1 districts) or two-
family residential zone (R2, R2R districts). More than one principal building
on a single parcel may be permitted in all other zones, including multi- family
residential zones (R3, R3R, S2 districts), visitor commercial and mixed use
zones (OT, OTW, RC, AC districts), commercial and industrial zones (C1, C2, L1
districts), shoreline resort zones (S3, S3R, S3M districts) and public and open
space zones (P, PR, S4 districts), provided the development is consistent with
all applicable development standards of the underlying district. (Ord. 849, 8-
17-2009)
   D.   Setbacks Between Buildings: The setback between buildings situated on
the same parcel shall be a minimum of ten feet (10'), or as required by the
building code, whichever is more restrictive. However, accessory buildings with
a gross floor area of less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet may be
placed within five feet (5') of the principal structure.
   E.   Setbacks For Sheds: For detached accessory structures with a gross
floor area of less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet (sheds), the
setback between the shed and the fence shall be a minimum of three feet (3'),
or as required by the building code, whichever is more restrictive.
   F.   Public Utilities: Public utility structures or use of land, such as
telephone exchanges, utility stations and pumping stations, are permitted in
all zones where such location is necessary to its function, subject to review
and approval by the city council. This provision shall not be construed to
permit other types of governmental or municipal structures, uses or facilities
where such a use is a conditional use or is not permitted.
   G.   Minimum Building Width: Excepting storage sheds, the minimum building
width shall be eleven feet (11').
   H.   Maximum Age Of Manufactured And Modular Homes: Except as specifically
allowed by the city, the maximum age of a manufactured or modular home being
established for the first time within the city is three (3) years. (Ord. 891,
4-13-2009)
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-5A-1: Intent
12-5A-2: Permitted Uses
12-5A-3: Conditional Uses
12-5A-4: Standards
12-5A-1: INTENT:
The intent of the R1 Single-Family Residential District is to provide for low
density, single-family residential neighborhoods that may include community
services and facilities that will serve the area's population while protecting
and maintaining the single-family residential character. The R1 Single-Family
Residential District implements in part the SFR single-family residential land
use designation of the City of Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 959, 10-15-
2018)
12-5A-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Single-family dwellings.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Home occupations.
Private accessory living quarters attached to a principal structure or in a
detached accessory building for sole use of occupant or temporary guests.
Private garages and private recreational equipment storage buildings.
Private (noncommercial) greenhouses, woodsheds and toolsheds.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs, saunas and tennis courts.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Churches.
Cooperative (State registered).
Daycare center, seven (7) or more children.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Parks, recreational areas or facilities.
Schools. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5A-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: Lot area shall be at least six thousand (6,000) square
feet. Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with
less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, will be permitted where total lot
coverage does not exceed sixty percent (60%) and where all setback requirements
can be met.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of any lot shall be
covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   Front yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         b.   Side yard: Five feet (5') minimum.
         c.   Rear yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         d.   Corner lots: Shall have a ten foot (10') minimum setback on each
street side, and a five foot (5') minimum setback on all other sides.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be thirty five
feet (35'), except the maximum height of an accessory building with a gross
floor area of less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be fifteen feet
(15').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: Permitted uses are exempt from design review. All new
construction, additions and exterior alterations for conditional uses are
subject to the provisions of chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Accessory Building Size: The total floor area of all accessory
buildings on a lot shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet or ten
percent (10%) of the total lot area, whichever is greater, but in no case more
than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
   H.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Each dwelling unit must be at least four
hundred ten (410) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE B. R1R SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTED DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-5B-1: Intent
12-5B-2: Permitted Uses
12-5B-3: Conditional Uses
12-5B-4: Standards
12-5B-1: INTENT:
The intent of the R1R Single-Family Residential Restricted District is to
provide for low density, single-family residential neighborhoods that enhance
and contribute to an atmosphere of early twentieth century beach architectural
design. Community services and facilities that will serve the area's population
while protecting and maintaining the single- family residential character may
also be included. The R1R Single-Family Residential Restricted District
implements in part the SFR single-family residential land use designation of
the City of Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5B-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Single-family dwellings.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Home occupations.
Private accessory living quarters attached to a principal structure or in a
detached accessory building for sole use of occupant or temporary guests.
Private garages and private recreational equipment storage buildings.
Private (noncommercial) greenhouses, woodsheds and toolsheds.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs, saunas and tennis courts.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Churches.
Cooperative (State registered).
Daycare center, seven (7) or more children.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses, or facilities.
Parks, recreational areas or facilities. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5B-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: Lot area shall be at least six thousand (6,000) square
feet. Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with
less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, will be permitted where total lot
coverage does not exceed sixty percent (60%).
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of any lot shall be
covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   Front yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         b.   Side yard: Five feet (5') minimum.
         c.   Rear yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         d.   Corner lots: Shall have a ten foot (10') minimum setback on each
street side, and a five foot (5') minimum setback on all other sides.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be thirty five
feet (35'), except the maximum height of an accessory building with a gross
floor area of less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be fifteen feet
(15').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review, as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Accessory Building Size: The total floor area of all accessory
buildings shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet or ten percent (10%)
of the total lot area, whichever is greater but in no case more than one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
   H.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Each dwelling unit must be at least four
hundred ten (410) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE C. R2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-5C-1: Intent
12-5C-2: Permitted Uses
12-5C-3: Conditional Uses
12-5C-4: Standards
12-5C-1: INTENT:
The intent of the R2 Two-Family Residential District is to provide for two-
family and single-family residential development as well as community services
and facilities that will serve the area's population while protecting and
maintaining the residential character. The R2 Two-Family Residential Zone
District implements in part the MDR medium density residential land use
designation of the City of Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 959, 10-15-
2018)
12-5C-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Home occupations.
Private accessory living quarters attached to a principal structure or in a
detached accessory building for sole use of occupant or temporary guests.
Private garages and private recreational equipment storage buildings.
Private (noncommercial) greenhouses, woodsheds and toolsheds.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs, saunas and tennis courts.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfast, fifteen (15) or fewer guestrooms.
Churches.
Daycare center, seven (7) or more children.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Schools. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5C-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be four thousand (4,000) square
feet per dwelling unit. Construction on lots platted prior to the effective
date hereof, with less than four thousand (4,000) square feet, will be
permitted for one single-family home, where total lot coverage does not exceed
sixty percent (60%), and where all setback requirements can be met. Not more
than one principal building shall be placed on any lot.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of any lot shall be
covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   Front yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         b.   Side yard: Five feet (5') minimum.
         c.   Rear yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         d.   Corner lots: Shall have a ten foot (10') minimum setback on each
street side, and a five foot (5') minimum setback on all other sides.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be thirty five
feet (35'), except the maximum height of an accessory building with a gross
floor area of less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be fifteen feet
(15').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: Permitted uses are exempt from design review. All new
construction, additions and exterior alterations for conditional uses are
subject to the provisions of chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Accessory Building Size: The total floor area of all accessory
buildings shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet or ten percent (10%)
of the total lot area, whichever is greater but in no case more than one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
   H.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Each dwelling unit must be at least four
hundred ten (410) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE D. R2R TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTED DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-5D-1: Intent
12-5D-2: Permitted Uses
12-5D-3: Conditional Uses
12-5D-4: Standards
12-5D-1: INTENT:
The intent of the R2R Two-Family Residential Restricted District is to provide
for two-family and single-family residential development that enhances and
contributes to an atmosphere of early twentieth century beach architectural
design. Community services and facilities that will serve the area's population
while protecting and maintaining the residential character may also be
included. Small scale lodging establishments and vacation rentals may also be
allowed. The R2R Two-Family Residential Restricted District implements in part
the MDR medium density residential land use designation of the City of Long
Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5D-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Home occupations.
Private accessory living quarters attached to a principal structure or in a
detached accessory building for sole use of occupant or temporary guests.
Private garages and private recreational equipment storage buildings.
Private (noncommercial) greenhouses, woodsheds and toolsheds.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs, saunas and tennis courts.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfast, fifteen (15) or fewer guestrooms.
Churches.
Daycare center, seven (7) or more children.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Nursing homes and convalescent centers, seven (7) or more beds.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Schools. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. 1046, 9-15-2025)
12-5D-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: A minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. Construction on lots platted prior to the
effective date hereof, with less than four thousand (4,000) square feet, will
be permitted for one single-family home, where total lot coverage does not
exceed sixty percent (60%) and where all setback requirements can be met. Not
more than one principal building shall be placed on any lot.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of any lot shall be
covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   Front yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         b.   Side yard: Five feet (5') minimum.
         c.   Rear yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         d.   Corner lots: Shall have a ten foot (10') minimum setback on each
street side and a five foot (5') minimum setback on all other sides.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be thirty five
feet (35'), except the maximum height of an accessory building with a gross
floor area of less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be fifteen feet
(15').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review, as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Accessory Building Size: The total floor area of all accessory
buildings shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet or ten percent (10%)
of the total lot area, whichever is greater, but in no case more than one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
   H.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Each dwelling unit must be at least four
hundred ten (410) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE E. R3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-5E-1: Intent
12-5E-2: Permitted Uses
12-5E-3: Conditional Uses
12-5E-4: Standards
12-5E-1: INTENT:
The intent of the R3 Multi-Family Residential District is to provide for multi-
family dwellings as well as single- and two- family residential development, at
a higher density than found in other residential zones. Residences may be
cottages and town homes developed on small lots as well as condominiums and
apartment buildings on larger properties. Community services and facilities
that will serve the area's population while protecting and maintaining the
residential character may also be provided. The R3 Multi-Family Residential
District implements in part the HDR high density residential land use
designation of the City of Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 959, 10-15-
2018)
12-5E-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Daycare center, eleven (11) or fewer children.
Multi-family dwellings, four (4) or fewer units.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Home occupations.
Management offices, laundry rooms, common areas and similar support facilities
for multi-family dwellings.
Private accessory living quarters attached to a principal structure or in a
detached accessory building for sole use of occupant or temporary guests.
Private garages and private recreational equipment storage buildings.
Private (noncommercial) greenhouses, woodsheds and toolsheds.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs, saunas and tennis courts.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title.
Supportive services for occupants of multi-family affordable dwellings. (Ord.
959, 10-15-2018)
12-5E-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Affordable housing, pursuant to the requirements of section
12-11-18 of this title.
Bed and breakfast, fifteen (15) or fewer guestrooms.
Churches.
Daycare center, twelve (12) or more children.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Group dwellings.
Group home or residential care facility, fifteen (15) or fewer beds.
Manufactured home parks.
Multi-family dwellings or a combination of two-family and/or multi-family
buildings, resulting in five (5) or more dwelling units.
Nursing homes and convalescent centers, seven (7) or more beds.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Schools. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5E-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: A minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. For affordable housing that meets the
requirements of section
12-11-18 of this title, the total number of allowed dwelling units on a lot may
be increased up to fifty percent (50%). On lots platted prior to the effective
date hereof, with less than three thousand (3,000) square feet, construction
will be permitted for one single-family home where total lot coverage does not
exceed sixty percent (60%) and where all setback requirements can be met.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of any lot shall be
covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   Front yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         b.   Side yard:
            (1)   Detached: Five feet (5') minimum.
            (2)   Semidetached And Attached: Where development is coordinated
with adjacent lots, attached and semidetached structures shall have a five foot
(5') minimum setback on exterior sides that are not abutting the adjacent
building and a zero setback on interior abutting sides.
         c.   Rear yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         d.   Corner lots:
            (1)   Detached: Shall have a ten foot (10') minimum setback on each
street side, and a five foot (5') minimum setback on all other sides.
            (2)   Semidetached and attached: Ten feet (10') minimum setback on
each street side; five feet (5') minimum setback on the interior side opposite
the shortest street frontage or the street frontage that is considered the
front; zero setback on the side opposite the longest street frontage, or
opposite the street frontage that is considered the side.
      4.   Multiple Principal Buildings: More than one (1) two-family and/or
multi-family residences may be placed on a lot. Multiple single-family
residences are only permitted as group dwellings.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be thirty five
feet (35'), except the maximum height of an accessory building with a gross
floor area of less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be fifteen feet
(15').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: Permitted uses are exempt from design review. All new
construction, additions and exterior alterations for conditional uses are
subject to the provisions of chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Accessory Building Size: The total floor area of all accessory
buildings shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet or ten percent (10%)
of the total lot area, whichever is greater.
   H.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Each dwelling unit must be at least four
hundred ten (410) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE F. R3R MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTED DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-5F-1: Intent
12-5F-2: Permitted Uses
12-5F-3: Conditional Uses
12-5F-4: Standards
12-5F-1: INTENT:
The intent of the R3R Multi-Family Residential Restricted District is to
provide for multi-family dwellings as well as single- and two-family
residential development, at a higher density than found in other residential
zones. The design character should enhance and contribute to an atmosphere of
early twentieth century beach architectural design. Community services and
facilities that will serve the area's population while protecting and
maintaining the residential character may also be included. The R3R Multi-
Family Residential Restricted District implements in part the HDR high density
residential land use designation of the City of Long Beach comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5F-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Daycare center, eleven (11) or fewer children.
Multi-family dwellings, four (4) or fewer units.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Home occupations.
Management offices, laundry rooms, common areas and similar support facilities
for multi-family dwellings.
Private accessory living quarters attached to a principal structure or in a
detached accessory building for sole use of occupant or temporary guests.
Private garages and private recreational equipment storage buildings.
Private (noncommercial) greenhouses, woodsheds and toolsheds.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs, saunas and tennis courts.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title.
Supportive services for occupants of multi-family affordable dwellings. (Ord.
959, 10-15-2018)
12-5F-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Affordable housing, pursuant to the requirements of section
12-11-18 of this title.
Bed and breakfast, fifteen (15) or fewer guestrooms.
Churches.
Daycare center, twelve (12) or more children.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Group dwellings.
Group home or residential care facility, fifteen (15) or fewer beds.
Multi-family dwellings, or a combination of two-family and/or multi-family
buildings, resulting in five (5) or more dwelling units.
Nursing homes and convalescent centers, seven (7) or more beds.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Schools. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-5F-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: A minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. For affordable housing that meets the
requirements of section
12-11-18 of this title, the total number of allowed dwelling units on a lot may
be increased up to fifty percent (50%). On lots platted prior to the effective
date hereof, with less than three thousand (3,000) square feet, construction
will be permitted for one single-family home where total lot coverage does not
exceed sixty percent (60%) and where all setback requirements can be met.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of any lot shall be
covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   Front yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         b.   Side yard:
            (1)   Detached: Five feet (5') minimum.
            (2)   Semidetached And Attached: Where development is coordinated
with adjacent lots, attached and semidetached structures shall have a five foot
(5') minimum setback on exterior sides that are not abutting the adjacent
building and a zero setback on interior abutting sides.
         c.   Rear yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         d.   Corner lots:
            (1)   Detached: Shall have a ten foot (10') minimum setback on each
street side, and a five foot (5') minimum setback on all other sides.
            (2)   Semidetached and attached: Ten feet (10') minimum setback on
each street side; five feet (5') minimum setback on the interior side opposite
the shortest street frontage or the street frontage that is considered the
front; zero setback on the side opposite the longest street frontage, or
opposite the street frontage that is considered the side.
      4.   Multiple Principal Buildings: More than one (1) two-family and/or
multi-family structure may be placed on a lot. Multiple single-family
residences are only permitted as group dwellings.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be thirty five
feet (35'), except the maximum height of an accessory building with a gross
floor area of less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be fifteen feet
(15').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review, as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Accessory Building Size: The total floor area of all accessory
buildings shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet or ten percent (10%)
of the total lot area, whichever is greater.
   H.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Each dwelling unit must be at least four
hundred ten (410) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
CHAPTER 6
VISITOR COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. OT OLD TOWN DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6A-1: Intent
12-6A-2: Permitted Uses
12-6A-3: Conditional Uses
12-6A-4: Standards
12-6A-1: INTENT:
The intent of the OT Old Town District is to provide a compact retail core that
will stimulate foot traffic, promote tourism and serve the needs of visitors.
The OT Old Town District partially implements the visitor commercial (VC) land
use designation of the Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018;
amd. Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
12-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
      Amusements conducted indoors.
      Arts and crafts galleries.
      Business, professional offices or financial institutions.
      Eating and/or drinking establishments, excluding drive-through
facilities.
      Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels, motels, twenty five (25) or fewer
lodging units.
      Mixed use: Any combination of the permitted uses listed herein.
      Performing arts center seating ninety nine (99) people or fewer.
      Personal services, including, but not limited to, barbershops, tailoring,
laundry and dry cleaning, or other service establishments.
      Residences shall be allowed on upper floors and behind commercial
buildings, not facing a street, when parking is provided.
      Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities.
      Retail trade establishments such as food stores, drugstores, gift shops,
garden stores, variety stores, and appliance stores.
      Special events and festivals may be allowed upon approval by the City
Council.
      Theaters, but not including drive-ins.
      Vacation rentals.
      Wineries and breweries.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
      Enclosed storage of materials, supplies and equipment associated with the
principal use of the property.
      Live-work spaces within residential uses.
      Outdoor merchandising, vending, dining and amusements, two hundred (200)
square feet or less, when such use is associated with a business operating out
of an adjacent building.
      Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the
property.
      Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
      Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
12-6A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Uses:
      Community centers.
      Custom manufacturing of goods for retail sale on premises, or cottage
industries.
      Governmental or Municipal structures, uses, or facilities.
      Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty six (26) or more
lodging units.
      Mixed use: Any combination of uses including at least one conditional use
listed herein.
      Outdoor merchandising, vending, dining and amusements greater than two
hundred (200) square feet may be allowed if such activity is associated with a
business operating out of an adjacent building. No businesses shall operate
solely in an open air environment.
      Parks, recreation areas and facilities.
      Performing arts center seating one hundred (100) people or more.
      Public parking lots.
      Quasi-public uses.
      Wireless communication facilities, pursuant to the requirements of
section
12-11-17 of this title.
   B.   Other Uses: Other uses may be allowed as a conditional use if the
hearing examiner determines that such use is similar in intent and impact to a
permitted or conditional use. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-6A-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot size: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square foot minimum.
Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with less than
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, may be permitted where approved
by the City Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
      2.   Lot coverage: No maximum.
      3.   Setback requirements:
         a.   Pacific Avenue: Five foot (5') maximum setback from Pacific
Avenue; except that a setback of up to twenty feet (20') may be permitted by
the reviewing authority during design review; provided, that none of the
setback area is used for parking, and the area is finished and used for outside
display, dining and/or landscaping.
         b.   All other sides: Subject to design review.
   B.   Building Height:
      1.   The maximum height of a building shall be thirty five feet (35').
      2.   The minimum building height shall be twenty five feet (25'), except
that a lower building height may be permitted by the reviewing authority during
design review upon an affirmative finding that the lower building height
results in a building of similar proportions to abutting buildings.
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Maximum Building Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet per floor.
   H.   Density: No maximum. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE B. OTW OLD TOWN WEST DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6B-1: Intent
12-6B-2: Permitted Uses
12-6B-3: Conditional Uses
12-6B-4: Standards
12-6B-1: INTENT:
The intent of the OTW Old Town West District is to provide a compact retail
core that will stimulate foot traffic, provide lodging, promote tourism and
serve the needs of visitors. Located west of Ocean Beach Boulevard, taller
buildings are allowed to take advantage of ocean views. The OTW Old Town West
District partially implements the visitor commercial (VC) land use designation
of the Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. 1036, 8-
19-2024)
12-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal Uses:
      Amusements conducted indoors.
      Arts and crafts galleries.
      Bed and breakfasts of fifteen (15) units or less.
      Business, professional offices or financial institutions.
      Drive-ins.
      Eating and/or drinking establishments, excluding drive-through
facilities.
      Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels, motels, twenty five (25) or fewer
lodging units.
      Mixed use: Any combination of the permitted uses listed herein.
      Multi-family dwellings, four (4) or fewer units.
      Personal services, including, but not limited to, barbershops, tailoring,
laundry and dry cleaning, or other service establishments.
      Residences shall be allowed on upper floors and behind commercial
buildings, not facing a street, when parking is provided.
      Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities.
      Retail trade establishments such as food stores, drugstores, gift shops,
garden stores, variety stores, and appliance stores.
      Special events and festivals may be allowed upon approval by the City
Council.
      Theater, but not including drive-ins.
      Vacation rentals.
      Wineries and breweries.
   B.   Sexually Oriented And Adult Businesses: Sexually oriented or adult
businesses shall be permitted, subject to design review as set forth in chapter
10, including article A, of this title, and subject to the restrictions set
forth in chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Accessory Uses And Structures:
      Enclosed storage of materials, supplies and equipment associated with the
principal use of the property.
      Live-work spaces within residential uses.
      Outdoor merchandising, vending and dining, two hundred (200) square feet
or less, when such use is associated with a business operating out of an
adjacent building.
      Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the
property.
      Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
      Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section 12-11-21 of
this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. 997, 11-15-2021; Ord. 1008, 11-21-
2022; Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
12-6B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Community centers.
Custom manufacturing of goods for retail sale on premises, or cottage
industries.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses, or facilities.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty six (26) or more lodging
units.
Multi-family dwellings resulting in five (5) or more dwelling units.
Outdoor merchandising, vending, and dining greater than two hundred (200)
square feet may be allowed if such activity is associated with a business
operating out of an adjacent building. No businesses shall operate solely in an
open-air environment.
Parks, recreation areas and facilities.
Performing arts center seating one hundred (100) people or more.
Public parking lots.
Quasi-public uses.
Resort/conference complexes. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-6B-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot size: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square foot minimum.
Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with less than
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, may be permitted as approved by
the City Council upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
      2.   Lot coverage: None specified.
      3.   Setback requirements: Maximum of twenty feet (20') from Ocean Beach
Boulevard if only one building is located on the property. For development with
multiple buildings, at least one building shall be set back a maximum of twenty
feet (20') from Ocean Beach Boulevard. All other setbacks shall be subject to
design review.
   B.   Building Height:
      1.   The maximum height of any building or portion of a building within
thirty feet (30') of Ocean Beach Boulevard shall be forty five feet (45'). The
maximum height for any building or portion of a building set back more than
thirty feet (30') from Ocean Beach Boulevard shall be fifty five feet (55').
      2.   The minimum building height shall be twenty five feet (25'), except
that a lower building height may be permitted by the reviewing authority during
design review upon an affirmative finding that the lower building height
results in a building of similar proportions to abutting buildings.
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: All parking shall be provided pursuant to chapter 12 of this
title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Maximum Building Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet per floor.
   H.   Density: No maximum.
   I.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Each dwelling unit must be at least four
hundred ten (410) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE C. RC RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6C-1: Intent
12-6C-2: Permitted Uses
12-6C-3: Conditional Uses
12-6C-4: Standards
12-6C-1: INTENT:
The intent of the RC Residential Commercial Zone District is to provide for a
mix of residential and commercial uses in a pedestrian oriented neighborhood
that is residential in character, while creating a twentieth century seashore
look. Commercial uses serve the needs of local residents as well as visitors
but exclude certain more intensive activities that might have a negative impact
on residences, such as those that emit noise, light, smells or vibrations.
Development is encouraged that will provide compatibility between different
uses, and facilitate future conversion from one use to another. The RC
Residential Commercial District implements the RC residential commercial land
use designation of the Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-6C-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal Uses:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Arts and crafts galleries.
Bed and breakfast, fifteen (15) or fewer guestrooms.
Building supply, contractors, shops, excluding exterior storage yards.
Business, professional offices or financial institutions.
Daycare center, eleven (11) or fewer children.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty five (25) or fewer lodging
units.
Laundromats.
Mixed use: Any combination of the permitted uses listed herein.
Multi-family dwellings, four (4) or fewer units.
Performing arts center seating ninety nine (99) people or fewer.
Personal services, including, but not limited to, barbershops, laundry and dry
cleaning, or other service establishments.
Restaurants, with or without drive-through facilities.
Retail trade establishments such as food stores, drugstores, gift shops, garden
stores, variety stores and appliance stores.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
Vacation rentals.
Wineries and breweries.
   B.   Sexually Oriented And Adult Businesses: Sexually oriented or adult
businesses shall be permitted, subject to design review as set forth in chapter
10, including article A, of this title, and subject to the restrictions set
forth in chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Accessory Uses And Structures:
Enclosed storage of materials, supplies and equipment associated with the
principal use of the property.
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Live-work spaces within residential uses.
Outdoor merchandising, vending and dining, two hundred (200) square feet or
less, when such use is associated with a business operating out of an adjacent
building.
Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the property.
Private garages and private recreational vehicle storage buildings.
Private (noncommercial) greenhouses, woodsheds, and toolsheds.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-6C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Auto repair shops and car washes.
Churches.
Commercial fishing equipment, supplies and repairs (equipment and small engine
only).
Cooperative (State registered).
Custom manufacturing of goods for retail sale on premises, or cottage
industries.
Daycare center, twelve (12) or more children.
Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-through facilities.
Funeral homes and mortuaries, crematorium.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Group dwellings.
Group home or residential care facility, fifteen (15) or fewer beds.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty six (26) or more lodging
units.
Marijuana (State licensed) retailer.
Mixed use: Any combination of uses including at least one conditional use.
Multi-family dwellings or a combination of two-family and/or multi-family
buildings, resulting in five (5) or more dwelling units.
Nursing homes and convalescent centers, seven (7) or more beds.
Outdoor merchandising, vending, and dining greater than two hundred (200)
square feet may be allowed if such activity is associated with a business
operating out of an adjacent building. No businesses shall operate solely in an
open air environment.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Public parking lots.
Quasi-public uses.
Recreational vehicle parks on the east side of SR 103 (Pacific Avenue).
Schools.
Wireless communication facilities, pursuant to the requirements of section
12-11-17 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-6C-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: Lot area shall be a minimum of five thousand (5,000)
square feet. Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof,
with less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, may be permitted as approved
by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
      2.   Maximum Lot Coverage: No more than seventy five percent (75%) of any
lot shall be covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   Front yard: Zero (0) minimum to a maximum of twenty feet (20')
along Pacific Avenue; zero (0) minimum and no maximum to other streets.
         b.   Side yard: Five foot (5') minimum.
         c.   Rear yard: Five foot (5') minimum.
         d.   Corner lots and multiple street frontages: Zero (0) minimum to a
maximum of twenty feet (20') along Pacific Avenue; five foot (5') minimum to
Ocean Beach Boulevard; zero (0) minimum to all other street sides.
            (1)   The ground level of the building, to a height of at least
eight feet (8') but excluding porch columns and railings, shall not be located
in a vision clearance triangle, formed by measuring twenty feet (20') along
each property line from the intersection of the two (2) streets and connecting
the end points of such lines formed by such measurements.
            (2)   Porch roofs, balconies, canopies, bays, upper floors and
similar features shall be permitted to project into the vision clearance
triangle, provided the lowest point of the overhang or projection has a
clearance of at least eight feet (8') above the sidewalk grade on Pacific
Avenue, if abutting, or the level of the adjacent street for all other
frontages.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a structure shall be thirty five
feet (35'), except the maximum height of an accessory building with a gross
floor area of less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be fifteen feet
(15').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14 of this title.
   D.   Parking: All parking toward the side or rear of buildings; otherwise as
provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Maximum Building Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet per floor. The
total floor area of all buildings on a lot shall not exceed seventy five
percent (75%) of the lot area (a floor area ratio [FAR] of 0.75:1).
   H.   Density: No maximum.
   I.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Each dwelling unit must be at least four
hundred ten (410) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE D. AC ACCOMMODATIONS DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6D-1: Intent
12-6D-2: Permitted Uses
12-6D-3: Conditional Uses
12-6D-4: Standards
12-6D-1: INTENT:
The intent of the AC accommodations district is to provide for tourist lodging
and associated visitor oriented commercial uses, with development that enhances
and contributes to an atmosphere of early twentieth century beach architectural
design. The AC accommodations district implements in part the RES resort land
use designation of the Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-6D-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Bed and breakfast, fifteen (15) or fewer guestrooms.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty five (25) or fewer lodging
units.
Vacation rentals.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Clubhouses.
Eating and/or drinking establishments, excluding drive- through facilities,
complementary to the principal use.
Laundry, maintenance shop, storage and other support functions associated with
the principal use.
Outdoor merchandising, vending and dining, two hundred (200) square feet or
less, when such use is associated with a business operating out of an adjacent
building.
Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the property.
Personal services, such as beauty salons and day spas, complementary to the
principal use.
Property management offices.
Small retail shops complementary to the principal use.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title.
Swimming pools, hot tubs, tennis courts and similar facilities for the use of
guests. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-6D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Governmental or municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty six (26) or more lodging
units.
Museums and interpretive facilities.
Outdoor merchandising, vending, and dining greater than two hundred (200)
square feet may be allowed if such activity is associated with a business
operating out of an adjacent building. No businesses shall operate solely in an
open air environment.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Resort/conference complexes. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-6D-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot size: Lot area shall be at least ten thousand (10,000) square
feet. Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with
less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, may be permitted as approved by
the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission.
      2.   Maximum lot coverage: Seventy five percent (75%).
      3.   Setbacks: None, except as may be required through design review.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be thirty five
feet (35') within one hundred feet (100') of Ocean Beach Boulevard, and fifty
five feet (55') for buildings located more than one hundred feet (100') west of
Ocean Beach Boulevard.
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
CHAPTER 7
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7A-1: Intent
12-7A-2: Permitted Uses
12-7A-3: Conditional Uses
12-7A-4: Standards
12-7A-1: INTENT:
The intent of the C1 Commercial District is to provide for more intensive
commercial uses and businesses that primarily serve the needs of local
residents by providing basic goods and services. It may also provide for multi-
family housing and mixed uses. While some visitor-serving uses may occur, it is
not the primary focus of the Commercial District. It is specifically intended
that no activities that emit annoying levels of noise, smoke, and/or vibration
be permitted. Designs in the Commercial District should continue the twentieth
century seashore theme. The C1 Commercial District implements in part the NC
neighborhood commercial land use designation of the Long Beach comprehensive
plan. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal Uses:
Arts and crafts galleries.
Building supply sales, contractor offices and shops, excluding exterior storage
yards.
Business, professional offices or financial institutions.
Commercial fishing equipment, supplies and repairs (equipment and small engine
only).
Commercial greenhouses.
Daycare center, seven (7) or more children.
Frozen food lockers.
Funeral homes and mortuaries with or without crematory.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty five (25) or fewer lodging
units.
Laundering facilities, including sales of linens, towels, and related items.
Medical and veterinary clinics or hospitals.
Mixed use: Any combination of permitted uses listed herein.
Personal services, including, but not limited to, barbershops, tailoring,
laundry and dry cleaning, or other service establishments.
Restaurants, with or without drive-through facilities.
Retail trade establishments such as food stores, drugstores, gift shops, garden
stores, variety stores, and appliance stores.
Special events and festivals may be allowed upon approval by the City Council.
Storage, warehouse, and wholesale establishments.
Theaters, but not including drive-ins.
Vacation rentals.
   B.   Sexually Oriented And Adult Businesses: Sexually oriented or adult
businesses, subject to design review as set forth in chapter 10, including
article A, of this title, and subject to the restrictions set forth in chapter
15 of this title.
   C.   Accessory Uses And Structures:
Enclosed storage of materials, supplies and equipment associated with the
principal use of the property.
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Live-work spaces within residential uses.
Outdoor merchandising, vending and dining, two hundred (200) square feet or
less, when such use is associated with a business operating out of an adjacent
building.
Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the property.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-7A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Affordable housing, pursuant to the requirements of section
12-11-18 of this title.
Any business related activity conducted out of doors, except for parking or
loading, and including outdoor merchandising, vending and dining greater than
two hundred (200) square feet if such activity is associated with a business
operating out of an adjacent building. No businesses shall operate solely in an
open air environment.
Church.
Cooperative (State registered).
Eating and/or drinking establishments.
Gasoline stations, auto repair shops and car washes.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Group dwellings.
Group home or residential care facility, fifteen (15) or fewer beds.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty six (26) or more lodging
units.
Light manufacturing including processing, cleaning, servicing, and/or repair of
goods and equipment.
Marijuana (State licensed) retailer.
Mixed use: Any combination of uses including at least one conditional use.
Nursing homes and convalescent centers, seven (7) or more beds.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Public parking lots.
Quasi-public uses.
RV parks and mobile home parks limited to the east side of SR 103 (Pacific
Avenue).
Residential uses: Single-family, two-family or multi-family.
Sale and/or rental of vehicles, boats, travel trailers, mobile homes and their
accessory equipment.
Schools.
Wireless communication facilities, pursuant to the requirements of section
12-11-17 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-7A-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot size: Lot area shall be a minimum of five thousand (5,000)
square feet. Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof,
with less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, may be permitted as approved
by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
      2.   Lot coverage: None.
      3.   Setback requirements: None, except as may be required through design
review.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a structure shall be thirty five
feet (35').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14 of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to the design review procedures and criteria prescribed in
chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Residential Densities:
      1.   The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit shall be three thousand
(3,000) square feet.
      2.   For affordable housing that meets the requirements of section
12-11-18 of this title, the total number of allowed dwelling units on a lot may
be increased up to fifty percent (50%).
      3.   For mixed use development with residences, the residential density
shall be determined by the hearing examiner through the conditional use permit
process.
      4.   Not more than one single-family dwelling shall be placed on any lot,
unless approved as a group dwelling. Multiple two- family and/or multi-family
dwellings may be placed on a lot. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE B. C2 COMMERCIAL RETAIL WAREHOUSE DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7B-1: Intent
12-7B-2: Permitted Uses
12-7B-3: Conditional Uses
12-7B-4: Standards
12-7B-1: INTENT:
The intent of the C2 commercial retail warehouse district is to provide for
uses that require larger warehouse facilities. It is specifically intended that
no activities that create noise disturbance or emit annoying levels of smoke or
vibration be permitted. The C2 commercial retail warehouse district partially
implements the C/LI commercial/light industrial land use designation of the
Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Building supply sales, contractor offices and shops excluding exterior storage
yards.
Commercial fishing equipment, supplies and repairs (equipment and small engine
only).
Commercial greenhouses.
Frozen food lockers.
Funeral homes and mortuaries with or without crematory.
Gasoline stations, auto repair shops and car washes.
Laundering facilities, including dry cleaning and sales of linens, towels, and
related items.
Medical and veterinary clinics or hospitals.
Retail trade establishment such as food stores, drugstores, gift shops, garden
stores, variety stores, and appliance stores.
Sale and/or rental of vehicles, boats, travel trailers, mobile homes and their
accessory equipment.
Storage facilities, warehouse, and wholesale establishments. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Enclosed storage of materials, supplies and equipment associated with the
principal use of the property.
Manager and security apartments.
Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the property.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-7B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Any business related activity conducted out of doors in whole or part.
Cooperative (state registered).
Governmental and municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Light manufacturing including processing, cleaning, servicing, and/or repair of
goods and equipment.
Marijuana (state licensed) producer, processor, or researcher.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Public parking lots.
Quasi-public uses.
RV parks and mobile home parks limited to the east side of SR 103 (Pacific
Avenue).
Wireless communication facilities, pursuant to the requirements of section
12-11-17 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 900, 6-16-2014; Ord.
931, 10-3-2016)
12-7B-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lot:
      1.   Lot size: Lot area shall be a minimum of five thousand (5,000)
square feet. Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof,
with less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, may be permitted as approved
by the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission.
      2.   Lot coverage: No maximum.
      3.   Setback requirements: Ten feet (10') minimum to property lines
abutting residential zones. All other property lines, no minimum.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a structure shall be thirty five
feet (35').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14 of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to the design review procedures and criteria as provided in
chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
ARTICLE C. L1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7C-1: Intent
12-7C-2: Permitted Uses
12-7C-3: Conditional Uses
12-7C-4: Standards
12-7C-1: INTENT:
The intent of the L1 light industrial district is to provide for uses that
require larger warehouse facilities, are more intensive in use, or are
industrial in nature and have the potential to emit noise, light and odors and
impact other uses. The L1 light industrial district partially implements the C/
LI heavy commercial/light industrial land use designation of the Long Beach
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-7C-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Building supply sales, contractor offices and shops.
Commercial fishing equipment, supplies and repairs (equipment and small engine
only).
Commercial greenhouses.
Frozen food lockers.
Gasoline stations, auto repair shops and car washes.
Light manufacturing including processing, cleaning, servicing, and/or repair of
goods and equipment.
Sale and/or rental of vehicles, boats, travel trailers, mobile homes and their
accessory equipment.
Storage, warehouse, and wholesale establishments. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Enclosed storage of materials, supplies and equipment associated with the
principal use of the property.
Manager and security apartments.
Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the property.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-7C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Auto wrecking.
Commercial kennels.
Cooperative (state registered).
Governmental or municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Marijuana (state licensed) producer, processor, or researcher.
Outdoor storage of materials, subject to screening requirements.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Quasi-public uses.
Wireless communication facilities, pursuant to the requirements of section
12-11-17 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 900, 6-16-2014; Ord.
931, 10-3-2016)
12-7C-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot size: Minimum lot area shall be five thousand (5,000) square
feet. Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with
less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, may be permitted as approved by
the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission.
      2.   Lot coverage: No maximum.
      3.   Setback requirements: Ten feet (10') minimum to property lines
abutting residential zones. All other property lines, no minimum.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a structure shall be thirty five
feet (35').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: Permitted uses are exempt from design review. All new
construction, additions and exterior alterations for conditional uses, with the
exception of wireless communication facilities, shall be subject to the
provisions of chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
CHAPTER 8
SHORELINE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. S1 SHORELINE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8A-1: Intent
12-8A-2: Permitted Uses
12-8A-3: Conditional Uses
12-8A-4: Standards
12-8A-1: INTENT:
The intent of the S1 Shoreline Single-Family Residential District is to provide
for a low density, residential neighborhood in keeping with the historical
beach village character and to provide for such community services and
facilities to serve the area's population while subject to restrictions to
protect, preserve and enhance the values of shoreline property. The S1
Shoreline Single-Family Residential District partially implements the single-
family residential land use designation in the Long Beach comprehensive plan,
and the rural residential environment of the shoreline master program. (Ord.
959, 10-15-2018)
12-8A-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Single-family dwellings.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Home occupations.
Private accessory living quarters attached to a principal structure or in a
detached accessory building for the sole use of the occupant or temporary
guests.
Private garages and private recreational vehicle storage buildings.
Private (noncommercial) greenhouses, woodsheds, and toolsheds.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs, saunas, and tennis courts.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-8A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfast, not more than fifteen (15) guestrooms.
Churches.
Cooperative (State registered).
Daycare center, seven (7) or more children.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Schools. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-8A-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size is ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with less than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet, will be permitted where total lot coverage
does not exceed sixty percent (60%) and where all setback requirements can be
met.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of any lot shall be
covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   Front yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         b.   Side yard: Five feet (5') minimum.
         c.   Rear yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         d.   Corner lots: Shall have a ten foot (10') minimum setback on each
street side and a five foot (5') minimum setback at other property lines.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a structure shall be thirty five
feet (35'), except the maximum height of an accessory building with a gross
floor area of less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be fifteen feet
(15').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
in this district are subject to design review, as provided in chapter 10 of
this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Accessory Building Size: The total square footage of all accessory
buildings shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet or ten percent (10%)
of the total lot area, whichever is greater but in no case more than one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
   H.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Each dwelling unit must be at least one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE B. S2 SHORELINE MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8B-1: Intent
12-8B-2: Permitted Uses
12-8B-3: Conditional Uses
12-8B-4: Standards
12-8B-1: INTENT:
The intent of S2 Shoreline Multi-Family Residential District is to provide for
a medium density, residential neighborhood character and to provide for
community services and facilities that will serve the area's population.
Development is subject to restrictions to protect, preserve, enhance, and
contribute to both the values of significant environmental features and the
historical beach village character. The S2 Shoreline Multi-Family Residential
District partially implements the MDR medium density residential land use
designation of the Long Beach comprehensive plan and the rural residential
environment of the shoreline master program. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-8B-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Adult family home, six (6) or fewer beds.
Multi-family dwellings, four (4) or fewer units.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Family daycare home, six (6) or fewer children.
Home occupations.
Private accessory living quarters attached to a principal or in a detached
accessory building for the sole use of the occupant or temporary guests.
Private garages and private recreational vehicle storage buildings.
Private (noncommercial) greenhouses, woodsheds, and toolsheds.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs, saunas, and tennis courts.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-8B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfast, not more than fifteen (15) guestrooms.
Churches.
Daycare center, seven (7) or more children.
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Group dwellings.
Multi-family dwellings, five (5) or more units total on a single lot.
Nursing homes and convalescent centers, seven (7) or more beds.
Parks, recreational areas or facilities.
Schools. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. 1046, 9-15-2025)
12-8B-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size:
         a.   The minimum lot size for a single-family dwelling unit shall be
ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
         b.   The minimum lot size for multi-family dwelling units shall be ten
thousand (10,000) square feet for the first dwelling unit, plus two thousand
(2,000) square feet for each additional dwelling unit. Where multiple principal
buildings are constructed on a property, there shall be ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of lot area for the first of each subsequent four (4) units, or
fraction thereof.
         c.   Construction of detached, single-family homes on lots platted
prior to the effective date hereof, with less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet, will be permitted where total lot coverage does not exceed sixty percent
(60%) and where all setback requirements can be met.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than seventy five percent (75%) of any lot
shall be covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   Front yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         b.   Side yard: Five feet (5') minimum.
         c.   Rear yard: Ten feet (10') minimum.
         d.   Corner lots: Shall have a ten foot (10') minimum setback on each
street side, and a five foot (5') minimum setback at other property lines.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a structure shall be thirty five
feet (35'), except the maximum height of an accessory building with a gross
floor area of less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be fifteen feet
(15').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Living Space: The minimum living space per multi-family residence is
seven hundred twenty (720) square feet.
   H.   Density: The maximum number of dwelling units allowed per building is
four (4). More than one (1) two-family and/or multi-family structure may be
placed on a lot. Multiple single-family residences are only permitted as group
dwellings.
   I.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: Single-family dwelling must be at least one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE C. S3 SHORELINE RESORT DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8C-1: Intent
12-8C-2: Permitted Uses
12-8C-3: Conditional Uses
12-8C-4: Standards
12-8C-1: INTENT:
The intent of the S3 shoreline resort district is to provide for tourist
oriented commercial development, providing lodging and tourist serving
businesses. The design character of the area is that of coastal resort, drawing
on the natural setting of the dunes while protecting, preserving and enhancing
significant environmental features. The S3 shoreline resort district partially
implements the RES resort land use designation of the Long Beach comprehensive
plan and the urban resort environment of the shoreline master program. (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009)
12-8C-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Amusements conducted indoors.
Arts and crafts galleries.
Eating and/or drinking establishments, excluding drive- through facilities.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty five (25) or fewer lodging
units.
Mixed use: Any combination of the permitted uses listed herein.
Personal services, including, but not limited to, barbershops, tailoring,
laundry and dry cleaning, or other service establishments.
Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities.
Retail trade establishments such as food stores, drugstores, gift shops, garden
stores, variety stores, and appliance stores.
Special occasions and festivals may be allowed upon approval by the city
council.
Theater, but not including drive-ins.
Vacation rentals.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Laundry, maintenance shop, storage and other support functions associated with
the principal use.
Outdoor merchandising, vending and dining, two hundred (200) square feet or
less, when such use is associated with a business operating out of an adjacent
building.
Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the property.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title.
Swimming pools, hot tubs, tennis courts and similar facilities for the use of
guests. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 891, 4-13-2013; Ord. 1008, 11-21-2022)
12-8C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Amusements.
Governmental or municipal buildings, uses, or facilities.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty six (26) or more lodging
units.
Museums and interpretive facilities.
Outdoor merchandising, vending, and dining greater than two hundred (200)
square feet may be allowed if such activity is associated with a business
operating out of an adjacent building. No businesses shall operate solely in an
open air environment.
Parks, recreation areas and facilities.
Performing arts center.
Public parking lots.
Resort/conference complexes. (Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-8C-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size is ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with less than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet, may be permitted where approved by the city
council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than seventy five percent (75%) of any lot
shall be covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setback Requirements: None, except as may be required through design
review.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be sixty feet
(60').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
ARTICLE D. S3R SHORELINE RESORT RESTRICTED DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8D-1: Intent
12-8D-2: Permitted Uses
12-8D-3: Conditional Uses
12-8D-4: Standards
12-8D-1: INTENT:
The intent of the S3R shoreline resort restricted district is to provide for
tourist lodging oriented commercial development. Development may also include
limited tourist oriented commercial establishments and resort amenities. The
design character of the area is that of a coastal resort, drawing on the
natural setting of the dunes while protecting, preserving and enhancing
significant environmental features. The S3R shoreline resort restricted
district partially implements the RES resort land use designation of the Long
Beach comprehensive plan and the rural resort environment of the shoreline
master program. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-8D-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty five (25) or fewer lodging
units.
Vacation rentals. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Clubhouses.
Eating and/or drinking establishments, excluding drive- through facilities,
complementary to the principal use.
Laundry, maintenance shop, storage and other support functions associated with
the principal use.
Outdoor merchandising, vending and dining, two hundred (200) square feet or
less, when such use is associated with a business operating out of an adjacent
building.
Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the property.
Personal services, such as beauty salons and day spas, complementary to the
principal use.
Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities, complementary to the principal
use.
Small retail shops complementary to the principal use.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title.
Swimming pools, hot tubs, tennis courts and similar facilities for the use of
guests. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-8D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Governmental or municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Itinerant lodging, i.e., hotels and motels, twenty six (26) or more lodging
units.
Museums and interpretive facilities.
Outdoor merchandising, vending, and dining greater than two hundred (200)
square feet may be allowed if such activity is associated with a business
operating out of an adjacent building. No businesses shall operate solely in an
open air environment.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Resort/conference complexes. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-8D-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size is ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with less than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet, may be permitted where approved by the city
council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than seventy five percent (75%) of any lot
shall be covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setbacks: None, except as may be required through design review.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be fifty five
feet (55').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
ARTICLE E. S3M SHORELINE RESORT MIXED USE DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8E-1: Intent
12-8E-2: Permitted Uses
12-8E-3: Conditional Uses
12-8E-4: Standards
12-8E-1: INTENT:
The intent of the S3M Shoreline Resort Mixed Use Zone District is to provide a
mixed use area for resort development that includes both short term lodging as
well as residences at a more intensive density. Development may also include
limited tourist oriented commercial establishments and resort amenities. The
design character of the area is that of a coastal resort, drawing on the
natural setting of the dunes while protecting, preserving and enhancing
significant environmental features. The S3M District is primarily intended for
properties in the north urban growth area that may be annexed into the City in
the future. The S3M Shoreline Resort Mixed Use District partially implements
the RES resort and rural resort land use designations of the Long Beach
comprehensive plan and the rural resort environment of the shoreline master
program. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-8E-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Itinerant lodging, twenty five (25) or fewer lodging units.
Multi-family dwellings, including condominiums, twenty five (25) or fewer
dwelling units.
Vacation rentals.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Clubhouses.
Eating and/or drinking establishments, excluding drive- through facilities,
complementary to the principal use.
Laundry, maintenance shop, storage and other support functions associated with
the principal use.
Outdoor merchandising, vending and dining, two hundred (200) square feet or
less, when such use is associated with a business operating out of an adjacent
building.
Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the property.
Personal services, such as beauty salons and day spas, complementary to the
principal use.
Property management offices.
Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities, complementary to the principal
use.
Small retail shops complementary to the principal use.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title.
Swimming pools, hot tubs, tennis courts and similar facilities for the use of
guests and residents. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-8E-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Governmental or Municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Itinerant lodging, twenty six (26) or more lodging units.
Multi-family dwellings, including condominiums, twenty six (26) or more
dwelling units.
Museums and interpretive facilities.
Outdoor merchandising, vending, and dining greater than two hundred (200)
square feet may be allowed if such activity is associated with a business
operating out of an adjacent building. No businesses shall operate solely in an
open air environment.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Resort/conference complexes. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
12-8E-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size is ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
Construction on lots platted prior to the effective date hereof, with less than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet, may be permitted where approved by the City
Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
      2.   Lot Coverage: No more than seventy five percent (75%) of any lot
shall be covered by structures and/or impermeable surfaces.
      3.   Setbacks: None, except as may be required through design review.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall be forty five
feet (45'), with fifty five feet (55') allowable if parking is placed on the
ground floor.
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions and exterior alterations
shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   G.   Dwelling Unit Minimum Size: The sum of the dwelling units must be at
least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, but each individual unit
cannot be less than four hundred ten (410) square feet. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. P PUBLIC DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-9A-1: Intent
12-9A-2: Permitted Uses
12-9A-3: Conditional Uses
12-9A-4: Standards
12-9A-1: INTENT:
The intent of the P public district is to provide for public and quasi-public
government facilities, and to ensure that there is a compatible relationship
between such uses and the surrounding area. The P public district implements
the P public land use designation of the city of Long Beach comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-9A-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Civic center.
Community center.
Conference center.
Governmental or municipal structures, uses or facilities.
Library.
Museums and interpretive facilities.
Parks, recreational areas and facilities.
Performing arts center.
Public and quasi-public utilities.
Public parking lots.
Quasi-public uses.
Schools.
Special events and festivals.
Theater, public owned. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Concessions.
Offices, maintenance and storage facilities associated with the principal use
of the property.
Parking and loading areas associated with the principal use of the property.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title. Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of
section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-9A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Hospitals.
Transit facilities.
Wireless communication facilities, pursuant to the requirements of section
12-11-17 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-9A-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot size: No minimum.
      2.   Lot coverage: No maximum.
      3.   Setbacks: None, except as may be required through design review.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall be the building
height for the zone district most closely associated with the property, except
the city council, upon recommendation from the planning commission, may grant
additional height, provided an affirmative finding is made that:
      1.   The additional height is necessary for the use of the building; and
      2.   The building design, scale and massing is compatible with the
surrounding area.
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions, and exterior
alterations shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this
title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
ARTICLE B. PR PARKS AND RECREATION DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-9B-1: Intent
12-9B-2: Permitted Uses
12-9B-3: Conditional Uses
12-9B-4: Standards
12-9B-1: INTENT:
The intent of the PR parks and recreation district is to provide for publicly
and privately owned parks, recreational and cultural facilities that serve both
residents and visitors. The PR parks and recreation district partially
implements the PR parks, recreation and open space land use designation of the
city of Long Beach comprehensive plan. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-9B-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Principal uses:
Day use parks.
Museums and interpretive facilities.
Playgrounds.
Public parking.
Public restrooms.
Recreational areas and facilities.
Special events and festivals.
Temporary, mobile open air food or retail establishments operating as
supplements to existing businesses in the OT, OTW, RC, C1, or C2 zones or
associated with a special event, subject to special approval by the city
council.
Trails. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
   B.   Accessory uses and structures:
Concessions.
Offices, maintenance and storage facilities associated with the principal use
of the property.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-9B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Campgrounds, RV parks.
Community center.
Golf courses.
Governmental or municipal structures, uses or facilities not associated with
the principal recreational use of the site (i.e., general offices, maintenance
yards). (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-9B-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot size: No minimum.
      2.   Lot coverage: No maximum.
      3.   Setbacks: None, except as may be required through design review.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall be thirty five feet
(35').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions, and exterior
alterations shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this
title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
ARTICLE C. S4 SHORELINE CONSERVANCY DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-9C-1: Intent
12-9C-2: Permitted Uses
12-9C-3: Standards
12-9C-1: INTENT:
The intent of the S4 shoreline conservancy zone district is to protect the
natural conditions of the city's shoreline area and provide for largely passive
and some active parks, recreational and cultural facilities that serve both
residents and visitors. The shoreline conservancy district is an asset to the
city, providing open space, public access to the beach and view corridors to
the ocean. The S4 shoreline conservancy district implements in part the parks,
recreation and open space land use designation of the Long Beach comprehensive
plan and the conservancy environment of the shoreline master program. (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009)
12-9C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Day use parks.
Interpretive facilities and museums.
Public parking.
Public restrooms.
Small wind generation facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-22 of this title.
Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of section
12-11-21 of this title.
Special events and festivals.
Temporary, mobile open air food or retail establishments operating as
supplements to existing businesses in the OT, OTW, RC, C1, C2, AC, S3, S3R or
S3M zones or associated with a special event, subject to special approval by
the city council.
Trails. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-9C-3: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots:
      1.   Lot size: No minimum.
      2.   Lot coverage: No maximum.
      3.   Setbacks:
         a.   Bolstad Avenue: A building setback of two hundred feet (200')
north and two hundred feet (200') south from the Bolstad Avenue right of way
shall be established to maintain the ocean beach view and open space.
         b.   All other areas: None, except as may be required through design
review.
   B.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall be thirty five feet
(35').
   C.   Signs: As provided in chapter 14, including article A, of this title.
   D.   Parking: As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
   E.   Design Review: All new construction, additions, and exterior
alterations shall be subject to design review as provided in chapter 10 of this
title.
   F.   Landscaping: As provided in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
CHAPTER 10
DESIGN REVIEW CRITERIA
SECTION:
12-10-1: Design Review Concept
12-10-2: Scope
12-10-3: Design Approval Required
12-10-4: Permit Application Procedure
12-10-5: Review Procedure
12-10-6: Design Review Approval; Expiration
12-10-7: Criteria For Approval; Required Findings
12-10-8: Appeal
12-10-1: DESIGN REVIEW CONCEPT:
Pursuant to the goals set forth in the comprehensive plan, a system of design
review shall be established and implemented in accordance with the design
review guidelines hereafter set forth. The following quotation from Justice
Douglas in rendering the opinion of the court concerning the case of Berman v.
Parker, 348.U.S. 26 (1954), captures the spirit and intent of this chapter:
The concept of the public welfare is broad and inclusive. The value it
represents is spiritual as well as physical, aesthetic as well as monetary. It
is well within the power of the legislature to determine that a community
should be beautiful as well as healthy, spacious as well as clean, well
balanced as well as carefully controlled.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-10-2: SCOPE:
   A.   Activities Subject To Design Review: The city shall review all
development subject to design review. For purposes of this chapter,
"development" means any improvement to real property open to exterior view,
including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, fixtures, landscaping,
site screening, fencing, murals, signs, parking lots, lighting, pedestrian
facilities, street furniture, use of open areas (including parks and
recreational facilities), and mobile home and recreational vehicle parks,
whether all or any are publicly or privately sponsored. "Development" also
includes new construction, additions, and any or all exterior remodeling to
existing structures. "Development" does not include underground utilities,
improvements within rights of way, or alterations to buildings that are
exclusively interior. (Ord. 870, 4-4-2011)
   B.   Activities Exempt From Design Review: The following activities shall be
exempt from the requirements of design review:
      1.   Normal maintenance and repair shall be exempt from the requirements
of design review, where there is no change to the exterior appearance of the
structure.
      2.   The replacement of fifty percent (50%) or less of a nonconforming
siding material on any single facade shall be considered maintenance. The
replacement of more than fifty percent (50%) of the exterior siding material on
a single facade shall be considered an alteration and shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter including article A of this chapter.
      3.   Minor adjustments to dimensions such as railing height or stairs,
where necessary to comply with the building code, shall be considered
maintenance, provided the design of the replacement feature is otherwise
identical to the feature being repaired, and the change is no more than
necessary to correct the deficiency.
      4.   In zones R1, R1R, R2, R2R, R3, R3R, S1 and S2 one accessory building
with a gross floor area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less may be
placed on a lot without meeting the requirements of this chapter, including
article A of this chapter, provided the structure is placed in the rear of the
lot behind the principal building. Additional accessory buildings located in
these residential zones, regardless of size and location, shall be subject to
all requirements of this chapter. This exemption does not apply to accessory
structures located in zones OT, OTW, RC, AC, C1, C2, L1, S3, S3R, S3M, P, PR,
or S4. (Ord. 912, 8-3-2015)
12-10-3: DESIGN APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Design Review Required: Design review is required for all development
in the R1R, R2R, R3R, OT, OTW, RC, AC, C1, C2, S1, S2, S3, S3R, S3M, P, PR and
S4 zones. Design review is also required for all development other than
permitted and accessory uses in the R1, R2 and R3 zones. Design review is
required for conditional uses in the L1 zone. No building permit shall be
issued for any development, redevelopment or construction requiring design
review until design approval has been granted.
   B.   Compliance With Approved Design: Development shall be completed in
exact accordance with the design approved by the city. If, after such approval,
a developer wishes to make revisions to the approved plans, those amendments
shall be brought before the city for approval prior to construction. Minor
revisions may be approved by the city administrator, provided such changes are
consistent with the original approval, comply with all design guidelines, and
do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the square footage of the project, according
to the procedures set forth in section
12-10-5 of this chapter. All other revisions shall be considered pursuant to
the same procedure under which the original approval was granted.
   C.   Business Licenses And Certificates Of Occupancy: No business license or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until construction is complete and in
conformance with the design approved by the city. Where occupancy is desired
before the completion of all required improvements, a temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued, provided the requirements of section
10-2-12 of this code have been met.
   D.   Guidebook: The "City Of Long Beach Design Review Guidebook" provides
greater detail for design review applicants, and is incorporated herein by
reference. Where any conflict may exist between this title and the design
review guidebook, this title shall control. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-10-4: PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Submission Of Application: Application for design review shall be made
on forms provided by the city. The city shall also make available to applicants
guidelines to assist in design. All applications shall be submitted to the city
administrator, who shall conduct an initial assessment for completeness and
code compliance before routing the application to the appropriate reviewing
authority.
   B.   Optional Preapplication: The applicant is encouraged to submit plans in
a preliminary draft or sketch form for staff review prior to final review. The
project can then be discussed with the developer and/or architect before
irrevocable decisions have been made and before expensive drawings have been
prepared. The preapplication review does not bind the city in any way, but
rather is offered as a convenience to the applicant. No fee shall be assessed
for any requested preapplication review.
   C.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   All plans submitted shall be drawn to scale, on standard sized
sheets not larger than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"). Site
plans shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch equals twenty feet (1"
= 20'), and building elevations and floor plans shall be drawn at a scale no
smaller than one-eighth inch equals one foot (1/8" = 1'), unless otherwise
approved by the city. If an applicant desires to submit plans on sheets larger
than the permitted size, then eight (8) copies shall be provided with the
application.
      2.   Submitted plans shall include site plans and landscaping plans, and
shall show, in a general manner, the locations of existing and proposed
buildings, parking and driveways, landscaping, fences, trash areas, mechanical
equipment, and site features of abutting properties. Landscape plans shall
generally indicate the location and type of existing and proposed ground cover,
and the location, type and quantity of existing and proposed shrubs and trees.
Exterior lighting plans may also be required.
      3.   Building elevations shall show the size and placement of all
windows, doors, porches, decks and other architectural features, including
trim, and shall indicate the proposed materials and finishes to be used.
      4.   Floor plans showing the general layout and use of the building shall
be provided for all new construction and additions, except for single-family
and two-family construction.
      5.   If alternative building materials are proposed, material samples and
specifications shall be provided with the application.
      6.   Applications for design review shall be accompanied by a fee as
established by resolution of the city council.
      7.   All plans submitted for review of new construction, additions or
alteration of a building over six thousand (6,000) square feet shall be
prepared and stamped by an architect licensed in the state of Washington.
   D.   Other Permit And Review Requirements: If any shoreline substantial
development (SSD) permits or state environmental policy act (SEPA)
environmental review is required for the proposed development, city officials
should caution the developer to secure these approvals prior to submitting a
design review application, to ensure that the project will be allowed as
designed. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
12-10-5: REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Administrative Review: The city administrator shall review and act upon
the following applications:
      1.   Signs.
      2.   Additions equal to no more than twenty percent (20%) of the existing
floor area or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less.
      3.   Residential alterations with no increase in floor area, and
commercial alterations with no increase in floor area and with less than fifty
percent (50%) change in exterior cladding and roofing combined.
      4.   Decks.
      5.   Fences.
      6.   Accessory structures.
      7.   Minor revisions that are consistent with the original approval,
comply with all design guidelines, and do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
square footage of the project, as allowed by subsection 12-10-3B of this
chapter.
   B.   Planning Commission Review: The planning commission shall review and
act upon the following applications, following receipt of a recommendation from
the city administrator:
      1.   Single-family dwellings:
         a.   New construction.
         b.   Additions greater than twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor
area or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less.
      2.   Multi-family developments containing up to four (4) dwelling units:
         a.   New construction.
         b.   Additions greater than twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor
area or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less.
      3.   Commercial development:
         a.   New construction of up to six thousand (6,000) square feet of
floor area.
         b.   Additions greater than twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor
area or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less, resulting in a
building with a gross floor area of not more than six thousand (6,000) square
feet.
         c.   Alterations with fifty percent (50%) or greater change in
exterior cladding and roofing combined.
   C.   City Council Review: The city council shall review and act upon any
design review application not included in subsections A and B of this section.
Prior to its review, the city council shall receive a recommendation from the
city administrator and the planning commission. (Ord. 870, 4-4-2011)
   D.   Action: Action on any design review application may include approval,
approval with modifications, or denial, and shall be made in writing to the
applicant. The reviewing authority may require additional information or
material from the applicant before taking final action.
   E.   Professional Assistance: The approving authority may, at its sole
discretion, determine that the nature of the proposed development requires
outside review by a design professional. The approving authority may retain the
services of a design professional if it determines that such assistance is
necessary to evaluate a design review application. The cost of such assistance
shall be borne by the applicant. No building permit shall be issued for any
development subject to design review until the city has been reimbursed for any
costs associated with outside review.
   F.   Reporting Requirements: The city administrator shall, on a monthly
basis, report to the planning commission on all designs approved under
subsection A of this section, and to the city council on all designs approved
under subsections A and B of this section.
   G.   Exempt Activities: The following activities shall be exempt from the
requirements of design review:
      1.   Normal maintenance and repair shall be exempt from the requirements
of design review, where there is no change to the exterior appearance of the
structure.
      2.   The replacement of fifty percent (50%) or less of a nonconforming
siding material on any single facade shall be considered maintenance. The
replacement of more than fifty percent (50%) of the exterior siding material on
a single facade shall be considered an alteration and shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter, including article A.
      3.   Minor adjustments to dimensions such as railing height or stairs,
where necessary to comply with the building code, shall be considered
maintenance, provided the design of the replacement feature is otherwise
identical to the feature being repaired, and the change is no more than
necessary to correct the deficiency.
      4.   One accessory building with a gross floor area of one hundred twenty
(120) square feet or less may be placed on a lot without meeting the
requirements of this chapter, including article A, provided the structure is
placed in the rear of the lot behind the principal building. Additional
accessory buildings, regardless of size and location, shall be subject to all
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-10-6: DESIGN REVIEW APPROVAL; EXPIRATION:
Approval for design review is valid for one year from date of final approval.
The approving authority may grant one extension of time not to exceed one year,
upon the filing of a timely request for extension by the applicant. No
extension shall be granted if any local zoning or design review regulations
have been amended in a manner that would have an impact upon the proposed
development. A request for extension shall be deemed to be timely filed if it
is received by the city before the expiration date of the final approval. (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009)
12-10-7: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL; REQUIRED FINDINGS:
   A.   Minimum Criteria: City administrator shall review the design for
compliance with respect to lot coverage, setbacks, height, and permitted use.
These are minimum requirements that shall be met before any further review
takes place.
   B.   General Review Criteria:
      1.   The approving authority shall review the detailed architectural
design with respect to materials and surface textures, colors, fenestration
pattern, roof form and pitch, and expression of detailing.
      2.   The reviewing authority shall also review the site design to
determine how the proposed development fits into the existing environment,
judging applications with respect to scale and proportion, orientation of
buildings and other site features to streets and surrounding properties, and
the placement and types of landscaping.
   C.   Specific Review Criteria:
      1.   Siding: Natural wood siding such as board and batten, clapboard,
shiplap and wood shingles is encouraged, depending on the zone district in
which the property is located. Metal, stone, and brick siding may be allowed as
accent materials in zones where it is not prohibited. However, it is the intent
of this title to use metal and masonry as an accent in combination with other
siding materials and not to use either as the exclusive siding material, as
structures constructed exclusively with metal or masonry do not meet the intent
of the early seashore or contemporary seashore architectural theme required in
certain zones.
      2.   Roofing Materials: Composite roofing is permitted and encouraged.
Metal roofing is also allowed. Membrane roofs may be permitted in commercial
applications, provided it is screened from view from the front. Also permitted
in some zones are wood shingle and tile roofs.
      3.   Windows: Wood sash windows are preferred. Vinyl or clad windows are
acceptable with an exterior wooden trim. Operable wooden storm shutters are
also acceptable.
      4.   Doors: Wood or simulated wood doors are preferred.
      5.   Fences: Decorative wooden fences are preferred. Chain-link, split
rail wood fences and wood framed hog wire fences are not permitted in the R1R,
R2R, R3R, S1, S2, S3, S3R or S3M zones.
      6.   Fenestration Pattern: The arrangement of windows on a building
facade should be used to avoid the creation of large, blank wall spaces,
especially on street facades.
      7.   Roof Form And Pitch: This criteria involves the shape, form and
pitch of the roof, and the placement of dormers, eaves, and gables. A variety
of forms, within the prescribed limitations of the roof pitch requirements of
the zone in which the building is located, are encouraged.
      8.   Expression Of Detailing: The use of architectural detailing such as
gingerbread, trim work and ornate fixtures is encouraged when incorporated with
appropriate architectural styles.
      9.   Scale And Proportion: The size and shape of a structure or group of
structures should be consistent with the scale of surrounding properties.
      10.   Orientation: Residential buildings shall be oriented toward the
street. Nonresidential buildings shall be oriented toward the street, unless an
arcade or courtyard is used to address the public realm and present variety in
architectural styling.
      11.   Landscaping: The type, placement, and arrangement of landscape and
landscape features is an essential element in the integration of a project with
its surrounding area. Landscaping with plant materials suited to the coastal
setting is required where indicated, and shall be provided in all projects. The
use of rock, bark and other nonplant materials as mulch shall be limited.
      12.   Site Design: The integration of the proposed development with
abutting properties will be considered. The extent to which the massing of
structures is mitigated by landscaping or other techniques will also be
considered. Site designs that create vehicular turning movement conflicts are
prohibited. Site designs for nonresidential projects that share parking or
other amenities with neighboring properties are strongly encouraged.
      13.   Signs: Signs attached to a building shall be incorporated into the
building design. Freestanding signs shall be of a size, shape, and color that
complements the building design.
   D.   Clustering:
      1.   Mandatory Clustering: Depending upon site specific conditions, the
reviewing entity may require that dwelling units be clustered on a portion of a
site in order to protect natural resources, to accommodate trails identified in
the comprehensive plan, to preserve scenic vistas, or to create buffers between
uses.
      Where allowed by state law, and to achieve the goals stated above, the
reviewing entity may, but is not required to, allow up to a twenty percent
(20%) reduction in lot size and setback requirements for the zoning district,
in order to facilitate clustering of the permitted number of dwelling units on
the site. The required clustering shall not result in fewer lots than would
otherwise be permitted on the site, without written agreement by the applicant.
The required clustering shall not result in more lots or more dwelling units
than would otherwise be permitted on the site.
      2.   Optional Clustering: Applicants for residential projects may request
up to twenty percent (20%) reduction in lot sizes, dimensions, and building
setback requirements in order to cluster housing and retain land in order to
protect natural resources, to accommodate trails identified in the
comprehensive plan, to preserve scenic vistas, or to create buffers between
uses, or otherwise make land available for public or private open space.
      The reviewing entity may, but is not required to, grant such requests if
it determines the requested clustering is allowed under state law and the
development would achieve the goals described above for clustering and would
not have a significant adverse impact on surrounding land uses. The optional
clustering shall not result in more lots or more dwelling units than would
otherwise be permitted on the site.
   E.   Required Findings: The approving authority shall make the following
findings before approval of any proposed development:
      1.   Comprehensive Plan Compliance: That the proposal complies with the
comprehensive plan and other adopted city policies.
      2.   Zoning Regulations Compliance: That the proposal meets the
requirements of the zoning regulations.
      3.   Design Review Compliance: That the proposal as approved or
conditionally approved satisfies the criteria and purposes of this chapter,
including article A of this chapter.
      4.   Design Review Guidebook Consistency: That the proposal is consistent
with the “City Of Long Beach Design Review Guidebook”. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009;
amd. Ord. 870, 4-4-2011; Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
12-10-8: APPEAL:
The decision of the approving authority shall be final unless, within fourteen
(14) days from the rendering of the decision, the applicant or any other party
withstanding files an appeal. Appeals of any administrative or planning
commission decision shall be made to the hearing examiner and shall be an open
record hearing. Appeals of any hearing examiner decision shall be made to
Pacific County superior court. Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be
conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 
12-3-4 of this title and section
11-2C-14 of this code. The filing of such an appeal within said time limit
shall stay the decision of the city until such time as the appeal has been
adjudicated or withdrawn. (Ord. 912, 8-3-2015)
ARTICLE A. SPECIFIC DESIGN CRITERIA BY DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-10A-1: OT, OTW, RC, AC, S3, S3R, S3M, C1 And C2 Districts
12-10A-2: R1R District
12-10A-3: S1, S2, R2R And R3R Districts
12-10A-4: P, PR And S4 Districts
12-10A-5: Design Review In Other Zones
12-10A-6: Use Of Alternative Building Materials
12-10A-7: Historic Buildings
12-10A-1: OT, OTW, RC, AC, S3, S3R, S3M, C1 AND C2 DISTRICTS:
   A.   Intent:
      1.   Generally: These zones have a mandatory architectural style that is
referred to as the "early seashore theme". The intent of these zones is to
create an early twentieth century seashore atmosphere, provide an attractive
compact retail core to stimulate foot traffic, and to promote tourism. Common
architectural details include false fronts, marquees, cedar shingles and ornate
seashore detailing. A diversity of building fronts is to be encouraged, and
simple replication is to be discouraged.
   B.   Design Requirements: The following design features are required:
      1.   Roofs: A roof pitch of five to twelve (5:12) or greater is required.
The approving authority may allow a more shallow pitch or a flat roof on
commercial or mixed use buildings where the pitch of the roof is concealed from
the primary street frontage by a false front that extends across at least fifty
percent (50%) of the width of the building's street frontage. Shallower roof
pitches on projecting features such as bays and porches may be permitted where
the form of the elements is complementary to the overall form and character of
the building. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
      2.   Wood Siding: A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the building's
total exterior siding exposure shall be cedar shingle, lap or clapboard siding
with an exposure not to exceed eight inches (8"), or cedar shake with a maximum
reveal of fourteen inches (14"). Board and batten siding may also be used. The
use of glass for window displays is encouraged, and shall be counted toward the
wood siding requirement. Cement board siding that is similar in appearance to
permitted siding materials shall be allowed. Other construction methods,
including sheet siding without bats, are prohibited. (Ord. 870, 4-4-2011)
      3.   Other Materials: If used, not more than twenty percent (20%) of the
building's total exterior siding exposure may be materials other than those
listed in subsection B2 of this section. Materials that may be used include
masonry (stone, brick or split faced block), sheet or corrugated metal, or
other styles of wood siding. Sheet siding shall not be used, except when
battens are applied. Materials should be used as accents to highlight the form
and architectural details of the building. Cement board siding that is similar
in appearance to permitted accent materials shall be allowed.
      4.   Finishes: Natural, painted or stained finishes are permitted. Muted
natural or neutral colors are required in shoreline areas.
      5.   Trim: Trim should be provided around all windows, doors and to
accent the architecture of the building. Trim should be painted in a
contrasting color, but may be left unfinished if the exterior siding material
is also unfinished.
      6.   Roof Ridge: One vertical change in elevation of a minimum of three
feet (3') shall occur in every fifty foot (50') run of roof. As an alternative,
one or more of the following may be applied:
         a.   The use of dormers may be proposed as an alternative to a three
foot (3') change in elevation. If dormers are used, there shall be not less
than two (2) dormers per fifty feet (50') of roof run, and each dormer must
span at least eighty percent (80%) of the roof face from ridge to eaves.
         b.   A cross gable may be used as an alternative to a three foot (3')
change in elevation. There shall be at least one cross gable for each fifty
feet (50') of roof run. The face of the cross gable must be in the same plane
as the building facade and the ridge of the cross gable shall be no more than
two feet (2') below the primary ridge.
         c.   The use of cupolas may be proposed as an alternative to a three
foot (3') change in elevation. If cupolas are used, there must be at least one
cupola per fifty feet (50') of roof run or fraction in excess of fifty feet
(50'). Cupolas shall be sized proportional to the building by being not less
than one foot (1') in height per ten feet (10') of roof run. The height of
cupolas shall also comply with the requirements of section
12-10-3 of this chapter.
      7.   False Fronts: For buildings in the OT, OTW and C1 zones, false
fronts are permitted on buildings fronting SR 103 (Pacific Avenue) and Ocean
Beach Boulevard. False fronts used to conceal a roof pitch less than five to
twelve (5:12) shall extend at least fifty percent (50%) of the width of the
building's frontage.
      8.   Facades:
         a.   For buildings in the OT and OTW zones with frontage on Pacific
Avenue or Ocean Beach Boulevard, at least fifty percent (50%) of each twenty
five (25) linear feet segment of the first floor building facade shall be glass
doors or windows designed to accommodate window displays. Bay or bow windows
are permitted, but may not extend into the right of way at the first floor.
         b.   For buildings in the C1 zone with frontage on Pacific Avenue,
windows, porches or other features that provide visual interest and scale are
encouraged. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
         c.   For buildings in the RC zone with frontage on Pacific Avenue,
covered or wrap porches are required on residential buildings and porches, bays
and other residential style features are encouraged on all structures. Porches
shall not be screened.
      9.   Screening: Trash receptacles and ground placed HVAC units shall be
screened from public view by landscaping, fencing, or other appropriate method.
HVAC and exhaust units placed on flat roofs may be screened by a false front.
HVAC and exhaust units placed on a roof of a five to twelve (5:12) or steeper
pitch are not required to be screened. (Ord. 870, 4-4-2011)
      10.   Parking: For buildings in the OT zone with frontage on Pacific
Avenue or Ocean Beach Boulevard, parking shall not be placed between the
building and the street. In all zones, it is preferred that parking be placed
on the side or to the rear of the building.
      11.   Landscaping:
         a.   Landscaping shall be used where necessary to mitigate the height,
bulk, or scale of buildings.
         b.   Landscaping or landscaped berms shall be used to partially screen
parking areas from view from adjacent streets or building occupants.
Landscaping shall also be used to screen commercial uses from the view of
adjacent residences.
         c.   Any building not built to the street line shall provide
landscaping between the building and the street. Hardscape areas such as patios
may be a part of the landscaping, provided planters are included in the design
and the space is designed as an outdoor amenity.
         d.   Plant materials shall include grasses, shrubs, trees and other
plant materials appropriate to the coastal setting. Along Pacific Avenue and
Ocean Beach Boulevard, landscaping should be used to provide visual interest
for pedestrians. In the shoreline areas, plants shall complement the natural
dune setting.
      12.   Building Width: The minimum width for any residential building
shall be not less than fourteen feet (14').
      13.   Orientation: The front door of any residential building shall face
the street. The primary entrance of a commercial building shall be clearly
visible from the street.
      14.   In S3 And S3R Zones Only: In the S3 and S3R zones only, balconies
shall be required as an architectural feature on the face of any building
directly facing the Pacific Ocean.
      15.   In C2 Zone Only: For commercial property completely surrounded by
noncommercial districts and uses, design review requirements shall be
compatible with those of the surrounding districts. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
      16.   In C1 Zone Only: Single-family dwelling units shall be designed and
sited to accommodate their future conversion to nonresidential use. (Ord. 891,
4-13-2013)
      17.   In RC Zone Only: Buildings shall be primarily residential in
character but designed to facilitate conversion between residential and
commercial uses.
      18.   Marquees And Canopies: For buildings in the OT and OTW zones
fronting on Pacific Avenue or Ocean Beach Boulevard, especially within the
downtown core, marquees, canopies, awnings and similar features are encouraged
that will project out over the pedestrianway and provide shelter from the
elements, to encourage pedestrian traffic. Such features shall be incorporated
into the overall design of the building.
      19.   In OT, RC, C1 And C2 Zones Only: Wireless communication facilities
(WCF) shall be designed pursuant to the requirements of subsection 12-11-17E of
this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
      20.   Tents: In the OT, OTW, RC, AC, S3, S3R, and S3M districts, tents
may be used to protect the allowed accessory two hundred (200) square feet of
outdoor merchandising, vending, dining and (in OT only) amusements. Any tent
must be adequately secured so as not to cause harm to persons, animals, or
property. Tents shall be erected only for the duration of regular business
hours, and must be taken down during nonbusiness hours. Tents may be a bright
solid or white in color, and may fly a pennant. Tents are considered an
accessory structure and their design and location are subject to administrative
design review pursuant to subsection 12-10-5A6 of this chapter. Each additional
tent to a site is subject to design review. (Ord. 899, 6-16-2014)
12-10A-2: R1R DISTRICT:
   A.   Intent:
      1.   Generally: The intent of the R1R district is to preserve, enhance,
and contribute to an existing architectural design currently present in the
older homes.
      2.   Architecture: The predominant architectural styles permitted are:
         a.   Beach cottage: Typically small, single-story houses with a front
porch, a gable end facing the street, dormers, and shingle siding.
         b.   Victorian beach house: The general characteristics are simple
one- or two-story, vertically oriented homes with a steep gable roof,
overhanging eaves, weathered shingle siding and a covered front porch.
         c.   Craftsman: These homes are typically one story with pitched,
broad gables. A lower gable usually covers a porch, and a large gable covers
the main portion of the house. Wood shingles or wood board and batten are the
favored exterior finish. Exposed structural members and trim work are usually
painted, with shingles left in a natural state or painted an earth tone stain.
   B.   Design Requirements In R1R District:
      1.   Roofs: Pitched roofs are required, with a minimum roof pitch of five
to twelve (5:12). Materials shall be wood shingle, composition or metal.
Shallower roof pitches on projecting features such as bays and porches may be
permitted where the form of the elements is complementary to the overall form
and character of the building.
      2.   Porches: Covered front porches or wraparound porches are required.
Porches on the front of the house, facing the street, shall not be enclosed
with screens. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
      3.   Wood Siding: A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the building's
total exterior siding exposure shall be cedar shingle, lap or clapboard siding
with an exposure not to exceed eight inches (8"), or cedar shake with a maximum
reveal of fourteen inches (14"). Board and batten siding may also be used. The
use of glass for window displays is encouraged, and shall be counted toward the
wood siding requirement. Cement board siding that is similar in appearance to
permitted siding materials shall be allowed. Other construction methods,
including sheet siding, are prohibited. (Ord. 870, 4-4-2011)
      4.   Foundations: Permanent foundations are required. Not more than
thirty six inches (36") of the foundation may be shown above ground level.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
      5.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall be designed to
complement the principal building(s) in form, detail, color, and material.
Garages, whether attached or detached, shall be proportional to the house, be
auxiliary to the principal structure, and shall not extend beyond the front
face of the structure by more than ten feet (10'). Where available, direct
access from a garage to a side street or an alley is required. Sheds and other
detached accessory buildings shall be located in the rear or side yard, and
shall not extend beyond any side of the house facing a street. (Ord. 870, 4-4-
2011)
      6.   Orientation: The front door shall face the street.
      7.   Building Width: The minimum width of any principal building shall be
not less than fourteen feet (14').
      8.   Landscaping: Sites shall be planted with grasses, shrubs, trees and
other plantings that are suited to a coastal cottage setting. The use of gravel
and hard surfaces should be limited to driveways, walkways and patios. Use of
rock, gravel or bark as a landscape finish should be limited. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
12-10A-3: S1, S2, R2R AND R3R DISTRICTS:
   A.   Intent:
      1.   Generally: The intent of these districts is to preserve, enhance,
and contribute to an existing architectural design currently present in the
older homes. A-frame, ranch, Tudor, log homes, Romanesque, Mediterranean villa,
exotic, Spanish, and contemporary are prohibited architectural styles.
      2.   Architecture: The predominant architectural styles permitted are as
indicated in subsection 12-10A-2A2 of this article.
   B.   Design Requirements In S1, S2, R2R And R3R Districts:
      1.   Roofs: Pitched roofs of not less than five to twelve (5:12) are
required. Materials shall be wood shingle, composition or metal. Shallower roof
pitches on projecting features such as bays and porches may be permitted where
the form of the elements is complementary to the overall form and character of
the building.
      2.   Porches: Covered front porches or wraparound porches are required.
Porches on the front of the house, facing the street, shall not be enclosed
with screens. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
      3.   Wood Siding: A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the building's
total exterior siding exposure shall be cedar shingle, lap or clapboard siding
with an exposure not to exceed eight inches (8"), or cedar shake with a maximum
reveal of fourteen inches (14"). Board and batten siding may also be used. The
use of glass for window displays is encouraged, and shall be counted toward the
wood siding requirement. Cement board siding that is similar in appearance to
permitted siding materials shall be allowed. Other construction methods,
including sheet siding, are prohibited. (Ord. 870, 4-4-2011)
      4.   Foundations: Permanent foundations are required. Not more than
thirty six inches (36") of the foundation may be shown above ground level.
      5.   Garages, whether attached or detached, shall be proportional to the
house, be auxiliary to the principal structure, and shall not extend beyond the
front face of the structure by more than ten feet (10'). Where available,
direct access from a garage to a side street or an alley is required. Sheds and
other detached accessory buildings shall be located in the rear or side yard,
and shall not extend beyond any side of the house facing a street.
      7.   Orientation: The front door shall face the street.
      8.   Building Width: The minimum width of any principal building shall be
not less than fourteen feet (14').
      9.   Landscaping: Sites shall be planted with grasses, shrubs, trees and
other plantings that are suited to the natural dune setting. The use of gravel
and hard surfaces should be limited to driveways, walkways and patios. Use of
rock, gravel or bark as a landscape finish should be limited. Drainage swales
and catchments should be incorporated into the overall landscape design. (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 870, 4-4-2011; Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
12-10A-4: P, PR AND S4 DISTRICTS:
   A.   Intent: Generally, the intent of these districts is to provide for
public uses and activities. Architectural styles should be those most
associated with the area surrounding the property. To accommodate the specific
needs of public uses, some flexibility in design standards may be necessary.
There should be greater design latitude for properties not adjacent to any zone
in which design review is required. For facilities in natural areas, structures
should blend with the natural setting of the dunes.
   B.   Design Requirements In P, PR And S4 Districts:
      1.   Roofs: Pitched roofs of not less than five to twelve (5:12) are
required, unless it is determined by the reviewing authority that such a roof
pitch would not be compatible with the function or location of the building or
structure. For properties most closely associated with the OT or OTW zones and
fronting on Pacific Avenue or Ocean Beach Boulevard, flat roofs concealed by
false fronts may be used.
      2.   Siding: The siding material shall be one that is allowed in the zone
district most closely associated with the property. Cedar shingle, board and
batten, lap or clapboard siding is preferred. Cement board siding that is
similar in appearance to permitted siding materials shall be allowed. Other
materials, including masonry (stone, brick or split faced block), sheet or
corrugated metal, or other styles of wood siding may be considered.
         a.   In the S4 zone, only cedar shingle siding shall be permitted. No
other siding materials are permitted. Alternate materials may be allowed for
trim, decking and other features, where appropriate.
      3.   Finishes: Natural, painted or stained finishes are permitted.
      4.   Building Form And Scale: Building forms and features are encouraged
that will be compatible with surrounding neighborhoods, help to break up the
mass of buildings, and provide scale to pedestrians. Where appropriate,
features such as canopies or porches should be used at entrances. Long walls
should have offsets or use elements such as bays and porches, especially on
street facades. Roofs should have changes in height or projecting features such
as cross gables, dormers, cupolas.
      5.   Screening: Trash receptacles and ground placed HVAC units shall be
screened from public view by landscaping, fencing, or other appropriate method.
      6.   Parking: For buildings with frontage on Pacific Avenue or Ocean
Beach Boulevard, it is preferred that parking not be placed between the
building and the street and that it be placed on the side or to the rear of the
building. Nothing in this section shall preclude the construction of public
parking lots.
      7.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall be used where necessary to mitigate
the height, bulk, or scale of buildings, and to provide screening of parking
and other activities.
         a.   In the S4 zone, all landscaping shall be compatible with the
natural dune setting.
      8.   Street Furniture: The use of street furniture that will enhance the
use of the facility is encouraged, where appropriate.
      9.   Wireless Communication Facilities: Wireless communication facilities
(WCF) shall be designed pursuant to the requirements of subsection
12-11-17E of this title.
      10.   Tents For Public Purposes: Tents may be used by the city or
nonprofits (as allowed by the city) for a public purpose to enhance a public
activity, including, but not limited to, festivals, events, Summerfest, and the
farmers’ market. Placement of a tent for public purposes must occur with the
concurrence of either the city administrator, a city department head, or the
city’s events coordinator. Existing tents of any style may be used. Public
tents shall be a bright solid or white in color. Replacement tents are subject
to administrative design review pursuant to subsection 12-10-5A6 of this
chapter, which should be conducted prior to their acquisition. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009; amd. Ord. 870, 4-4-2011; Ord. 899, 6-16-2014; Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
12-10A-5: DESIGN REVIEW IN OTHER ZONES:
Where design review is required in zones not otherwise enumerated in this
article, the design review criteria for the zone district most similar to the
zone district in which the project is located, or that criteria most suited for
the architectural form and character of the use, shall be used.
   A.   Public Uses: For governmental or municipal structures, uses or
facilities, public parking lots, and parks, recreation areas and facilities
located in zones other than P, PR and S4, the design criteria for the P, PR and
S4 zones, listed in section
12-10A-4 of this article may be used.
   B.   L1 Light Industrial Zone: For properties in the L1 zone, the emphasis
shall be on screening of the use, including outdoor storage, and reducing
impacts from noise, lighting, vehicles and other aspects of the use. (Ord. 849,
8-17-2009)
12-10A-6: USE OF ALTERNATIVE BUILDING MATERIALS:
   A.   Fiber Cement Materials: Notwithstanding the requirements set forth
herein for the use of wood products, the use of fiber cement based materials in
lieu of wood is permitted in all zones for all applications, unless
specifically excluded. The fiber cement material shall match the appearance,
including design, shape and dimensions, of the permitted wood product.
   B.   Alternate Materials: The approving authority may authorize the use of
alternate materials such as plastic composite, PVC or similar materials for
trim if all of these requirements are met:
      1.   The product has a woodlike treatment or finish, such as an embossed
wood grain or a shape that mimics a natural wood product.
      2.   The applicant provides appropriate documentation attesting to the
long term durability of the product.
      3.   The product is consistent in size and shape to the wood product it
proposes to replace.
   C.   Prohibited Materials: Where design review is required, vinyl siding,
aluminum siding, and similar materials shall not be used. Sheet siding shall
not be used except where battens are applied. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to limit the use of such materials in zones where design review is
not required. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-10A-7: HISTORIC BUILDINGS:
Where substantiated by photographs, physical evidence or other historical
documentation, the reviewing authority may approve alterations and additions to
historic buildings that are not otherwise permitted by this chapter. A building
is typically considered historic if it is more than fifty (50) years of age, is
architecturally or aesthetically important, or has cultural significance. The
intent shall be to preserve the historic appearance of the building, or restore
it to its original historic appearance. The intent shall not be to permit
buildings that do not comply with design requirements and that have no
historic, cultural or aesthetic value to the city. There shall be a
demonstrated effort to preserve, restore or rehabilitate the entire building,
such that the project generally meets the "secretary of the interior's
standards for the treatment of historic properties", which may be used by the
reviewing authority as alternate design guidelines where appropriate. (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 11
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-11-1: Home Occupations
12-11-2: Bed And Breakfast Operations
12-11-3: Projections From Buildings
12-11-4: Location Of Accessory Structures
12-11-5: Recreational Vehicles And Equipment, Camping
12-11-6: Manufactured Homes
12-11-7: Parking And Storage Of Certain Vehicles
12-11-8: Fences
12-11-9: Short Term Vacation Rentals
12-11-10: Lot Filling And Modification
12-11-11: Underground Utilities
12-11-12: Outdoor Merchandising, Vending And Dining
12-11-13: Use Of Sidewalk Or Public Way
12-11-14: Special Use Permit
12-11-15: Illumination
12-11-16: Uses Not Compatible With Sexually Oriented Businesses
12-11-17: Wireless Communication Facilities
12-11-18: Affordable Housing
12-11-19: Recreational Vehicle Parks; Requirements
12-11-20: Manufactured Home Parks
12-11-21: Solar Energy Facilities
12-11-22: Small Wind Generation Facilities
12-11-23: Essential Public Facilities
12-11-24: Special Event Permits
12-11-1: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A home occupation may be conducted in a portion of a dwelling or accessory
structure, where allowed as an accessory use; provided, that:
   A.   The area used for the home occupation does not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the living area of the dwelling, or if located in an accessory
structure, does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. The home occupation
shall not be located in both the dwelling and an accessory structure. No home
occupation shall be conducted outside of a building.
   B.   No person other than members of the family residing on the premises
shall be engaged in such occupation.
   C.   The use of the dwelling unit or accessory structure for the home
occupation shall be clearly subordinate to the use of the principal dwelling
unit for residential purposes by its occupants.
   D.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation
other than one sign, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area,
nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building, as
allowed by chapter 14 of this title.
   E.   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met
off the street.
   F.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used that creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or
cause fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
   G.   No retail sales shall be conducted on the premises, unless such sales
are clearly secondary to the home occupation (such as a hairdresser selling
shampoo) or involve craft products produced on site.
   H.   For the purposes of this title, vacation rentals and bed and breakfasts
are not home occupations.
   I.   Businesses conducted in dwellings located in the OT, OTW, RC or C1 Zone
shall not be subject to the limitations on home occupations set forth herein
and shall be considered "live-work", as permitted by the underlying zone
district. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-2: BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATIONS:
The following minimum conditions shall apply to bed and breakfast operations:
   A.   Generally: Bed and breakfast facilities shall meet all applicable
Health, Fire, Safety, and Building Codes and shall be operated so as to not
give the appearance of being a business, and those facilities shall not
infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to peaceful occupancy of their
homes.
   B.   Specific Conditions:
      1.   The bed and breakfast facility premises shall be the principal
residence of the owner or the manager.
      2.   One nonilluminated sign not to exceed three (3) square feet shall be
permitted in the R2, R2R, R3, R3R, S1 and S2 zones, subject to the provisions
of chapter 14 of this title. Signage in all other zones shall be subject to the
provisions of chapter 14 of this title.
      3.   Driveways accessing a bed and breakfast that are greater than one
hundred feet (100') in length shall have an improved width of at least twelve
feet (12') with appropriately spaced cutouts to facilitate the passage of two
(2) vehicles traveling in opposite directions.
      4.   One off street patron parking space shall be provided for each
guestroom rented in addition to two (2) spaces required for the residence.
      5.   Other conditions may be imposed such as additional parking, improved
access, landscaping, or screening, if found necessary to protect the best
interests of the surrounding properties or the neighborhood due to the nature
or character of the facility's site.
      6.   Meals shall be provided to guests only. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
      7.   There shall be no more than fifteen (15) guestrooms in a bed and
breakfast facility. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-11-3: PROJECTIONS FROM BUILDINGS:
   A.   Cornices, eaves, gutters, sunshades, and other similar architectural
features may not project more than two feet (2') into a required setback.
   B.   Cupolas, domes and observation towers may exceed the maximum allowable
building height by twenty percent (20%).
   C.   The following types of structures or structural parts are not subject
to the building height limitations of this title: belfries, chimneys, church
steeples, elevator shafts, flagpoles, monuments, and other similar projections.
The height of such features may be limited through design review, where
applicable. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-4: LOCATION OF ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
No accessory buildings shall be located between the principal building and the
principal bordering street. All personal pet containment areas such as private
kennels, dog runs, etc., shall only be located in a rear yard. Sheds may be
located in a rear yard or side yard. (Ord. 870, 4-4-2011)
12-11-5: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT, CAMPING:
   A.   Parking And Storage: For purposes of these regulations, "major
recreational equipment" is defined as including boats and boat trailers,
recreational vehicles (RVs) and the like, and cases or boxes used for
transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not.
All such equipment shall be stored in rear yards away from street side view or
along the side yards. No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored
on any lot except in a carport or enclosed building or behind the nearest
portion of a building to a street; provided, however, that such equipment may
be parked anywhere on residential premises for periods not to exceed twenty
four (24) hours during loading or unloading. Recreational vehicles that are
parked or stored within view of the street or on a vacant lot shall be
considered occupied, for purposes of subsection B of this section. No major
recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any street or way, whether
public or private. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
   B.   Camping And Use Of RVs: No person shall park and occupy a recreational
vehicle (RV) nor shall camp, except:
      1.   At a duly licensed RV park or campground.
      2.   As a guest of a resident, and then only upon private property, and
for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) continuous days, or thirty (30) days
total in a calendar year.
      3.   On private property by the owner for his own use, but not to exceed
sixty (60) days in a calendar year. An RV stored on an otherwise vacant lot
shall be considered occupied for purposes of this section. An RV connected to
water and/or sewer shall also be considered occupied.
      4.   No more than two (2) RVs may be used on a lot that is not an RV
park. Such RVs may be placed upon a lot for not more than sixty (60) days'
total use per year. Each day of use of each RV shall be counted as a day of
use. Parking and use of more than two (2) RVs on a lot may be permitted by the
City Council upon an application to the City Council for a special use permit.
      5.   Occupancy of a trailer or other recreational equipment not designed
to be temporary living accommodations is not permitted. Occupancy of a boat
regardless of whether such vessel contains living accommodations is not
permitted.
      6.   Occupancy of an RV as a manager's unit shall only be permitted in a
licensed RV park or campground.
      7.   Parking of all vehicles at a site, including one or more RVs must
comport to the requirements of chapter 12 of this title.
   C.   Camping On Public Property Prohibited: It is unlawful and an infraction
for any person to camp on any City owned or City controlled property, any
public park, or any public right-of- way. (Ord. 912, 8-3-2015)
12-11-6: MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Manufactured homes may be constructed in any district in which a residential
use is allowed, provided the development is consistent with all use and
development standards of the zone in which the property is located, including
design review where applicable. Manufactured homes shall also be consistent
with the requirements of title 10, chapter 3 of this Code. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
12-11-7: PARKING AND STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES:
Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license
plates shall not be parked or stored on any property other than in a completely
enclosed building. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-8: FENCES:
A fence shall be permitted as an accessory use in all zones.
   A.   Fence Location: Fences shall be placed on the property of the owner of
the fence.
   B.   Fence Height: In order to achieve an open appearance, avoid visually
"fencing in" properties, and achieve vehicle safety by keeping the vision
triangle obstacle free, the following shall apply:
      1.   Any fence shall not exceed forty two inches (42") in height,
excluding gates, when:
         a.   The fence is located in front of the street facing side of the
house, and is parallel to that street; or
         b.   The fence is located along a driveway, and is perpendicular to
and within the first ten feet (10') from its intersection with a street; or
         c.   The fence is located within the first twenty feet (20') from a
street to street intersection.
      2.   All other fences may be seventy two inches (72") in height.
      3.   Fences that do not meet the above requirements may be higher than
allowed under this section when permitted by the Community Development Director
through design review, if the applicant demonstrates the design accomplishes
the goals of the City's design guidelines and the vision clearance triangle is
not encumbered by the fence. (Ord. 942, 8-21-2017)
   Maximum Fence Height, Corner Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cb2b2a551d24f71b8ca6467b5f7c336616c9664f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1949.gif]
 
   Maximum Fence Height, Noncorner Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cb2b2a551d24f71b8ca6467b5f7c336616c9664f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1951.gif]
 
(Ord. 870, 4-4-2011)
   C.   Design Review Application: All fencing requires a design review
application to be submitted to the Community Development Director along with a
ten dollar ($10.00) fee. (Ord. 942, 8-21-2017)
12-11-9: SHORT TERM VACATION RENTALS:
   A.   Vacation rentals are permitted as specified for each of the different
land use districts, subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Density: Within the R2R and S2 zoning districts, vacation rentals
must have a distance of greater than or equal to two hundred feet (200'), as
measured from all property lines belonging to another permitted vacation
rental. Special conditions or circumstances cannot be applied to allow relief
from the two hundred foot (200') setback standard through a variance process.
      2.   Residential Structure: On any residentially zoned properties
containing both a residential dwelling and an accessory residential dwelling,
only one (1) residential structure may be licensed as a vacation rental, but
not both.
   B.   Regulations Below Apply To All Vacation Rentals:
      1.   Occupancy Limits: No more than two (2) overnight occupants per
bedroom, plus two (2) additional overnight occupants, shall be accommodated at
any one time, e.g., a one (1) bedroom dwelling would be allowed four (4)
overnight occupants while a two (2) bedroom dwelling would be allowed six (6)
total overnight occupants. The total number of overnight occupants temporarily
residing in a vacation rental shall not exceed ten (10) at any one time and
includes all occupants over the age of two (2). The maximum number of overnight
occupants cannot be advertised to exceed the permitted occupancy. Overnight
occupancy limits cannot be increased by mitigation through a conditional use
process.
      2.   Parking: The vacation rental shall have one (1) off-street parking
space per each bedroom unit with a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces
required.
      3.   Operation And Maintenance (O&M) Inspection: A satisfactory
completion of an O&M inspection must be submitted prior to the initial vacation
rental permit being issued, and each year thereafter, or more frequently as
determined by the city. The approved vacation rental permit/license will be
issued after the completion of the approved final inspection.
      4.   Property Management Plan: A property management plan demonstrating
how the vacation rental will be managed and how impacts to neighboring
properties will be minimized shall be submitted for review and approval as part
of the permitting and licensing process. The property management plan shall
include:
         a.   Property owner and property manager's name and phone number;
         b.   Local point of contact, name and phone number, who is responsible
for responding immediately to complaints, i.e., clean up garbage, manage unruly
tenants, etc.;
         c.   Statement regarding how garbage removal is to be conducted;
         d.   The "land line" phone number to the vacation rental;
         e.   Statement identifying emergency procedures the occupants are to
follow in case of an emergency; and
         f.   Identification and location of parking spaces available; and how
the parking standards are to be met.
The approved property management plan shall be mailed to all adjoining property
owners within three hundred feet (300') as a condition of license approval and
shall be prominently and permanently displayed inside the unit near the front
entrance of the vacation rental, along with the vacation rental license.
Revisions to the approved property management plan and/or local point of
contact will require review and approval. Once approved, the property owner
shall mail the approved revised property management plan to all adjoining
property owners within three hundred feet (300'). The revised license will be
issued after receipt of the completed affidavit of mailing.
      5.   Fire And Life Safety Inspection: Satisfactory completion of a life/
safety inspection, performed by the City of Long Beach, prior to the issuance
of the initial vacation rental permit; and shall be required every year after
to ensure fire and life safety requirements are maintained.
      6.   Floor Plans: Accurate to scale floor plans are required for all new
and existing vacation rentals to ensure fire and life safety requirements are
maintained.
         a.   Floor plans will be required to be submitted at time of initial
applications submittal and approved prior to the initial permit issuance. These
plans should include the egress points.
         b.   The approved floor plan must be posted in a visible location
within the vacation rental.
         c.   Changes to the approved floor plan will require resubmittal and
approval and may require a fire and life safety inspection, at the discretion
of the building department.
      7.   Appearance: The exterior of the building(s) shall retain a
residential appearance with house numbers maintained on the front of the
building and visible from the street or road. No junk or garbage shall be
allowed to accumulate in any yards and all vehicles shall park only in
designated parking areas. Landscaping shall also be maintained; irrigation
maybe be required.
      8.   Garbage: Provisions shall be made for garbage removal during rental
periods and said provisions shall be documented in the property management
plan. Proof of said service shall be provided to the City of Long Beach. Any
complaints regarding littering or garbage shall be resolved immediately. The
garbage can shall be put out on the street the same day as pick-up service and
returned to its designated spot afterward. The can cannot remain on the street
after service.
      9.   Animals: Animals shall be secured at all times while on the
property. All other city regulations regarding pets must be abided by as
described in chapter 6-4. There cannot more than three (3) dogs staying at the
property at one time.
      10.   Fences: A fenced area shall be required for all vacation rentals
unless otherwise granted an exception by the City Administrator or their
designee. Each property shall conform to their respective zoning requirements,
design review.
      11.   Phone Service: The vacation rental shall have a "land line" with
local phone service. The phone number servicing the vacation rental shall be
included in the property management plan. This is for the purposes of 911
identification.
      12.   Vacation Rental Signage: One (1) vacation rental sign either
attached to the dwelling or placed in front of the dwelling and containing no
more than four (4) square feet, is required. The sign cannot be internally lit.
No off-premises signage or advertising is permitted.
      13.   Operation: The vacation rental shall be operated in a way that will
prevent disturbances to neighboring properties not typical of a residential
neighborhood, including, but not limited to, loud music, loud noises, excessive
traffic, loud and uncontrolled parties, junk/debris/garbage accumulation in the
yards, trespassing, barking dogs, or excess vehicles, boats or recreational
vehicles parked in the streets in front of the unit.
      14.   State Business License And Taxes: Prior to the issuance of the
initial vacation rental permit, the property owner of record shall demonstrate
that the vacation rental is registered as a business with the State of
Washington and that a State Business License and Unified Business Identifier
(UBI) number have been issued for the vacation rental. The owner shall also
certify that all applicable lodging taxes will be paid and shall provide proof
of general liability insurance for use of the residential structure as a
vacation rental.
      15.   Code Compliance: The vacation rental shall meet all applicable
State and local health, safety and building codes.
      16.   License Requirement: In addition to the underlying Land Use
District permitting and process requirements, property owner shall obtain a
revocable vacation rental annual license from the City of Long Beach whenever a
dwelling unit is to be used for vacation rental purposes and shall comply with
the following:
         a.   A vacation rental license shall be obtained from the City of Long
Beach prior to using the dwelling unit as a short-term vacation rental.
         b.   The vacation rental license shall be renewed annually.
         c.   The vacation rental license is non-transferable. If the property
is sold, the new owner will need to re-apply for both the vacation rental
license and the underlying vacation rental permit. The new property owner must
wait a minimum of three (3) months prior to applying for a vacation rental
permit.
         d.   The City of Long Beach vacation rental license shall be
prominently and permanently displayed inside the unit near the front entrance
of the vacation rental and shall list the following:
            (1)   The name, address and phone numbers of the property owner
and/or the designated property manager.
            (2)   The name and phone number of the local point of contact who
must reside within one (1) hour (travel time) from the site address of the
vacation rental.
            (3)   The maximum occupancy.
            (4)   Number and locations of required parking spaces.
            (5)   The service provided to handle garbage.
            (6)   A statement that occupants are to respect adjoining property
owners by adhering to quiet hours from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M., and refrain from trespassing, littering or parking on
adjoining properties.
            (7)   A statement that occupants, property owners, and property
managers of this vacation rental are subject to civil penalties for violating
this section.
            (8)   A statement that the license to operate this vacation rental
may be revoked for violations of these rules.
      17.   Conditions Imposed: The Administrator may impose other conditions,
including but not limited to additional parking, improved access, fencing,
landscaping, or minimum screening to ensure the proposed use is compatible with
the surrounding residential character.
      18.   Revocation: If the terms of the vacation rental license are not
met, the license may be revoked, and the property owner may be subject to
penalties per section
1-4-1 or any amendments thereto.
      19.   Complaints: All complaints shall proceed as follows:
         a.   The complaining party shall first attempt to communicate with the
local contact person designated on the permit and property management plan,
describe the problem, and leave a contact phone number for call back
information.
         b.   The contact person shall respond promptly to the complaint,
regardless of time of day, and make reasonable efforts to remedy any situation
that is out of compliance with the section, including contacting the Long Beach
Police Department if necessary.
         c.   If the response is not satisfactory to the complaining party,
then the complaining party may next provide a written complaint to the City of
Long Beach Community Development Director, which complaint shall identify and
be signed by the complaining party. The complaint shall include a description
of the informal attempts to resolve the complaint. A copy of the written
complaint shall be provided to the property owner and contact person by the
City. The Director of Community Development shall attempt to resolve the
complaint. If so required, the owner or local contact person shall provide a
written response to the complaint with the anticipated corrective action within
ten (10) days. A copy of the complaint will be filed with the vacation rental
license file.
      20.   Compliance And Revocation:
         a.   Property owners of vacation rentals shall obey all applicable
laws and ordinances of the City and shall be subject to vacation rental permit
revocation procedures and appeals processes outlined in this section and in
section
4-1-5 or any amendments thereto.
         b.   If there have been three (3) or more authenticated violations of
this section related to the same vacation rental within one (1) calendar year,
or if there have been three (3) or more authenticated violations of other City
Ordinances related to the same vacation rental within one (1) calendar year,
the Administrator shall revoke the vacation rental license and underlying
vacation rental permit, and the property owner shall be prohibited from
obtaining a new vacation rental permit and license for at least one (1) year
from the revocation.
         c.   Nothing in this subsection precludes the City of Long Beach from
proceeding with formal enforcement action against a property owner and/or
occupant for violations of this section.
         d.   All existing and permitted vacation rentals shall meet the
modified licensing/permitting standards contained within this section 12-11-
9 or future amendments no later than December 31, 2023. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018;
amd. Ord. 1008, 11-21-2022; Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
12-11-10: LOT FILLING AND MODIFICATION:
Excessive land filling for the purpose of improving a view(s) is not permitted.
The intent of this regulation is to allow filling of land for the purpose of
being above the surrounding floodplain, yet achieve a fairly homogeneous finish
grade with the surrounding properties. No land in or near a floodplain shall be
altered or filled unless such activity has received all necessary permits from
all agencies. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-11: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
All new and/or renovated utilities on Pacific Avenue, Ocean Beach Boulevard and
for development located west of Ocean Beach Boulevard shall be required to be
placed underground. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-12: OUTDOOR MERCHANDISING, VENDING AND DINING:
   A.   Outdoor Merchandising, Vending And Dining: Outdoor merchandising,
vending and dining greater than two hundred (200) square feet may be allowed
only by a conditional use permit. Outdoor merchandising, vending or dining up
to two hundred (200) square feet may be allowed as an accessory use to a
business, where permitted. Such activity shall be associated with a business
operating out of an adjacent building. Limitations on length of time, hours of
operation, lighting, noise, placement of goods, and screening may be applied.
Temporary displays for periods not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days, or
sixty (60) days in a calendar year, may be approved by special use permit of
the City Council. No business shall operate solely in an open air environment
unless approved by special use permit of the City Council. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
12-11-13: USE OF SIDEWALK OR PUBLIC WAY:
   A.   Display Of Goods: The City Administrator may authorize the display of
goods for sale on a sidewalk or public way, subject to the following
limitations:
      1.   The display shall not project more than eighteen inches (18") from
the property line into the sidewalk, as measured perpendicular to the property
line;
      2.   The display shall not occupy more than six (6) linear feet along the
sidewalk, as measured parallel to the building face;
      3.   The display shall not reduce the clear width of the sidewalk to less
than seventy two inches (72"), as measured between the property line and the
curb or any intervening street furnishings, including, but not limited to,
planters, benches, bike racks and trash cans, and shall not otherwise obstruct
pedestrian traffic;
      4.   There shall be no other outside display space on the subject
property;
      5.   The display shall be limited to goods sold within the business
abutting the sidewalk or public way. All transactions shall occur within the
business;
      6.   The display, including all racks and furnishings, shall be removed
from the public way daily;
      7.   The display shall be designed and placed or secured so as to
minimize the potential of tipping or being blown over by the wind; and
      8.   The City Administrator, at his discretion, may revoke authorization
for any display. Failure to comply with any of the limitations listed herein,
resulting in a condition that is deemed to constitute a nuisance, shall be
enforceable and punishable pursuant to title 5, chapter 2, "Public Nuisances",
of this Code.
      9.   This section shall not apply to the placement of newspaper boxes.
   B.   Street Performers: Street performers may perform only within the OT
Zone, on private property with the permission of the owner or in the public
parks located at 3rd Street and 5th Street. Performances shall not occur where
sidewalks, the public way, doorways or drives would be obstructed by the
performer or by observers, or where it would interfere with scheduled
activities or events. Performers shall not use any props. Amplification shall
be prohibited. Performances shall be limited to the hours between ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Performers who fail to comply with
the requirements of this section or are disruptive to public peace and morals
shall be considered a nuisance, which shall be enforceable and punishable
pursuant to title 5, chapter 2, "Public Nuisances", of this Code.
   C.   Vending And Peddling: Vending, peddling or any other use of the public
way not enumerated herein shall be prohibited. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-14: SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
For temporary uses, and other activities not specifically addressed by this
title, an applicant may apply to the City Council for a special use permit. The
issuance of a special use permit is at the discretion of the City Council. The
City Council may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to mitigate
impacts including, but not limited to, noise, lighting, traffic and hours of
operation. A special use permit shall not be used to permanently permit a use
that would otherwise be prohibited by the zone district in which the property
is situated. A special use permit shall have an expiration date that is no more
than one year after the approval date. Upon application, the City Council may
grant a single extension of a special use permit. One single property is only
allowed to apply for two (2) permits per year and this includes conjoined lots.
Special use permits will not be granted for a use on public property. (Ord.
959, 10-15-2018)
12-11-15: ILLUMINATION:
The intent of this provision is to restrict lighting to only an immediate area,
to avoid distracting and annoying illumination in residential areas, and to
avoid lighting that distracts vehicle operators or causes glare. Lighting
intended for security, parking areas, unloading areas, walkways, porches,
entrances to buildings, signs, yards, courts and similar areas, shall cast its
light only upon said areas and not upon areas outside of the intended area.
Full cutoff (dark sky) fixtures should be used. Activity switches and timers
should be used where appropriate. Illumination and lighting that are erected as
traffic control lighting or navigation lighting are exempt from this provision.
Illumination of signage is subject to the provisions of chapter 14, including
article A, of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-16: USES NOT COMPATIBLE WITH SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
Schools, playgrounds, libraries, child daycare facilities, or churches located
within one thousand feet (1,000') of that area of the C1, OT, OTW or RC Zones
designated for the location of sexually oriented or adult businesses, and
public parks located within five hundred feet (500') of that area of the C1,
OT, OTW or RC Zones designated for the location of sexually oriented or adult
businesses, whether allowed by right or requiring a conditional use permit,
shall also be required to obtain a special use permit from the City
Administrator. Such special use permit shall require the applicant to waive, in
writing, any protest to the current or future location of a sexually oriented
or adult business that may be approved in accordance with the provisions set
forth in chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-17: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose and intent of the Long Beach City Council in
enacting the provisions of this section is to protect the public health, safety
and welfare, to protect property values and minimize visual impacts while
furthering the development of enhanced telecommunication services in Long
Beach. These standards were designed to comply with the Telecommunications Act
of 1996. The provisions of this section are not intended to and shall not be
interpreted to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting wireless
communication facilities (WCF). This section shall not be applied in such a
manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally
equivalent wireless communication facilities.
   B.   Exemptions: The following uses and wireless communication facilities
(WCF) are exempt from the provisions of this section and shall be permitted in
all zones:
      1.   WCF operated or maintained by local, County, State or Federal
agencies for purposes of official government communications;
      2.   WCF located on Federal, State or tribal lands;
      3.   Temporary WCF during an emergency declared by the city;
      4.   Licensed amateur (ham) radio antennas;
      5.   Satellite dish antennas less than two meters (2 m) in diameter when
located in nonresidential zones, and satellite dish antennas less than one
meter (1 m) in diameter when located in residential zones, including direct to
home satellite services, when used as an accessory use of the property;
      6.   WCF that legally existed on or prior to the effective date of this
section, except that this exemption does not apply to modifications of such
facilities;
      7.   Routine maintenance or repair of a WCF and related equipment
(excluding structural work or changes in height or dimensions of antennas,
support structures or buildings); provided, that compliance with the standards
of this section are maintained;
      8.   Individual wireless broadband receivers for the purpose of providing
wireless access to the internet through a wireless internet service provider.
   C.   Wireless Communication Facility Permitted Locations: Wireless
communication facilities (WCF) shall be allowed in the L1 light industrial, C1
commercial, C2 commercial retail warehouse, OT old town, RC residential
commercial and P public zone districts, subject to issuance of a conditional
use permit pursuant to section
11-2D-2 of this code and the criteria and standards contained herein.
      1.   In considering applications for WCF, preference shall be given in
the following order:
         a.   Collocation of antennas on an existing structure in the L1 light
industrial zone district.
         b.   Attachment of antennas to a new or existing structure in the L1
light industrial zone district.
         c.   Attachment to existing or replacement light standards, electrical
transmission towers, water tanks or existing utility poles in the L1 light
industrial zone district.
         d.   Attachment of antennas to an existing building in the C1
commercial, C2 commercial retail warehouse, RC residential commercial or P
public zone district that do not exceed the building height requirement of the
district or are located within architectural features that meet the
requirements of section
12-11-3, "Projections From Buildings", of this chapter.
         e.   Installation of antennas in the OT old town zone district that
are concealed from view from abutting streets and adjacent properties by an
existing structure (such as a roof parapet) or within an architectural feature
(such as a cupola) and that do not exceed the building height requirement of
the zone district or are located within architectural features that meet the
requirements of section
12-11-3, "Projections From Buildings", of this chapter.
         f.   All other locations.
      2.   An applicant shall demonstrate that due to valid considerations,
including physical constraints or technological feasibility, the proposed
facility cannot be located in a preferred location. In the C1, C2, OT, RC and P
zone districts, the applicant must additionally demonstrate that the WCF is
necessary to fill an existing significant gap in the ability of remote users to
access the communication service (not merely a particular provider's service),
that there is no alternative site in the L1 zone district, and that the manner
in which it proposes to fill the gap complies in all other respects with this
section. The information submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the
area to be served by the facility, field strength test data (a drive test) of
existing coverage quality within the area to be served by the facility, its
relationship to other sites in the applicant's network (within and outside of
city limits), and an evaluation of existing available land, buildings and
structures within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the proposed site.
      3.   In no case shall a WCF be located on a property on which there is an
existing residential use.
   D.   Collocation: To minimize potential adverse visual impacts associated
with the proliferation of wireless communication facilities (WCF) and wireless
communication towers and support structures such as lattice towers and
monopoles, collocation of WCF antennas on existing or new support structures is
encouraged, as follows:
      1.   Collocation shall be accomplished in a manner consistent with the
provisions of this subsection.
      2.   This subsection applies to both new and existing WCF. The terms and
conditions for collocating latecomer providers on collocatable WCF facilities
shall be reasonable and based on current market rates for comparable
facilities. Imposition of unreasonable or higher than market rate terms and
conditions by the host provider shall be considered failure to cooperate in
good faith to accommodate collocation with competitors and shall be subject to
the provisions of subsection D6 of this section.
      3.   The city may deny an application to construct a new support
structure if the applicant has not shown by substantial evidence that it has
made an effort to mount the proposed antennas on an existing building or
support structure that would provide adequate service to the proposed coverage
area. The applicant shall use the following collocation protocol:
         a.   Prior to or with an application for approval of a WCF, the
applicant shall demonstrate that the following notice was mailed via certified
mail to all other WCF providers licensed to provide service within the city:
Pursuant to the requirements of City of Long Beach Municipal Code Section 12-
10-17(D), (name of wireless provider) is hereby providing you with notice of
our intent to submit an application with the City of Long Beach for
construction of a new freestanding personal wireless service facility that
would be located at                  (location). In general, we plan to
construct a                     (lattice tower, monopole, etc.) of
              feet in height for the purpose of providing                 
(cellular, PCS, ESMR, etc.) service in the                  frequency range.
Please inform us whether you have any existing or planned personal wireless
service facilities within one mile of the proposed facility that may be
available for possible co-location. If you do not have a facility available for
co-location, please indicate whether you would be interested in collocating on
our proposed facility. Please provide us with this information within ten (10)
business days after the date of this letter. Your cooperation is appreciated.
         b.   Copies of any responses to the collocation request letter shall
be provided to the city with the WCF application. If a response to a
collocation request letter is received by an applicant indicating an
opportunity for collocation, the applicant shall make a good faith effort to
analyze the feasibility of collocation. This analysis shall be submitted with
an application for any WCF support structure and shall include, at a minimum:
            (1)   A statement from a qualified engineer indicating whether the
necessary service can or cannot be provided by collocation at the possible
collocation site, and the basis for that determination; and
            (2)   Evidence that the lessor of the possible collocation site
either agrees or disagrees to collocation on his/her property; and
            (3)   Evidence that adequate space exists or does not exist at the
possible collocation site to accommodate needed equipment and meet the
applicable requirements of this code; and
            (4)   Evidence that adequate access does or does not exist at the
possible collocation site.
      4.   To reduce the number of future support structures needed in the
city, new support structures shall be designed to accommodate antennas for more
than one user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not
feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons.
      5.   Unless collocation is not feasible, an applicant's site plan shall
reserve an area for at least one other provider's equipment near the base of
the applicant's wireless communication tower or support structure. An option
agreement to lease the area at the base of the facility for a second provider
shall not expire prior to the underlying lease.
      6.   Personal wireless service providers, their lessees and agents shall
cooperate in good faith to accommodate collocation with competitors, including
responding in a timely manner to a collocation letter required by subsection D3
of this section. If a dispute arises about the feasibility of collocating, the
director may require a third party technical study, pursuant to subsection H of
this section, to resolve the dispute. Costs associated with this study shall be
borne by the applicant. Failure to accommodate collocation may be grounds for
revocation of permit and removal of the WCF under public nuisance abatement
procedures.
   E.   Design Criteria:
      1.   Impact On Neighborhood: The location and design of wireless
communication facility (WCF) sites shall consider the visual and physical
impacts of the facility on the surrounding neighborhood.
      2.   Architectural Compatibility: WCF shall be architecturally compatible
with the surrounding buildings and land uses and screened or otherwise
integrated, through location and design, to blend in with the existing
characteristics of the site and its surroundings.
      3.   Collocation: As provided in subsection D4 of this section, new
support structures shall be designed to accommodate collocation, unless the
applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical
or physical reasons.
      4.   Support Structures And Antennas: Support structures such as
monopoles and lattice towers, and antennas mounted on utility poles, shall only
be allowed in the L1 light industrial zone district. Panel and whip antennas
mounted on buildings shall be allowed in the OT, RC, P, C1, C2 and L1 zone
districts.
      5.   Setbacks: The setback requirements in this subsection are not
subject to a variance.
         a.   All support structures, such as lattice towers and monopoles, and
all aboveground equipment enclosures shall be set back at least ten feet (10')
from property lines. This setback shall be measured from the closest point of
the antenna, support structure or equipment enclosure to the property lines on
the lot on which it is located. Additionally, setbacks to adjacent properties
on which an existing residence is located shall be equal to at least the height
of the tower unless otherwise authorized by the hearings examiner.
         b.   Antennas installed on building rooftops shall be set back from
the edge of the roof at least one foot (1') for each foot of antenna height as
measured from the top of the roof (or parapet, if one exists) to the highest
point of the antenna.
         c.   Antennas installed on building facades shall be set back at least
ten feet (10') from all street facades.
      6.   Height: The height limits in this subsection are not subject to a
variance.
         a.   The height of the WCF shall be no more than that required to
function satisfactorily.
         b.   Antennas and support structures shall not exceed one hundred
twenty feet (120') in height in the L1 zone district.
         c.   Antennas located in the C1, C2, OT, RC and P zone districts shall
not exceed the maximum height permitted by the underlying zone district, except
when entirely enclosed within architectural features that meet the requirements
of section
12-11-3, "Projections From Buildings", of this chapter.
      7.   Screening:
         a.   All WCF shall be designed and located on a site to take maximum
advantage of existing trees, mature vegetation, structures and/or topography to
screen as much of the facility as possible from view, and so that the facility
blends into the background.
         b.   The visual impacts of support structures and ground mounted
equipment enclosures shall be mitigated through installation of a five foot
(5') wide landscape strip around the perimeter of the structure, equipment
enclosure and the outside of the security fence (if any). A decorative solid
wood fence, six feet (6') in height and not topped by barbed wire, may be
permitted in lieu of the landscape strip. The hearings examiner may waive or
modify this requirement for those sides of the facility that are not visible
from streets or adjacent property, or when equipment is located within a fully
enclosed building that meets the design requirements of the underlying zone.
         c.   Landscaping shall be properly maintained and kept in good
condition at all times, pursuant to section
12-13-11 of this title.
         d.   Equipment enclosures shall have a finish and appearance similar
to the exterior building walls.
         e.   In the OT zone district, WCF shall be concealed from public view
by architectural features or parapets.
      8.   Antennas: The requirements in this subsection are not subject to a
variance.
         a.   Antennas mounted on buildings shall be architecturally compatible
with the building and wall on which it is mounted, and shall be designed and
located so as to minimize any adverse aesthetic impact. Antennas shall be
allowed where concealed entirely within those structures listed in section
12-11-3, "Projections From Buildings", of this chapter. Panel antennas shall
not be mounted on a facade facing a street. A wall mounted antenna shall be as
flush to the wall as technically possible and shall not project above the wall
on which it is mounted. Antennas and any visible mounting brackets and cables
shall be constructed, painted, or fully screened to match as closely as
possible the color and texture of the building and wall on which it is mounted,
or otherwise blend into its background.
         b.   Antennas mounted on other structures shall be integrated into the
design of the structure to which they are attached. Antenna platforms are
prohibited. External projections from the structure shall be limited to the
smallest projection technically feasible.
      9.   Locating On Utility Poles: The requirements in this subsection are
not subject to a variance. WCF located on utility poles shall only be permitted
in the L1 light industrial zone district and shall conform to the following
design criteria:
         a.   The utility pole at the proposed location may be replaced with a
taller pole for the purpose of accommodating a WCF, except as prohibited in
subsections E9c and E9d of this section; and provided, that the new pole shall
not exceed a height that is a maximum of fifteen feet (15') taller than the
existing pole;
         b.   Panel antennas shall not project out from the surface of the
utility pole by more than twelve inches (12"), shall not exceed six feet (6')
in height, and shall be placed such that the top of the panel antenna does not
extend above the height of the utility pole;
         c.   A cylindrical antenna may be mounted as an extension on top of an
existing utility pole, but the existing pole shall not be replaced with a
taller pole for the purpose of accommodating the cylindrical antenna. A
cylindrical antenna mounted on top of a utility pole shall not exceed eighteen
inches (18") in diameter and eight feet (8') in height;
         d.   A whip antenna may be mounted as an extension on top of an
existing utility pole, but the existing pole shall not be replaced with a
taller pole for the purpose of accommodating the whip antenna. A whip antenna
mounted on top of a utility pole shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height;
         e.   All WCF, including, but not limited to, antennas, equipment,
cables and conduit that are mounted on utility poles, shall be painted to match
the pole;
         f.   The visual effect of the WCF on all other aspects of the
appearance of the utility pole shall be minimized to the greatest extent
possible;
         g.   The use of the utility pole for the siting of a WCF shall be
considered secondary to the primary function of the utility pole. If the
primary function of a utility pole serving as the host site for a WCF becomes
unnecessary and any regulation requires its removal, the utility pole shall not
be retained for the sole purpose of accommodating the WCF and the WCF and all
associated equipment shall be removed immediately;
         h.   In all cases where a utility pole is replaced for the purpose of
accommodating a WCF installation, the cables and other wiring necessary for the
WCF shall be routed inside the new pole. If routing inside the pole is not
allowed by the utility and that determination is confirmed in writing by the
utility, then all cable, wiring and conduit routed outside the pole shall be
painted to match the pole; and
         i.   There is no collocation requirement for WCF located on utility
poles and there shall be no more than one WCF located on any one utility pole.
WCF located on utility poles shall be located no closer than one thousand feet
(1,000') from any other WCF located on a utility pole.
      10.   Color: WCF shall have colors generally matching the surroundings or
background that minimizes their visibility. In the event that the FCC or FAA
requires special marking, the city may require the applicant to request dual
mode lighting as an alternative to the marking requirement.
      11.   Lights, Signals And Signs: No lights, signals, signs, banners or
similar devices shall be permitted on support structures or antennas, except
for those required by law.
      12.   Noise: WCF shall comply with applicable state and local noise
regulations.
         a.   All generators shall be enclosed.
         b.   Testing of equipment and maintenance activities shall occur on
weekdays between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and four thirty
o'clock (4:30) P.M. This restriction shall not apply to emergency situations or
to an impending failure of the communication system.
      13.   Safety: The design of wireless communication towers shall include
"anticlimbing" features to reduce the potential for trespass and injury.
      14.   Federal Requirements: WCF providers and lessees shall assure that
its facility complies at all times with current federal standards. Failure to
maintain WCF in compliance with current federal standards and regulations shall
constitute a nuisance.
   F.   Facility Removal:
      1.   Prior to issuance of any building or construction permits for a
wireless communication facility (WCF), the property owner shall sign an
affidavit agreeing to remove the WCF at his or her expense pursuant to this
subsection. The form of the affidavit shall be approved by the city attorney.
      2.   In the event the use of any support structure or antenna will be
discontinued for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days, the owner or operator
shall so notify the city in writing, and the support structure or antenna shall
thereafter be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment
shall be made by the city which shall have the right to request documentation
and affidavits from the support structure or antenna owner or operator
regarding the issue of support structure or antenna usage. Upon such
abandonment, the owner or operator of the support structure or antenna or the
owner of the property upon which such facility is located shall have an
additional sixty (60) days within which to:
         a.   Reactivate the use of the support structure or antenna or
transfer the support structure or antenna to another owner or operator who
makes actual use of the support structure or antenna; or
         b.   Dismantle and remove the support structure or antenna. If such
support structure or antenna is not removed within said sixty (60) days from
the date of abandonment, the city may remove such support structure or antenna
at the facility owner's and property owner's expense. If there are two (2) or
more users of a single support structure, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the support structure. At the earlier of
sixty (60) days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon
completion of dismantling and removal, city approval for the support structure
and/or antenna shall automatically expire.
   G.   Application Requirements:
      1.   All wireless communication facilities (WCF) shall obtain a
conditional use permit, pursuant to the requirements of section
11-2D-2 of this code. WCF located in the OT, RC, P, C1 and C2 zone districts
shall also be subject to design review, pursuant to chapter 10 of this title.
All applications to locate a WCF shall include the following information:
         a.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed support structure, antennas, on site land uses and
zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent streets, proposed means of
access, and setbacks from property lines and residential zones.
         b.   Scaled elevation drawings of the proposed support structure and
equipment enclosure.
         c.   Photo simulations of the proposed facility from public rights of
way, public properties and affected residentially zoned properties.
         d.   Approximate distance between the proposed antennas and the
nearest residentially zoned property.
         e.   A landscape plan showing size, type, and location of specific
landscape, screening and fencing materials.
         f.   Manufacturer's information indicating compliance with adopted
noise standards.
         g.   The city may require submittal of propagation maps showing that
the proposed WCF is required for network coverage in order to satisfy the
requirements of the provider's grid system. The maps shall also demonstrate
that the requested height is the minimum height necessary for the support
structure and antennas, as applicable. The maps shall show the neighboring or
regional facilities with which the facilities in the city can communicate. The
city may require additional propagation maps showing coverage areas at lower
heights.
   H.   Third Party Review: In certain instances there may be a need for expert
review by a third party of the technical data submitted by the wireless
communication facility (WCF) applicant. The city may require such a technical
review, to be paid for by the WCF applicant. The selection of the third party
expert may be by mutual agreement between the applicant and the city, or at the
sole discretion of the city, such mutual agreement not to be unreasonably
withheld by either party. The third party expert shall have recognized training
and qualifications in the field of radio frequency engineering or structural
engineering, as appropriate. The expert review is intended to be a site
specific review of technical aspects of the wireless communication facilities,
facilities and other matters as described herein, and not a subjective review
of the site selection. In particular, but without limitation, the expert shall
be entitled to provide a recommendation on the height of the proposed
facilities relative to the applicant's coverage objectives and system design
parameters, or the structural requirements for accommodating collocation. Such
a review should address the accuracy and completeness of the technical data,
whether the analysis techniques and methodologies are legitimate, the validity
of the conclusions and any specific technical issues outlined by the city or
other interested parties. Based on the results of the third party review, the
city may require changes to the application for the WCF that comply with the
recommendations of the expert.
   I.   Other Wireless Communication Facilities: All of the provisions of this
section, which address wireless communication facilities and personal wireless
service facilities, shall also be deemed to cover other wireless communications
facilities (and, in particular, but without limitation, television and AM/FM
radio towers) to the maximum extent allowed by law.
   J.   Conflict: To the extent that any provisions of this section are
inconsistent or in conflict with any other provision of the zoning code,
comprehensive plan or any ordinance or regulation of the city, the provisions
of this section shall be deemed to control. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-18: AFFORDABLE HOUSING:
   A.   Purpose: The intent of this section is to encourage the provision of
affordable housing for low, very low and extremely low income households in the
city of Long Beach by allowing a density bonus for projects that are located in
the R3 multi-family residential district and in the RC residential commercial
district.
   B.   Density: The maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a property
may be increased to the extent that all other zoning standards are met without
need for a variance, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant
to the requirements of section
11-2D-2 of this code and provided all units on the property are affordable for
low, very low and/or extremely low income households. The exact density
allowable will be determined by the hearing examiner pursuant to the
conditional use permit process.
   C.   Qualification:
      1.   The city shall maintain and update annually standards for qualified
households, based on the level of income and family size, describing the
"qualified household" eligible for the affordable housing. The city shall also
maintain and update annually a schedule of the maximum allowable housing costs
for affordable dwelling units, based on income and household size. The city may
choose to use qualification standards and/or cost schedules prepared by the
joint Pacific County housing authority.
      2.   The city shall verify that tenants of affordable dwelling units are
qualified households upon initial rental and annually thereafter. The city
shall verify purchasers of for sale affordable dwelling units are qualified
households prior to closing. It shall be the responsibility of the landlord
(for rent units) or purchaser (for sale units) to provide all necessary
documentation to the city regarding income and household size.
      3.   For properties operated by an agency, nonprofit or developer whose
primary purpose is providing affordable housing, which housing organization is
acceptable to the city and has similar qualification standards, processes and
affordability requirements, the city may defer qualification to that entity.
Upon mutual agreement by the city and joint Pacific County housing authority
(JPCHA), the city may pass responsibility for determination of qualification
and affordability to the JPCHA.
   D.   Deed Restriction: A deed restriction shall be placed on the property
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The city shall review and
approve all covenants, conditions and restrictions that may be placed on the
property prior to execution, in order to ensure affordability standards are
maintained. The deed restriction shall run with the land. The period for which
it must remain affordable must be included in the deed restriction. For rent
affordable dwelling units shall remain affordable for a period not less than
twenty (20) years. For sale affordable dwelling units shall remain affordable
for a period not less than twenty (20) years.
   E.   Rental Affordable Dwelling Units:
      1.   Prior to initial renting of an affordable dwelling unit, the
landlord shall provide to the city of Long Beach community development
department documentation of the family size and gross income for verification
of qualification to occupy the affordable dwelling unit. The landlord shall
thereafter provide verification to the city annually that the tenants for all
units continue to meet the household size and income limits for occupancy of an
affordable dwelling unit. Tenants who no longer meet the requirements of a
qualified household may continue to occupy the affordable dwelling unit,
provided their income for their household size does not exceed one hundred
twenty percent (120%) of the area median income. If the tenant's income exceeds
that amount, the tenant shall be required to vacate the unit within sixty (60)
days. A lease or rental agreement shall be required for rental of affordable
dwelling units, and the lease or agreement shall include a clause stating the
terms under which a household that is no longer qualified may continue to
occupy the unit. Nothing in this section shall be construed to otherwise change
or limit the usual rights of tenant or landlord.
      2.   A schedule showing the rents charged for affordable dwelling units
shall be provided to the city on initial rental and annually thereafter. The
city shall verify that rents meet the standards for affordable housing and that
rent and utilities constitute no more than thirty percent (30%) of such gross
annual household income for a qualified household of the size that may occupy
the unit in question.
   F.   For Sale Affordable Dwelling Units: The developer must place a deed
restriction in the deed conveying the property to the qualified household a
restriction running with the land stipulating that, from the time of the first
conveyance, any subsequent conveyance shall have the following limitation:
      1.   Any monies received by the qualified household seller in excess of
the actual reduction of the principal of the mortgage and the down payment and
payments for home improvements for the first five (5) years after the purchase
by the qualified household shall revert to and belong to the city of Long
Beach, to be deposited in the affordable housing fund.
      2.   After the first five (5) years, twenty five percent (25%) of any
excess funds received shall belong to the qualified household seller. During
the subsequent fifteen (15) years, five percent (5%) of the excess funds
received for each full year of ownership shall belong to the qualified
household seller. The excess balance shall revert and belong to the city of
Long Beach, to be deposited in the affordable housing fund.
      3.   After twenty (20) years, all the sale proceeds shall belong to the
qualified household seller.
      4.   If the property is sold by the qualified household to another
qualified household at any time at the price then established for the qualified
household, all excess funds shall belong to the selling qualified household.
The buyer shall submit to the city documentation of household size and income
for verification of qualification.
      5.   If the household size or income of a previously qualified owner
occupied household changes in such a way that they are no longer qualified to
occupy an affordable dwelling unit, they shall not be required to vacate and/or
sell the affordable dwelling unit they own. All other requirements of this
section shall continue to apply.
      6.   If the owner of a for sale affordable dwelling unit should choose to
rent the dwelling unit rather than occupy it within twenty (20) years after the
first conveyance, it shall be rented to a qualified household, subject to
verification of qualification as set forth in subsection E of this section.
If the for sale units are built under the auspices of an agency, nonprofit or
developer whose primary purpose is providing affordable housing, which housing
organization is acceptable to the city and has similar qualification standards
and processes, the city may defer to those standards and accept the deed
restriction put in place by that entity.
   G.   Affordable Housing Fund: The city of Long Beach shall establish an
"affordable housing fund" to receive the funds described in subsection F of
this section, which funds will be used only to produce or rehabilitate
affordable housing. The city may choose to pass the funds to the joint Pacific
County housing authority, provided the projects for which the funds are used
serve the Long Beach area. (Ord. 906, 2-2-2015)
12-11-19: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall operate a recreational vehicle (RV)
park within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a business
license as required by title 4, "Business And License Regulations", of this
code, and any necessary approvals required by the zone district in which the
property is located, including a conditional use permit and design review.
   B.   Allowable Uses And Use Allocation:
      1.   Spaces: An RV park may include itinerant, short term, and long term
spaces, as well as storage areas as follows:
         a.   Itinerant spaces (30 days or less): Up to one hundred percent
(100%) of total spaces; a minimum of fifty percent (50%).
         b.   Short term spaces (more than 30 days and less than 6 months): A
maximum of fifty percent (50%) of total spaces.
         c.   Long term spaces (more than 6 months): A maximum of fifty percent
(50%) of total spaces.
         d.   Storage (unoccupied): A maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of
total spaces.
      2.   Nonconforming Use Allocation: Any nonconforming use allocation
existing at the time of passage of this section shall be corrected the next
time a nonconforming space is occupied. No new nonconforming uses shall be
allowed.
      3.   Sunset Date For Existing Nonconforming Use Allocation:
Notwithstanding other sections of this code, all existing RV parks shall be
made to conform to the allowable use allocation no later than December 31,
2020.
   C.   Prohibition On Subletting: The renter(s) of an RV space may not sublet
that space to another party.
   D.   Current Vehicle Title: All RVs located in an RV park must have a
current vehicle title.
      1.   Under no circumstances will an RV be allowed to be placed on blocks.
   E.   Recreational Or Open Space Development:
      1.   RV parks with an area of ten (10) acres or less shall be required to
develop a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total area for recreational or
open space purposes.
      2.   RV parks with an area greater than ten (10) acres shall be required
to develop a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total area for recreational
or open space purposes.
      3.   The required open space may include amenities for the use of guests,
such as recreational facilities and picnic areas. It shall not include the area
within the individual RV spaces.
   F.   Off Street Parking: Parking shall be provided as required by chapter 12
of this title.
   G.   Ingress And Egress:
      1.   Driveways for ingress and egress shall comply with the requirements
of subsection 11-5-1D of this code and with the requirements of subsection 12-
12-2D3 of this title.
      2.   Street access shall be limited to driveways serving the entire RV
park. All access to individual RV spaces shall be from within the property. The
access of an RV space directly from the street shall be prohibited.
   H.   Interior Circulation And Driveways:
      1.   Interior driveways shall have a width of not less than fifteen feet
(15') for a one-way drive and not less than twenty feet (20') for a two-way
drive, exclusive of on site parking.
      2.   Driveways and parking surfaces within the park and RV parking sites
shall be properly surfaced with gravel or asphalt.
   I.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided as required by chapter 13 of
this title. Landscaping shall be provided around the perimeter of the site, to
provide screening from the street and adjacent properties and to beautify the
park.
      1.   Wherever possible, existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall
be maintained.
      2.   There shall be one tree for every ten (10) RV spaces.
   J.   Fences: Fences may be incorporated into the landscaping design.
Chainlink fences shall not be used on the perimeter of the site, unless
approved by the reviewing authority.
   K.   Sanitary Facilities: Sanitary facilities and sewer connections shall be
provided as required by section
10-3-2 of this code. (Ord. 912, 8-3-2015)
12-11-20: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS:
   A.   Size Of Site: There shall be a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square
feet of stall space for each manufactured home site.
   B.   Common Area: At least ten percent (10%) of the total area of the
property on which the park is situated shall be maintained as common area or
open space. Such area may include amenities for the use of the residents but
shall not include the interior driveways or parking or the open areas of the
individual stall spaces.
   C.   Setbacks Between Manufactured Homes: There shall be a minimum setback
of ten feet (10') between manufactured homes. Landings and stairs projecting no
more than three feet (3') from each unit shall be allowed to project into the
setback area. The setback area shall be kept otherwise free and clear of
structures, for purposes of fire department access.
   D.   Off Street Parking: Parking shall be provided as required by chapter 12
of this title. Parking spaces shall not be part of the minimum pavement width
for internal circulation. Parking may be provided adjacent to each unit and/or
in common shared parking areas.
   E.   Width Of Drives: Internal driveways shall have a width of not less than
twenty feet (20'), exclusive of on site parking. Driveways and parking shall be
properly surfaced with gravel or asphalt.
   F.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided as required by chapter 13 of
this title. Landscaping shall be provided around the perimeter of the site, to
provide screening from the street and adjacent properties and to beautify the
park.
      1.   Wherever possible, existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall
be maintained.
      2.   There shall be a minimum of one tree on the site for each unit.
      3.   Fences may be incorporated into the landscaping design.
   G.   Design Review: Design review is required for the site design of the
manufactured home park, including, but not limited to, site layout, circulation
and landscaping. Design review is not required for individual structures except
where design review would be required for a single-family residence.
   H.   Additional Requirements: Manufactured home parks shall also be subject
to the requirements of sections
10-3-3 and
10-3-4 of this code. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-11-21: SOLAR ENERGY FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to encourage
development of home or business scale solar energy in Long Beach while ensuring
such development is compatible with the principal use of a property and
minimizing impacts to nearby properties.
   B.   Permitted Locations Of Solar Facilities: Solar panels or arrays are
permitted accessory uses to principal uses located in all zones within the city
limits. Solar panels or arrays are permitted subject to the requirements of
this section and the criteria and standards contained herein.
   C.   Design Criteria: Solar panels or arrays are permitted as an accessory
use to commercial and residential uses subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The solar panel or array shall not be located within a required
setback, on a structure within a required setback, or within a front yard;
      2.   Solar panels or arrays may extend above the building height standard
for the zone by a maximum of six feet (6'), provided:
         a.   They are mounted at the minimum height necessary to generate
usable energy;
      3.   Any solar panel or array shall not cause glare or reflection so as
to constitute a hazard to pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic;
      4.   Installation of any solar panel or array shall comply with all
applicable provisions of the international building code, international
residential code, international fire code, and Washington state electrical
code;
      5.   Any solar panel, array, or accessory component located on the ground
shall be located in the side or rear yards in residential zones, and screened
with a minimum six foot (6') tall, sight obscuring fence or landscaping in both
residential and commercial zones. The community development director may waive
or modify the screening requirement under the following circumstances:
         a.   Screening would render the solar facility ineffective and there
are no suitable alternative locations on site to locate the solar facility
where screening is feasible; or
         b.   Where abutting uses will not be adversely affected by an
unscreened solar facility system due to existing physical improvements,
physiographic features, landscaping and/or other factors;
      6.   Solar panel or array collectors are not considered impervious
coverage for the purposes of calculating lot coverage if minimum standards are
met, including, and not limited to, height and setback requirements;
      7.   A solar facility collector may be added to an existing nonconforming
principal building or lot on which it is located without forcing the entire
building to be brought up to current code standards. (Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-11-22: SMALL WIND GENERATION FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure the public
health, safety, and welfare regarding installation and operation of small (less
than 10 kW) wind generation facilities, to provide guidance to those who wish
to install and operate such facilities, and to ensure such facilities are
compatible with the principal use of a property and minimize impacts to nearby
properties.
   B.   Permitted Locations Of Wind Facilities: Small windmills and turbines
(less than 10 kW) are permitted accessory uses to principal uses located in all
zones within the city limits. Windmills and turbines are allowed subject to the
requirements of this section and the criteria and standards contained herein.
   C.   Permit Application And Project Review Process: Prior to installation of
any component of a small wind generation facility, an application shall be made
to the city of Long Beach.
      1.   A four hundred dollar ($400.00) fee shall be required.
      2.   A site map and elevations of the proposed installation shall be
required.
      3.   Detailed information on windmill specifications from the
manufacturer shall be required, including, but not limited to, information on
height, bulk, and noise generation.
      4.   The application shall be reviewed by staff to determine if the
property meets the minimum requirements for installation of a windmill or
turbine as described in subsection D of this section. If the installation as
proposed does not meet minimum requirements, staff shall deny the permit and
refund fifty percent (50%) of the application fee.
      5.   If staff finds that the installation as proposed does meet minimum
requirements, the city shall provide notice of the project application, of a
minimum two (2) week public comment period, and of a public hearing to be
conducted by the city. This notice shall be provided to all owners of property
located within three hundred feet (300') of the perimeter of the subject
property. This notice shall be sent to the relevant owners of record and
addresses of record according to the records of the Pacific County tax
assessor.
         a.   The Long Beach city council shall conduct the hearing and make a
final decision regarding the application. The council may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application.
   D.   Design Criteria: Small wind generation facilities are permitted as an
accessory use to commercial and residential uses and are subject to design
review, including the following conditions:
      1.   The wind generation facility shall not be located within a standard
required setback, on a structure within a required setback, or within a front
yard, moreover:
         a.   No small wind generation facility shall be located closer than
one hundred ten percent (110%) of its maximum height to a property line, an
aboveground utility, a potentially occupied structure, or a liquid or gaseous
fuel source.
      2.   The maximum height of any windmill or turbine, measured from the
ground at the base of the foundation to the highest vertical point shall not
exceed seventy five feet (75').
      3.   No windmill blade at its lowest point shall be closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the top of its foundation or the ground, whichever is higher.
      4.   No windmill or turbine shall interfere with the viewsheds of
surrounding properties or cast substantial shadow on same.
      5.   No windmill or turbine shall generate noise considered a nuisance
noise disturbance pursuant to section
5-5-4, "Nuisance Noise Disturbance", of this code.
      6.   Any connection to the small wind generation facility shall be
underground, with the exception of guywires.
      7.   No antenna or advertising shall be affixed to or otherwise placed on
a windmill or turbine.
      8.   Installation of any small wind generation facility shall comply with
all applicable provisions of the international building code, international
residential code, international fire code, and Washington state electrical
code.
      9.   Small wind generation facilities are not considered impervious
coverage for the purposes of calculating lot coverage if minimum standards are
met, including, and not limited to, height and setback requirements.
      10.   A small wind generation facility may be added to an existing
nonconforming principal building or lot on which it is located without forcing
the entire building to be brought up to current code standards.
   E.   Decommissioning; Removal: Any small windmill or turbine that is not
used or nonfunctional for a period of six (6) months or greater must be
decommissioned, and completely removed from the property on which it is
installed. (Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-11-23: ESSENTIAL PUBLIC FACILITIES:
   A.   The City recognizes that due to their nature and possible secondary
effects, essential public facilities may be difficult to site.
   B.   The City shall first determine if an incorporated location is the
appropriate location for the proposed essential public facility, taking into
consideration the health, safety, and welfare of Long Beach citizens.
   C.   If the City determines it is an appropriate location for a proposed
essential public facility, it shall make every reasonable effort to responsibly
site the facility within the City. (Ord. 899, 6-16-2014)
12-11-24: SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS:
For events, and other short-term activities not specifically addressed by this
title, an applicant may apply to the Community Development Director for a
special event permit. The event must not exceed ten (10) days in duration. The
Community Development Director may impose such conditions as are deemed
necessary to mitigate impacts including, but not limited to, noise, lighting,
traffic and hours of operation. The special event permit is only valid for
those days specifically noted in the permit application. (Ord. 959, 10-15-2018)
CHAPTER 12
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
12-12-1: Intent
12-12-2: Off Street Parking
12-12-3: Off Street Loading
12-12-1: INTENT:
This chapter is intended to reduce the need for parking on streets and the
traffic congestion and hazards caused thereby, and to provide for off street
parking adequate for each type of development in terms of both amount and
location. (Ord. 942, 8-21-2017)
12-12-2: OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   Parking Space Requirements: In all districts except OT Old Town and RC
Residential Commercial, the following shall apply:
Type Of Use Parking Space Required1
Type Of Use                             Parking Space Required1
Art gallery, library, museum            1 per 800 square feet of gross floor
                                        area, plus 1 per 2 employees
Bakery, confectionery                   1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
                                        area
Church, theater, community hall         1 per 6 seats or 12 feet of bench
Commercial amusements                   1 space per 300 square feet of ground
                                        area
Gas station                             1 per 2 employees
Motels, hotels, itinerant condominiums, 1 per unit, plus 1 per each employee
timeshares                              and 2 for a manager's unit
                                        1 for each studio or one-bedroom unit;
Multi-family residences, 3 or more      1.5 for each two-bedroom unit; 2 for
dwellings                               each three-bedroom or larger unit; plus
                                        1 visitor space for every 4 dwelling
                                        units
Offices, including banks, medical       1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
clinics, and professional offices       area
One- and two-family residences          2 per dwelling unit; tandem parking
                                        allowed
Private clubs, lodges                   1 per 4 seats
RV parks and campgrounds                1 per RV space or campsite, plus 1 per
                                        employee and 2 for a manager's unit
Restaurants, eating and drinking        1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
establishments                          area; drive-through stacking to be
                                        evaluated by the reviewing authority
Retail stores, such as grocery stores,  1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
tourist shops, furniture stores         area, plus 1 per 2 employees
Schools, elementary, nursery            1 per employee or teacher
Senior citizen homes, convalescent      1 per 6 beds, plus 1 for every 3
centers                                 employees
                                        To be evaluated by the Planning
Similar uses or aggregate               Commission on a case by case basis,
                                        based on the above standards
 
   Note:
1.   Where parking is required for employees, the number shall be calculated
based on the maximum number of full time equivalent (FTE) employees per maximum
shift.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 942, 8-21-2017)
   B.   OT Old Town Zone Parking Requirements: There are no off street parking
requirements in the Old Town Zone, except for the following:
      1.   One off street parking space shall be provided for each hotel or
motel room.
      2.   No variances for required parking spaces will be given in the Old
Town Zone.
      3.   There shall be no ingress to or egress from off street parking from
Pacific Avenue, unless the reviewing authority determines there are no other
feasible access points from other streets.
   C.   RC Residential Commercial Zone Parking Requirements: Parking
requirements in the Residential Commercial Zone shall be as set forth in
subsection A of this section, except as follows:
      1.   Offices, excluding banks and medical clinics, shall provide one
parking space per eight hundred (800) square feet of gross floor area.
      2.   Retail stores with a gross floor area of three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet or less shall provide one parking space per eight hundred
(800) square feet of gross floor area.
      3.   There shall be a minimum of two (2) parking spaces provided,
regardless of the use.
   D.   General Criteria: Parking requirements shall comply with the following
criteria:
      1.   Plan: A plan drawn to scale, indicating how the off street parking
and loading requirements are to be met, shall accompany a development
application.
      2.   Dimensions: An off street parking space shall be at least nine feet
(9') in width and eighteen feet (18') in length. Such space shall have a
vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7'). For parking areas where at
least ten (10) spaces are required, a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of
required spaces may be utilized as compact stalls measuring eight feet (8')
wide by sixteen feet (16') in length.
      3.   Ingress And Egress: The maximum allowable width of ingress and
egress access points for an off street parking lot shall be fifteen feet (15')
for a one-way access point and twenty five feet (25') for a two-way access
point, except the approving authority may approve a one-way access point that
is twenty feet (20') wide or a two-way access point that is thirty feet (30')
wide, provided the following criteria are met:
         a.   The wider access point is necessary to allow safe ingress and
egress for the type and size of vehicles customarily associated with the use of
the property or for uses that have higher traffic volumes;
         b.   Pedestrians will not be unduly impacted by the greater width; and
         c.   The property is served by only one access point on each street
frontage.
      4.   Location: Off street parking requirements shall be met on the same
lot and zoning district as the building served, or off site on a lot within two
hundred feet (200') specifically reserved for said business's clientele.
Multiple uses may share off site parking facilities located on a separate lot
(s), provided the number of spaces available meets the total requirement of all
of the separate uses. Off site parking shall be considered accessory to the
use, as if it were located on the same site as the use. Off site parking that
is required for the use shall be secured in perpetuity through a deed, recorded
easement or other document acceptable to the City. Off site parking that is
provided voluntarily in excess of the parking requirement will not be required
to be secured in perpetuity and will be considered accessory to the use.
      5.   Surface Conditions: Parking lots shall have graveled or paved
surfaces, maintained adequately for all weather use, and drained to avoid flow
of water over public sidewalks, rights- of-way, and abutting private property.
The use of low impact development techniques to reduce stormwater impacts is
encouraged.
      6.   Maneuvering Space: Maneuvering space (to prevent backing onto
streets) shall be provided for all lots that provide access onto arterial
streets. Internal driveway widths and circulation patterns shall be adequate to
provide necessary maneuvering for vehicles, according to the design and layout
of the parking lot.
      7.   Multiple Uses: In the event that several uses occupy a single
structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off street parking
shall be the sum of the requirements of the several uses computed separately,
unless evidence is presented to the satisfaction of the reviewing authority
that the various uses shall not be used simultaneously.
      8.   Storage Use Prohibited: Required parking spaces shall not be used
for the storage of vehicles or materials used in conducting the business.
      9.   Change Of Use: Should the owner or occupant of a lot or building
change the use of the lot or building resulting in an increase in the number of
required off street parking spaces, the off street parking shall be increased
according to the new use.
      10.   Tandem Parking: Tandem or stacked parking is allowed for
residential uses and itinerant lodging. Tandem or stacked parking is not
allowed for any commercial use.
         a.   For residential uses, no more than two (2) spaces shall be
stacked, and both spaces shall be specifically reserved for the use of a single
unit. One space may be in a garage with the other space in the driveway.
         b.   For itinerant lodging, tandem or stacked parking shall only be
permitted if a parking attendant is designated and on duty at all times. Such
parking shall not be more than three (3) spaces deep.
      11.   Use Of Driveways: For residential uses, driveways or garage
approach aprons may be considered parking spaces, provided length of the
driveway is at least twenty feet (20').
      12.   Property Residentially Zoned: On property residentially zoned, or
property occupied by a single-family residence or duplex, the parking, storing
or allowing to be parked or stored or kept are:
         a.   Any commercial vehicles, as that term is defined in this section;
or
         b.   More than four (4) motor vehicles, but not including any
recreational vehicles, trailers, unmounted camper or canopy shells, motor
homes, or boats over fourteen feet (14') in length; provided, it is affirmative
defense to this section for the total to exceed four (4) motor vehicles by the
number of licensed drivers who reside at the residence and whose driver's
licenses are the same as the residence; or
         c.   A total of not more than three (3) combined number of
recreational vehicles, motor homes, trailers, unmounted camper or canopy
shells, boats over fourteen feet (14') in length; and further provided, that
subsections D12a through D12c of this section are subject to the following:
            (1)   One commercial vehicle up to sixteen thousand five hundred
(16,500) pounds of gross vehicle weight may be parked on property residentially
zoned or property occupied by a single- family residence or duplex; and
            (2)   Any number of the total allowed may be parked, stored, or
location upon a designated driveway as defined in this subsection; and
            (3)   A total of not more than two (2) of the total allowed may be
parked, stored, or located, anywhere else on the property within the side or
rear yards, subject to requirements of the Zoning, Building, and Fire Codes;
and
            (4)   A total of not more than two (2) of the total allowed, and
only if they are motor vehicles (not including recreational vehicles, motor
homes, trailers, unmounted camper or canopy shells, boats over 14 feet in
length), may be parked on private property adjacent to and within twenty feet
(20') of the right-of-way so long as:
               (A)   The area is surfaced by asphalt, concrete, gravel or
similar material; and
               (B)   The parking area is immediately accessible to the traveled
portion of the roadway without intervening sidewalk; and
            (5)   Any vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer, boat, camper, or
motor home must be currently licensed and in operable condition;
         d.   This subsection does not apply to the following:
            (1)   Any vehicle, including recreational vehicles, motor vehicles,
trailers, camper shells or boats, when they are kept or located in or under
lawfully permitted and constructed building;
            (2)   Temporary parking for a duration not to exceed twelve (12)
hours, for example, for temporary repairs, cleaning, or guests, excluding
temporary parking of commercial vehicles except as otherwise provided in this
section;
            (3)   Any property or situation where a development regulation
applies. For example, the limitation on number of vehicles would not apply at
an apartment constructed pursuant to an approved building plan and permit with
approved parking plans. For further example, parking would not be allowed in an
approved landscaped area;
            (4)   To allow parking in or on the right-of-way, City-owned
property or fire lanes;
            (5)   To allow the parking of any junk vehicles;
            (6)   Parking of motorcycles is exempt from this section;
         e.   "Designated driveway" means that clearly defined roadway leading
from the street which is surfaced by asphalt, concrete, gravel or similar
material not to exceed twenty four feet (24') in width, or otherwise as shown
on City-approved building or site plans approved by the Community Development
Department. Where there is curb and gutter at the street, the vehicles may only
be parked in one driveway in the area between the front of the residence or
principal structure and the lot front line;
         f.   "Vehicle" or "motor vehicle" means a currently licensed motorized
or nonmotorized conveyance that includes, but is not limited to, an automobile,
car, truck, trailer, camper, motorcycle, or watercraft, in operable condition;
         g.   "Recreational vehicle" means a currently licensed motorized or
nonmotorized conveyance that includes, but is not limited to, motor homes,
travel trailers, folding tent trailers, truck campers removed from a truck or
pickup, horse trailers, boat trailers with or without boats, utility trailers,
and similar vehicles;
         h.   "Commercial vehicle" means any motor vehicle the principal use of
which is the transportation of commodities, merchandise, produce, freight,
vehicles, animals, passengers for hire, or which is used primarily in
construction or farming, including but not limited to bulldozers, backhoes,
tractors and cranes. Parking of commercial vehicles on property residentially
zoned, or property occupied by a single-family residence or duplex, shall
constitute a nuisance and is prohibited. It shall be a defense to a violation
of this section that during the entire time that the commercial vehicle was
parked in the residential neighborhood, the operator of the vehicle was
actively engaged in making a delivery or providing services to residents in the
immediate vicinity or where the vehicle was parked. (Ord. 942, 8-21-2017)
12-12-3: OFF STREET LOADING:
   A.   Required Berths: For each use for which a building is to be erected or
structurally altered to the extent of increasing the floor area to equal the
minimum floor area required to provide loading space, and that will require the
receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by truck or similar
vehicle, there shall be provided off street loading space on the basis of
minimum requirements as follows:
      1.   Commercial, industrial, and public utility uses that have a gross
floor area of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or more shall
provide truck loading or unloading berths in accordance with the following
table:
 
Square Feet Of Floor Area Required Berths
3,500 to 6,500            1
6,501 to 10,000           2
10,001 and over           3
 
      2.   Office buildings, hotels, motels, hospitals, institutions, schools,
public buildings, recreational or entertainment facilities, and any similar use
that has a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more shall
provide off street loading or unloading berths in accordance with the following
table:
 
Square Feet Of Floor Area Required Berths
10,000 to 50,000          1
50,001 and over           2
 
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   Dimensions: A loading berth shall contain space at least twelve feet
(12') wide, thirty feet (30') long, and have a height clearance of at least
fourteen feet (14').
      2.   Change Of Use: Should the owner or occupant of a lot or building
change the use of the lot or building resulting in an increase in the number of
required off street loading berths, the loading shall be increased according to
the new use. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 13
LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
12-13-1: Required Landscaping
12-13-2: OT Old Town District
12-13-3: OTW Old Town West District
12-13-4: C1 Commercial And RC Residential Commercial Districts
12-13-5: S3 Shoreline Resort, S3R Shoreline Resort Restricted And S3M Shoreline
Resort Mixed Use Districts
12-13-6: AC Accommodations District
12-13-7: L1 Light Industrial And C2 Commercial Retail Warehouse Districts
12-13-8: P Public, PR Parks And Recreation And S4 Shoreline Conservancy
Districts
12-13-9: Residential Districts
12-13-10: Vision Clearance Triangle
12-13-11: Required Maintenance
12-13-1: REQUIRED LANDSCAPING:
The landscaping provisions shall be applied in the zoning districts as set out
in sections
12-13-2 through
12-13-10 of this chapter. Additionally, the following shall apply in all zone
districts:
   A.   Screening From Residential Uses: Nonresidential and multi- family
development or additions and alterations that have a value of fifty percent
(50%) or more of the existing structure and that abut a residential zoned
property shall provide a landscape strip along the common property line. The
required landscaping strip shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width and
consist primarily of a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs.
Ground cover and smaller plantings may also be used but shall not be used
exclusively. A decorative solid wood fence six feet (6') in height may be
allowed by the reviewing authority in lieu of the landscaping buffer. The
intent shall be to screen the view of the commercial activity from the
residential use.
   B.   Parking Lots: Parking lots shall be landscaped as follows:
      1.   Parking lots shall be screened from view of the adjoining street by
a landscape strip that is an average of at least five feet (5') in depth but
not less than three feet (3'), excluding driveways and pedestrian walkways. The
required landscape strip shall consist of evergreen and deciduous trees planted
not more than thirty feet (30') on center, interspersed with large and small
shrubs and ground cover. Plantings of shrubs and ground covers shall be chosen
and spaced to result in a covering of the landscape strip within two (2) years.
Shrubs shall be of a type that do not exceed a height at maturity of
approximately three (3) to four feet (4'). Deciduous trees shall have a minimum
trunk diameter of two inches (2") at time of planting. Evergreen trees shall be
a minimum of six feet (6') tall at time of planting.
      2.   Parking areas containing more than six (6) spaces shall be
landscaped with not less than four hundred (400) square feet of landscaping.
      3.   The location and placement of plant materials at driveways and
street intersections shall also comply with the requirements of the vision
clearance triangle, as set forth in section
12-13-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
   C.   Landscape Materials: Required landscaping shall be predominantly native
or plant materials suited to the coastal setting. Consideration should be given
to the appearance of the landscaping in all seasons. Landscaping plans shall be
designed to conserve and make efficient use of water. Plant sizes shall be used
that will best ensure their survival, and to provide coverage within two (2)
years. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches (2")
at time of planting. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet (6') tall
at time of planting. Ground cover shall be used to fill in between larger
plants; mulch such as river rock or bark may be used only if approved as part
of the overall landscaping plan and shall be limited. Land disturbed by
development activities shall be revegetated at least to its predevelopment
condition. (Ord. 870, 4-4-2011)
   D.   Integration With Stormwater Plans: Wherever possible, the landscaping
plan shall be coordinated with the stormwater plan, where required for the
development, and shall be designed to help control and reduce stormwater
runoff. Low impact development techniques are encouraged. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-13-2: OT OLD TOWN DISTRICT:
There are no minimum requirements for landscaping in the OT zone except as
required in section
12-13-1 of this chapter. However, where buildings are not built to the property
line, the area between the building and the property line shall be landscaped
or otherwise treated as an outdoor amenity. The area may be finished as
hardscape with planters, or may be planted with landscape materials, provided
the reviewing authority finds the proposed design enhances the proposed
development and the surrounding area. Street furniture may also be included in
the design. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-13-3: OTW OLD TOWN WEST DISTRICT:
New development or additions and alterations that have a remodeling value of
fifty percent (50%) of the existing structure in the OTW zone shall landscape a
minimum of five percent (5%) of the subject property. Landscaping required by
section
12-13-1 of this chapter may be counted toward this requirement. Additionally, a
portion of the required landscaping, equal to at least three (3) square feet of
landscaping for each one foot (1') of the property's Ocean Beach Boulevard
street frontage must be located abutting and within twenty feet (20') of Ocean
Beach Boulevard. At least two-thirds (2/3) of the landscaping area shall be
natural materials, or softscape. The remaining one-third (1/3) of the required
landscaping area may be hardscape, provided the reviewing authority finds the
proposed design enhances the proposed development and the surrounding area. The
hardscape area may be used for outdoor vending, merchandising or dining,
subject to the requirements of the OTW district. Landscape areas may be
enhanced with street furniture such as benches. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-13-4: C1 COMMERCIAL AND RC RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
New development or additions and alterations that have a remodeling value of
fifty percent (50%) of the existing structure in the C1 and RC zones shall
provide five (5) square feet of landscaping for each one foot (1') of street
frontage along all property lines abutting public rights of way. All required
landscaping shall be located within twenty feet (20') of the property line
abutting the street. Landscaping required by section
12-13-1 of this chapter may be counted toward this requirement. At least two-
thirds (2/3) of the landscaping area shall be natural materials, or softscape.
The remaining one- third (1/3) of the required landscaping area may be
hardscape, provided the reviewing authority finds the proposed design enhances
the proposed development and the surrounding area. The hardscape area may be
used for outdoor merchandising, vending or dining, subject to the requirements
of the underlying zone. Landscape areas may be enhanced with street furniture
such as benches. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-13-5: S3 SHORELINE RESORT, S3R SHORELINE RESORT RESTRICTED AND S3M SHORELINE
RESORT MIXED USE DISTRICTS:
   A.   New development or additions and alterations that have a remodeling
value of fifty percent (50%) of the existing structure in the S3 zone shall
provide five (5) square feet of landscaping for each one foot (1') of street
frontage along all property lines abutting public rights of way. All required
landscaping shall be located within twenty feet (20') of the property line
abutting the street. Landscaping required by section
12-13-1 of this chapter may be counted toward this requirement. The required
landscaping shall consist of natural plant materials, or softscape. Plant
materials shall complement the natural dune setting.
   B.   Along all property lines that abut the S4 conservancy district, the
development shall provide a landscape buffer that is a minimum of five feet
(5') deep. The landscape buffer shall be planted with native plant materials
that are suited to the natural dune setting. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-13-6: AC ACCOMMODATIONS DISTRICT:
New development or additions and alterations that have a remodeling value of
fifty percent (50%) of the existing structure in the AC zone shall provide five
(5) square feet of landscaping for each one foot (1') of street frontage along
all property lines abutting public rights of way, excluding alleys, ingress and
egress points. All required landscaping shall be located within twenty feet
(20') of the property line abutting the street. Landscaping required by section
12-13-1 of this chapter may be counted toward this requirement. The required
landscaping shall consist of natural plant materials, or softscape. (Ord. 849,
8-17-2009)
12-13-7: L1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND C2 COMMERCIAL RETAIL WAREHOUSE DISTRICTS:
New development or additions and alterations that have a value of fifty percent
(50%) of the existing structure in the L1 or C2 zones shall provide five (5)
square feet of landscaping for each one foot (1') of street frontage along all
property lines abutting public rights of way, excluding alleys, ingress and
egress points. All required landscaping shall be located within twenty feet
(20') of the property line abutting the street. The intent of the landscaping
requirement is to screen the view of the use from the street. Landscaping
required by section
12-13-1 of this chapter may be counted toward this requirement. (Ord. 849, 8-
17-2009)
12-13-8: P PUBLIC, PR PARKS AND RECREATION AND S4 SHORELINE CONSERVANCY
DISTRICTS:
Landscaping for the P, PR or S4 zones shall be compatible with the area
surrounding the project site. Landscaping standards for adjacent properties
should be used to provide guidance on the location and amount of landscaping.
Consideration should be given to the need for screening of the use, parking
areas, trash and equipment when designing the landscape plan. Projects in the
S4 zone shall utilize plant materials that are suited to the natural setting.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-13-9: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Landscaping in residential zones shall cover all open areas of the site,
excluding driveways, walkways and patios. Trees, shrubs and planting beds, with
both perennials and annuals, are encouraged. Extensive use of mulch such as
rock or bark is not allowed. Uses other than single-family or two-family
residences shall include landscaping that will screen parking, trash and HVAC
equipment from view of the street and from other properties. (Ord. 870, 4-4-
2011)
12-13-10: VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE:
To ensure that landscape materials and fences do not constitute a safety
hazard, a vision clearance triangle (VCT) shall be provided at all
intersections of public rights of way and driveways.
   A.   Height: Within this area, unobstructed cross visibility at a level
between forty two inches (42") and eight feet (8') above the adjacent street
level shall be maintained. However, trees having limbs or foliage trimmed,
except during early growth stages, so as to not extend into the sight area,
shall be allowed. Landscaping material shall not be located closer than four
feet (4') from the edge or top of the curb line or driveway apron, except for
required ground cover.
   B.   Structures: Freestanding signs are permitted in the VCT only as
provided in section
12-14A-18 of this title. This section shall not apply to buildings except where
specifically provided for in the development standards of the zone district in
which the building is located.
   C.   Dimensions: The vision clearance triangle for said intersections shall
be as follows:
      1.   At intersections of public rights of way, the VCT shall be formed by
measuring twenty feet (20') along each property line from the intersection and
connecting the end points of such lines formed by such measurement to create a
triangle.
      2.   At intersections of driveways and alleys with public rights of way,
the VCT shall be formed by measuring ten feet (10') along the property line
from the intersection and ten feet (10') along the driveway or alley connecting
the end point of such lines formed by such measurement to create a triangle.
   D.   Exceptions: The following are exempt from the requirements of this
section:
      1.   Public utility poles and boxes.
      2.   Official signs or signals. (Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-13-11: REQUIRED MAINTENANCE:
All required landscape areas shall be properly maintained and kept in good
condition at all times in order to present a neat, lively and orderly
appearance. Where necessary, irrigation shall be installed to ensure the
landscaping will be healthy and viable. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued unless and until landscaping is installed as required by the landscaping
plan, or a surety bond has been provided to guarantee its completion, as
permitted by sections
11-1-10 and
11-4D-5 of this code. Failure to maintain required landscape areas shall be
pursued as a zoning violation subject to section
12-3-6 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 14
SIGNS
SECTION:
12-14-1: Purpose And Applicability
12-14-2: Conformance To Codes And City Regulations
12-14-3: Permits
12-14-4: Traffic Visibility
12-14-5: Signage Allocation
12-14-6: Maintenance, Repair Or Removal
12-14-7: Computation Of Frontage
12-14-8: Prohibited Signs
12-14-9: Exempt Signs
12-14-10: Temporary Signs
12-14-11: Abandoned Signs
12-14-12: Nonconforming Signs
12-14-13: Illegal Signs
12-14-14: Appeals
12-14-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
The purpose of this chapter, including article A, is to protect the safety and
orderly development of the community through the regulation of signs and sign
structures and further the implementation of the comprehensive plan. The
orderly development of the community requires striking a balance between the
needs of businesses to advertise and the desire to maintain an aesthetically
pleasing environment. The regulation of signs is an important element in
promoting local business while ensuring a safe and attractive community. (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-2: CONFORMANCE TO CODES AND CITY REGULATIONS:
Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, and
article A of this chapter, and the provisions of the building code and any
other applicable ordinance or regulation within the city. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-3: PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required; Owner Responsibility: Unless specifically exempted, a
sign permit must be obtained as required in this chapter. A building permit may
also be required from the building inspector for the erection and maintenance
of all signs erected or maintained within the city, and in accordance with all
other applicable regulations and ordinances of the city. Exemptions from the
necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not relieve the owner of the
sign from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner, and
in a manner in accordance with all the other provisions of this chapter, and
article A of this chapter. The permit application shall be accompanied by the
written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is
to be erected.
   B.   Permit Fees: Permit fees to erect, alter, or relocate a sign shall be
in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council.
   C.   Permit Exemptions: The following shall not require a permit; these
exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of a sign from the
responsibility of its erection, maintenance and its compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the same:
      1.   The changing of the advertising copy or message on a lawfully
erected sign designed for the use of replaceable copy.
      2.   Painting, repainting or cleaning of a lawfully erected sign
structure.
      3.   Temporary decorations customary for special holidays, such as
Christmas and Independence Day, erected entirely on private property.
      4.   Exempt signs as specifically stated in section
12-14-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-4: TRAFFIC VISIBILITY:
No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the intersection of any street in
such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, nor at any location where
by its position, shape, or color it may interfere with or obstruct the view of
or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. All signs
must comply with vision clearance triangle requirements as found in section
12-13-10 of this title except as may be permitted by section
12-14A-18 of this chapter. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-5: SIGNAGE ALLOCATION:
   A.   Permitted Sign Area And Type: The total sign area, type and height
shall be as specified by the sign matrix in this section. Additional
restrictions on specific sign types as provided in article A of this chapter
shall also apply.
   SIGN MATRIX
District Total Signage Allocation Permitted Signs Prohibited Signs
District           Total Signage       Permitted Signs     Prohibited Signs
                   Allocation
                   1 per street
                   frontage per                            Temporary signs for
                   residence, 3 sq.                        home occupations;
                   ft. each sign;      Wall signs;         off premises signs;
R1, R1R, S1        signage for home    monument signs;     projecting signs;
                   occupations shall   temporary signs     portable signs;
                   not exceed 3 sq.                        illuminated, moving,
                   ft. and shall be                        or flashing signs
                   included in this
                   allocation
                   Same as R1, plus
                   group sign of 3 sq.
                   ft. per dwelling
                   unit up to 24 sq.
                   ft. per street
                   frontage for multi-                     Temporary signs for
                   family                                  home occupations;
R2, R2R, R3, R3R,  developments;       Wall signs;         off premises signs;
S2                 signage for home    monument signs;     projecting signs;
                   occupations,        temporary signs     portable signs;
                   vacation rentals                        illuminated, moving,
                   and bed and                             or flashing signs
                   breakfasts shall
                   not exceed 3 sq.
                   ft. and shall be
                   included in this
                   allocation
                   Group sign of 3 sq.
                   ft. per dwelling
                   unit up to 24 sq.
                   ft. per street                          Temporary signs for
                   frontage for multi-                     home occupations;
                   family              Wall signs;         off premises signs;
S3, S3R, S3M, AC   developments; 100   monument signs;     projecting signs;
                   sq. ft. for         temporary signs     portable signs;
                   commercial                              illuminated, moving,
                   developments, plus                      or flashing signs
                   1 4-sq. ft. sign
                   per commercial
                   occupant
                                       Only temporary
S4                 4 sq. ft.           signs as permitted  All other signs
                                       by the city council
                   50 sq. ft. for the  Wall signs;
                   first street        projecting signs;
                   frontage and 25 sq. freestanding signs; Internally
OT and OTW - each  ft. for each        off premises signs; illuminated signs;
single business    additional street   way finding signs;  moving or flashing
property           frontage, including temporary signs;    signs
                   1 freestanding sign individual letter
                   not to exceed 15    signs
                   sq. ft.
                   2 sq. ft. per       Wall signs;
                   linear foot of      projecting signs;
OT and OTW - each  street frontage up  freestanding signs; Internally
multiple- tenant   to 150 sq. ft.,     off premises signs; illuminated signs;
building           including 1         way finding signs2; moving or flashing
                   freestanding sign   temporary signs;    signs
                   up to 35 sq. ft.    individual letter
                                       signs
                   1 sq. ft. per
                   linear foot of
                   street frontage up  Wall signs;
                   to 75 sq. ft.,      projecting signs;
OT and OTW - each  including 1         freestanding signs; Internally
multiple- building freestanding sign   off premises signs; illuminated signs;
complex            up to 25 sq. ft.; 1 way finding signs2; moving or flashing
                   wall sign not to    temporary signs;    signs
                   exceed 1 sq. ft.    individual letter
                   per foot of wall    signs
                   frontage per
                   business
                                       Wall signs;
                                       projecting signs;
                   100 sq. ft.,        freestanding signs;
C1, C2, LI, RC -   including 1         internally
each single        freestanding sign   illuminated signs1; Moving or flashing
business property  not to exceed 25    off premises signs; signs
                   sq. ft.             way finding signs2;
                                       temporary signs;
                                       individual letter
                                       signs
                                       Wall signs;
                   2 sq. ft. per       projecting signs;
                   linear foot of      freestanding signs;
C1, C2, LI, RC -   street frontage up  internally
each multiple-     to 175 sq. ft.,     illuminated signs1; Moving or flashing
tenant building    including 1         off premises signs; signs
                   freestanding sign   way finding signs2;
                   up to 50 sq. ft.    temporary signs;
                                       individual letter
                                       signs
                   1 sq. ft. per
                   linear foot of      Wall signs;
                   street frontage up  projecting signs;
                   to 100 sq. ft.,     freestanding signs;
                   including 1         internally
C1, C2, LI, RC -   freestanding sign   illuminated signs1; Moving or flashing
each multiple-     up to 50 sq. ft.;   off premises signs; signs
building complex   in addition, each   way finding signs2;
                   business may have 1 temporary signs;
                   wall sign not to    individual letter
                   exceed 1 sq. ft.    signs
                   per linear foot of
                   wall frontage
                                       Wall signs;
                   100 sq. ft. per     projecting signs;
                   street frontage,    freestanding signs; Moving or flashing
P, PR              including 1         off premises signs; signs; internally
                   freestanding sign   way finding signs2; illuminated signs
                   not to exceed 25    temporary signs;
                   sq. ft.             individual letter
                                       signs
 
Notes:
1.   Internally illuminated signs permitted in C1 and RC only, provided the
signs are located on frontage facing Pacific Avenue. Internally illuminated
signs shall count against the sign allocation at a 2:1 ratio. Each square foot
of an internally illuminated sign shall be calculated as 2 square feet.
2.   Way finding signs are permitted in OT, RC, C1, P and PR zones only,
subject to city council approval.
   B.   Materials: Signs may be made of any material, other than chipboard;
provided, that the sign shall complement the property upon which the sign is
erected and shall be durable; wood and paint is preferred. For signs in zones
requiring design review, the standards for buildings in those zones shall be
used as a guide for sign design.
   C.   Double Faced Signs: Only one side of a double faced sign shall be
counted toward the sign area, provided only one side is visible from a single
vantage point, such as a freestanding and projecting sign.
   D.   Sign Height: The maximum height of a freestanding sign, including all
components of the support structure, cabinet and lighting, if any, shall be as
set forth in the following table:
   SIGN HEIGHT
District Maximum Height1
District            Maximum Height1
OT                  8 feet
OTW                 12 feet
C1                  16 feet
RC                  16 feet
C2                  16 feet
L1                  16 feet
P                   16 feet
PR                  16 feet
All other districts 6 feet
 
   Note:
1.   All signs must comply with the traffic visibility requirements of section
12-14-4 of this chapter and section
12-13-10 of this title.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-6: MAINTENANCE, REPAIR OR REMOVAL:
   A.   Maintenance:
      1.   Every sign shall be kept in good condition and repair.
      2.   The building inspector shall determine whether or not a sign is in
good condition or repair. The administrative decision of the building inspector
may be appealed as provided in this title. In evaluating whether or not a sign
meets the objective in this subsection, the building inspector will evaluate
each sign on a case by case basis using some or all of the following criteria
to assist in making a determination; however, additional consideration may be
given to other factors at the sole discretion of the building inspector:
         a.   Is the sign intact to include the face, structure, and all other
attached components; or
         b.   Is the sign face damaged; or
         c.   Is the sign faded, illegible, peeling, or chipped; or
         d.   Is the illumination functional; or
         e.   Does the sign present a neat, clean and attractive appearance; or
         f.   Does the lack of maintenance or repair create a condition such
that the sign detracts from the aesthetics of neighboring properties.
   B.   Dangerous Condition; Sign Removal: In cases where there exists an
immediate danger to public safety, the building inspector shall have the
authority to immediately remove or cause to be removed any sign, at the expense
of the owner as provided in section
12-14-13 of this chapter.
   C.   Nonconforming Signs:
      1.   Structural repairs to nonconforming signs shall not be permitted.
      2.   Repainting and minor repairs to nonconforming signs shall be
permitted, provided the total cost of the repairs does not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the estimated replacement cost of the sign with a conforming sign at
the time of the repair or two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00),
whichever is less.
   D.   Sign Alterations; Conformance, Permit: No sign shall be structurally
altered, enlarged or relocated except in conformity to the provisions herein,
nor until a proper permit, if required, has been secured.
   E.   Signs Subject To Design Review Standards: The changing copy, business
names, lettering, sign faces, colors, display and/or graphic material, or the
content of any conforming sign shall not be deemed a structural alteration but
shall be subject to the design review standards of chapter 10 of this title.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-7: COMPUTATION OF FRONTAGE:
If a premises contains walls facing more than one property line or encompasses
property frontage bounded by more than one street, the sign area(s) for each
building wall or property frontage will be computed separately for each
building wall or property line facing a different frontage, and each wall shall
only be counted once. Walls resulting from building recesses that are not
visible from the property line shall not be counted as additional frontage. The
sign area(s) thus calculated may then be applied to permitted signs placed on
each separate wall or property line frontage, as set forth in the sign matrix.
The total sign allocation is based only on frontage that faces a public way.
Placement of signs on sides without any allocated signage shall be counted
towards the total sign allocation. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-8: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following are specifically prohibited and illegal:
   A.   Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere
with an official traffic sign, signal or device, or which obstruct or interfere
with a driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic.
   B.   Except as provided in sections
12-14A-10,
12-14A-14,
12-14A-15 and
12-14A-16 of this chapter, signs encroaching upon or overhanging any street or
public right of way.
   C.   No sign shall be attached to any utility pole, light standard, street
tree or any other public facility located within the public right of way.
   D.   Signs that blink, flash or are animated by lighting in any fashion.
   E.   Portable signs, except for temporary signs as set forth in sections
12-14-10 and
12-14A-11 of this chapter.
   F.   Advertising vehicles or any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle
or trailer parked on any public or private property, except for signs meeting
the following conditions:
      1.   The primary purpose of such vehicle or trailer is not the display of
signs.
      2.   The signs are magnetic, decals, or painted upon an integral part of
the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer, and do not
break the silhouette of the vehicle.
      3.   The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently
registered and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and
actively used or available for use in the daily function of the business to
which such signs relate.
   G.   Balloons, streamers, pennants, or pinwheels, except those temporarily
displayed as part of a special sale, promotion or community event, as set forth
in section
12-14A-12 of this chapter. For the purposes of this subsection, "temporarily"
means no more than a total of sixty (60) days in any calendar year.
   H.   Any sign constructed upon or attached to the roof of a building or
structure. For the purposes of this subsection, the face of a mansard roof or
fascia shall not be considered to be a part of the roof.
   I.   Billboards.
   J.   Inflatable signs. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-9: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
However, no sign shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in sections
12-14-4 and
12-14-6 of this chapter.
   A.   Official notices authorized by a court, public body, or public safety
official.
   B.   Directional, warning or information signs authorized or required by
federal, state, or municipal governments.
   C.   Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building
cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made of
noncombustible material and made an integral part of the building or structure.
   D.   The flag of a government or noncommercial institution, such as a
school.
   E.   Religious symbols and seasonal decorations within the appropriate
public holiday season.
   F.   Nonelectrical street address signs, or combination nameplate and street
address signs attached to a building, which contain no advertising copy and
which do not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
   G.   Historical markers.
   H.   Signs visible through a window in the C1, C2, RC, OT, and OTW zones;
provided, that the sign(s) do not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the
total window space facing any street.
   I.   Kites and similar objects that do not include any advertising and are
displayed in a fashion that complies with all other provisions of this chapter
are not considered signs and are therefore exempt.
   J.   Sponsorship signs placed on ball field fences during the season,
subject to approval by the administrator as to size and design.
   K.   Advertising of area activities or events sponsored by not for profit
groups or organizations on changeable signs.
   L.   One real estate sign per lot or per frontage, whichever is greater,
while the property is currently for sale, provided the sign may remain in place
for up to thirty (30) days following the sale of the property.
   M.   Existing decorative features. Decorative features on buildings that
were in place on January 1, 1975, that could be considered a sign shall be
exempt, provided they remain in the same location, are consistent with the
theme of the community as described in the comprehensive plan and expressed in
design guidelines as amended and are maintained as provided in section
12-14-6 of this chapter.
   N.   Existing unique decorative features. Upon approval by the city council,
property owners may request existing decorative features be declared unique
decorative features and therefore exempt from the sign regulations, provided
the feature was in place prior to January 1, 2000, and the feature is
determined to be unique to the history of the city. Determinations by the city
council shall be final and not subject to appeal.
   O.   Property management sign. One sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet
per property, containing only the name and phone number(s) of the property
management company for a vacation rental located in the R2R or S2 zone shall be
exempt from the signage area requirement. It may be mounted on the building
wall or ground mounted, as necessary, to provide the best visibility from the
street. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-10: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Temporary signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts and only in
conjunction with a special event or promotion as provided in section
12-14A-12 of this chapter and subject to the following limitations:
   A.   No more than one such sign may be displayed on any property.
   B.   Temporary signs located on a single residential lot shall be limited to
not greater than four (4) square feet per side and are not permitted for home
occupations.
   C.   Temporary signs for all other zones shall not exceed an aggregate of
thirty two (32) square feet.
   D.   No temporary sign shall be displayed for more than sixty (60) days in a
calendar year.
   E.   No temporary sign shall contain any component that moves or flashes.
   F.   No temporary sign shall interfere with the vision clearance triangle.
   G.   Temporary signs shall be located on the same property as the special
event or promotion. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-11: ABANDONED SIGNS:
   A.   Abandoned signs must be removed within thirty (30) days of the close of
the business or activity. With the approval of the Administrator, conforming
sign structures may remain in place, provided the owner submits a plan for
removing the obsolete copy and replacing or covering the message area in such a
fashion as to preserve the investment in the sign without advertising the
former use of the property, using materials that do not detract from the
aesthetics of the building. Failure to comply with this requirement will result
in the sign becoming illegal.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, a sign for a seasonal business that
only operates during recurring times of the year with the intent to reopen
shall not be considered an abandoned sign; provided, that a temporary sign is
attached indicating "Closed For The Season" or "Will Reopen Month/Year". (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009)
12-14-12: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Signs Allowed Subject To Limitations: Any sign legally existing at the
time of the passage of this chapter that does not conform in use, location,
height, or size with the regulations of the zone in which such sign is located
shall be considered a legal nonconforming use or structure and may continue in
such status until such time as it is either abandoned or removed by its owner,
subject to the following limitations:
      1.   No sign shall be structurally altered unless it is made to conform
to this chapter.
      2.   No billboard or temporary sign shall be considered to be a legal
nonconforming sign.
      3.   Property owners with multiple nonconforming signs may replace some
or all of the nonconforming signs provided all other requirements of this
regulation are met.
      4.   WSDOT and wayfinding signs shall not count against the limit on off
premises signage.
   B.   Nonconforming Sign Inventory: The Administrator shall, as soon as
practicable, survey the City for signs which do not conform to the requirements
of this chapter. Upon determination that a sign is nonconforming or illegal,
the Administrator shall use reasonable effort to so notify in writing the sign
owner and where practicable the owner of the property on which the sign is
located. Notification shall include:
      1.   Whether the sign is nonconforming or illegal.
      2.   Whether the sign may be eligible for a nonconforming sign permit.
      3.   If the identity of the sign owner cannot be determined after
reasonable inquiry, the notice may be affixed in a conspicuous place on the
sign or on the business premises with which the sign is associated.
   C.   Nonconforming Sign Exemptions:
      1.   Any nonconforming signs purchased and mounted prior to December 31,
2015 shall be grandfathered.
      2.   The sign must be brought up to current code if there is damage of
fifty percent (50%) or more in the replacement cost of either the nonconforming
sign or the structure to which it is affixed; or
      3.   Failure to maintain the sign in good repair, to include regular
painting and rust removal.
   D.   Nonconforming Sign Permits:
      1.   Eligibility: An on premises or off premises nonconforming sign may
be issued a nonconforming sign permit. Nonconforming sign permits shall not be
issued for illegal, prohibited, or temporary signs.
      2.   Permit Required: A nonconforming sign permit is required for all
eligible nonconforming signs in the OT, OTW, C1 and C2 Zones. The sign owner
shall obtain the permit within one hundred eighty (180) days of notification by
the City. Applications for a nonconforming sign permit shall contain the name
and address of the sign user, the sign owner, and the owner of the property
upon which the sign is located, and such other pertinent information as the
Administrator may require to ensure compliance with this chapter. The Community
Development Director may waive specific submittal requirements determined to be
unnecessary for review of an application.
      3.   Permit Issuance: Any person submitting an application for a
nonconforming sign permit shall use the forms provided by the City. The
Community Development Director shall issue nonconforming sign permits upon a
determination of eligibility. The Community Development Director may require
the filing of plans or other pertinent information where such information is
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. Appeals shall be filed in
accordance with this chapter. Should an appeal be filed, the City shall not
take any action until the appeal has been acted upon and the applicant notified
of the final disposition.
   E.   Loss Of Legal Nonconforming Status: Nonconforming signs shall either be
removed or immediately brought into compliance with this chapter upon the
occurrence of one or more of the following events:
      1.   When a nonconforming sign permit is required but not obtained within
one hundred eighty (180) days of notice of nonconformance; or
      2.   Damage of fifty percent (50%) or more in the replacement cost of
either the nonconforming sign or the structure to which it is affixed; or
      3.   Failure to maintain the sign in good repair, to include regular
painting and rust removal.
   F.   Maintenance: Ordinary maintenance and repair of a sign, including a
sign face or message change that does not increase the sign face area, shall be
permitted without loss of nonconforming status if the cost of the maintenance
or repair is less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacing the sign.
(Ord. 942, 8-21-2017)
12-14-13: ILLEGAL SIGNS:
   A.   Illegal Signs Described; Exceptions: An "illegal sign" is:
      1.   A sign erected without a permit;
      2.   A sign not permitted by the sign matrix in section
12-14-5 of this chapter; or
      3.   A sign not conforming to all other regulations in this chapter,
including article A of this chapter. Exceptions are: a) legal nonconforming
signs; b) exempt signs; and c) temporary signs that fulfill the regulations
provided in this chapter, including article A of this chapter.
   B.   Conformance Required, Or Removal: The owner thereof or the person or
firm using an illegal sign shall, upon written notice by the building
inspector, forthwith in the case of immediate danger, and in any case within
not more than ten (10) days, make such sign conform to the provisions of this
chapter, or shall remove it. If, within ten (10) days, the order is not
complied with, the building inspector may remove or cause such signs to be
removed at the expense of the owner and/or the user of the sign. In the case of
immediate danger to public safety, the building inspector shall have the
authority to immediately remove or cause to be removed any sign, at the expense
of the owner. Such removal shall occur only after the building inspector
attempted to contact the owner of the sign. (Ord. 942, 8-21-2017)
12-14-14: APPEALS:
Any decision of the Administrator regarding interpretation or application of
this chapter, and article A of this chapter, may be appealed in accordance with
the same provisions set forth in section
11-2C-14 of this Code and section
12-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
ARTICLE A. SPECIFIC SIGN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-14A-1: Animation And Changeable Messages
12-14A-2: Canopy And Awning Signs
12-14A-3: Development And Construction Signs
12-14A-4: Development Complex Signs
12-14A-5: Directional Signs
12-14A-6: Illuminated Signs
12-14A-7: Marquee Signs
12-14A-8: Off Premises Signs
12-14A-9: Political Signs
12-14A-10: Projecting Signs
12-14A-11: Sandwich Board Signs
12-14A-12: Special Promotion, Event And Grand Opening Signs
12-14A-13: Individual Letter Signs
12-14A-14: Under Canopy Signs
12-14A-15: Signs In Rights Of Way
12-14A-16: Projections Over Public Ways
12-14A-17: Wayfinding Signs
12-14A-18: Monument And Freestanding Signs
12-14A-19: Feathers Or Pins
12-14A-1: ANIMATION AND CHANGEABLE MESSAGES:
   A.   Animated Signs Prohibited: Animated signs are prohibited.
   B.   Changeable Signs Permitted: Changeable signs up to thirty percent (30%)
of the allowable signage, manually activated, are permitted in the OT, OTW, RC,
C1, and C2 zones and shall be monitored on a daily basis and shall not be used
as an off premises sign for a commercial use or activity. Changeable signs may
be used to promote community events and for public interest announcements.
Theaters may request approval from the city council to exceed the percentage of
changeable signage within the total maximum sign allowance.
   C.   Electrically Activated Signs Prohibited: Changeable signs, electrically
activated, are prohibited. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-2: CANOPY AND AWNING SIGNS:
   A.   Copy Area: The copy area of canopy and awning signs shall not exceed an
area equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the background area of the awning or
awning surface to which such sign is affixed or applied, or for a canopy,
twenty five percent (25%) of the total visible canopy surface. In all cases,
the copy area shall not exceed the permitted area for wall or fascia signs.
   B.   Background Color; Graphics: Neither the background color of a canopy or
awning, nor any graphic treatment or embellishment thereto such as striping,
patterns or valances, shall be included in the computation of sign copy area.
   C.   Calculating Size And Height: For the purpose of calculating the
permitted size and height of a sign, awning signs shall be considered as wall
signs, and they shall count toward the permitted area for all wall signs.
   D.   Backlit Awnings: A backlit awning on which sign copy has been affixed
shall be counted as an internally illuminated sign, and shall not be permitted
where internally illuminated signs are not permitted. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-3: DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION SIGNS:
Signs temporarily erected during construction to inform the public of the
developer, contractors, architects, engineers, the nature of the project, or
anticipated completion dates, shall be permitted in all zoning districts,
subject to the following limitations:
   A.   Residential Lot: Such signs on a single residential lot shall be
limited to one sign, not greater than six feet (6') in height and six (6)
square feet in area.
   B.   Residential Subdivision Or Multiple Lots: Such signs for a residential
subdivision or multiple residential lots shall be limited to one sign at each
entrance to the subdivision, or on one of the lots to be built upon, and shall
be no greater than eight feet (8') in height and thirty two (32) square feet in
area.
   C.   Commercial Or Industrial Projects: Such signs for commercial or
industrial projects shall be limited to one sign per street front, not to
exceed eight feet (8') in height and thirty two (32) square feet for projects
on parcels five (5) acres or less in size, and not to exceed twelve feet (12')
in height and one hundred (100) square feet for projects on parcels larger than
five (5) acres.
   D.   Permits For Issuance And Removal: Development and construction signs
shall not be displayed until after the issuance of construction permits by the
building inspector, and must be removed prior to issuance of an occupancy
permit for all or any portion of the project. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-4: DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX SIGNS:
   A.   Master Sign Plan Required: All single owner controlled multiple-
occupancy nonresidential or mixed use development complexes on parcels
exceeding two (2) acres in size shall submit to the planning commission for
review and recommendation to the city council, a master sign plan prior to
issuance of new sign permits concurrently with the submission of the design
review application for the development. The master sign plan shall establish
standards and criteria for all signs in the complex that require permits, and
shall address, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   Proposed sign locations.
      2.   Materials.
      3.   Type of illumination.
      4.   Design of freestanding sign structures.
      5.   Size.
      6.   Height.
      7.   Quantity.
      8.   Uniform standards for nonbusiness signage, including directional and
informational signs.
   B.   Development Complex Sign: In addition to the freestanding business
identification signs otherwise allowed by this article, every multiple-
occupancy development complex shall be entitled to one freestanding sign per
street front, at the maximum size permitted for business identification
freestanding signs, to identify the development complex. No business
identification shall be permitted on a development complex sign. Any
freestanding sign otherwise permitted under this article may identify the name
of the development complex.
   C.   Calculation Of Sign Size: For freestanding signs, internally
illuminated signs, and any other sign with an identifiable border, the entire
face of one side of the sign shall be measured. For all other signs, the area
of the sign shall be calculated by drawing the smallest possible rectangle or
rectangles around the sign copy. Illustrations of specific sign types and the
methods used to calculate sign sizes are shown in the appendix on file in the
office of the city clerk.
   D.   Compliance With Master Sign Plan: All applications for sign permits for
signage within a multiple-occupancy development complex shall comply with the
master sign plan.
   E.   Special Permit Required: The city council shall act upon all
applications for master sign plans through the special permit process. Special
permits for master sign plans shall be reviewed concurrently with the site plan
approval process. In their review of master sign plans, the city council shall
consider the following:
      1.   The relationship of the proposed signage to the overall development,
as well as to surrounding properties.
      2.   The extent to which the proposed signage is compatible with the
proposed architecture.
      3.   The use of appropriate landscaping to complement the proposed sign
designs.
   F.   Waiver From Underlying Requirements: The city council, upon
recommendation from the planning commission, shall have the authority to modify
or waive specific sign regulations related to a master sign plan if it finds
that such modification or waiver results in a superior master sign plan design.
(Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-5: DIRECTIONAL SIGNS:
One directional sign shall be permitted per street entrance to any lot. There
shall be no limit to the number of directional signs providing directional
information interior to a lot. The maximum area for directional signs shall be
four (4) square feet per sign face, for a maximum of eight feet (8') per sign
visible from adjacent property or rights of way. Not more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the area of any directional sign may be devoted to business
identification or logo, which area shall not be assessed as identification sign
area. Directional signs shall not be placed in the vision clearance triangle as
required in section
12-14-4 of this chapter, unless the sign is no more than forty two inches (42")
in height above the level of the adjacent street or the grade level at the
sign, whichever is lower, and is not located within four feet (4') of the
property line or driveway. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-6: ILLUMINATED SIGNS:
   A.   Hours Of Use Limited; Exception:
      1.   With the exception of businesses along the SR 103 corridor, no sign
shall be illuminated except during the hours of operation of the business to
which the sign refers, or until ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., whichever is later.
      2.   Illumination that is designed primarily to illuminate the building
or parking area and also illuminates a sign is not subject to the hours of
operation in subsection A1 of this section.
   B.   Electric Signs: Electric signs shall display the Underwriters
Laboratory approval seal, or shall display the manufacturer's name, and the
voltage and amperage used.
   C.   External Illumination: External illumination shall be directed only
onto the sign and shall not shine off the property or into streets and ways in
such a way that it would impair the vision of motorists or pedestrians or cause
glare. The intensity of the lighting shall be no greater than necessary to
illuminate the sign.
   D.   Internal Illumination: Internally illuminated signs are permitted only
in the C1 and RC zones, provided the signs are located on frontages facing
Pacific Avenue. Internally illuminated signs shall be prohibited in all other
zones. Internally illuminated signs shall count against the sign allocation at
a two to one (2:1) ratio. Each square foot of an internally illuminated sign
shall be calculated as two (2) square feet. A backlit awning on which sign copy
has been affixed shall be counted as an internally illuminated sign.
   E.   Alternatives To Illumination: As an alternative to externally
illuminated signs where externally illuminated signs would otherwise be
prohibited, lighting may be placed behind individual letters and symbols to
create a backlit or halo effect, provided the letters or symbols are made of a
material that does not create an internally illuminated effect as determined by
the administrator. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-7: MARQUEE SIGNS:
   A.   Copy Area: The copy area of marquee signs shall be counted toward the
permitted area for wall signs.
   B.   Graphics: Graphic striping, patterns or color bands on the face of a
building, marquee, or architectural projection shall not be included in the
computation of sign copy area. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-8: OFF PREMISES SIGNS:
   A.   Findings: Off premises signs are necessary to promote those commercial
or other activities that, due to location, may require greater visibility than
that which is available on premises. However, the needs of such businesses or
activities must be balanced against the need for an uncluttered landscape,
especially in residential and rural areas of the city.
   B.   Governing Regulations: The following regulations govern the use of off
premises signs:
      1.   No business shall be permitted more than a total of one off premises
sign within the city limits.
      2.   No freestanding off premises sign shall exceed the height limit or
square footage for the zone where the sign is placed.
      3.   Off premises wall signs shall conform to the placement requirements
for the zone where the sign is placed and shall be included in the total
signage requirement for the building on which the off premises sign is placed.
      4.   Off premises signs for home occupations are prohibited.
      5.   Off premises signs shall be placed on private property only. In
applying for a permit for an off premises sign, the applicant shall furnish
evidence of the approval of the owner of the property upon which the sign is to
be placed. No property shall contain more than one off premises sign; however,
multiple businesses may utilize the same sign for advertisement and such sign
shall conform to the requirements of subsection B2 of this section.
      6.   An off premises sign shall not be permitted for businesses located
outside of the city limits, except for visitor-serving attractions, regional
services, amenities or public facilities that require greater visibility, as
determined by the planning commission. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-9: POLITICAL SIGNS:
Political signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the
following limitations:
   A.   Height And Area: Such signs shall not exceed a height of four feet
(4'), nor an area of eight (8) square feet.
   B.   Time Limit For Sign Display: Such signs for election candidates or
ballot propositions shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the
election; provided, that signs promoting successful candidates or ballot
propositions in a primary election may remain displayed until not more than
fourteen (14) days after the general election.
   C.   Placement Restrictions: Such signs shall not be placed in any public
right of way, on city property, or obstruct traffic visibility. (Ord. 849, 8-
17-2009)
12-14A-10: PROJECTING SIGNS:
   A.   Permitted: Projecting signs shall be permitted in lieu of freestanding
signage, limited to one sign per occupancy along any street frontage with
public entrance to such occupancy. A business may have both a projecting sign
and an under canopy sign.
   B.   Height Limitation: No such sign shall extend vertically above the
highest point of the building facade upon which it is mounted.
   C.   Extending Over Sidewalk: Such signs shall not extend over a public
sidewalk in excess of two-thirds (2/3) of the width of the sidewalk, and shall
comply with the requirements set forth in section
12-14A-16 of this article.
   D.   Clearance: Projecting signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance
above any sidewalk or pedestrianway a minimum of eight feet (8'). (Ord. 849, 8-
17-2009)
12-14A-11: SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS:
Sandwich board signs are permitted in the OT, OTW, RC, C1, and C2 zones only,
and are subject to the following limitations:
   A.   Placement: Such signs may only be placed on private property and are
prohibited on public property, including sidewalks, streets (including unpaved
right of way) and parks. Sandwich board signs shall be removed when the
business is not open. Sandwich board signs placed on public property may be
immediately removed by the city as a hazard.
   B.   Size: Sandwich board signs shall be forty two inches (42") or less in
height and such sign shall not exceed seven (7) square feet per side.
   C.   Limitation On Number; Area: Sandwich board signs are limited to one per
business. Sandwich board sign area shall not count toward allowable sign area.
   D.   Anchoring: Sandwich board signs must be anchored to the ground or
weighted in such a manner as to keep them from being tipped over by the wind.
(Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-14A-12: SPECIAL PROMOTION, EVENT AND GRAND OPENING SIGNS:
Temporary signs and other signs displayed to advertise special promotions,
events and grand openings shall be permitted for all business and industrial
zones, subject to the following requirements and limitations:
   A.   Limitation On Number: Such signs shall be limited to one sign per
street front.
   B.   Time Limitation On Display: Such signs may be displayed for not more
than a total of sixty (60) days in any calendar year. Group promotions that are
conducted as part of a community event shall not be counted toward the sixty
(60) day limit on promotions.
   C.   Area: The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed thirty two
(32) square feet.
   D.   Illumination Prohibited: Such signs shall not be internally
illuminated. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-13: INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGNS:
Letters must be affixed to a building and not painted on the building.
Individual letters must not exceed forty eight inches (48") in height and must
be proportional in size. The area of the individual letter sign shall be
calculated as one- half (1/2) the wall area covered by the letters, measured by
drawing a rectilinear perimeter around all of the letters, calculating the area
enclosed by the perimeter and dividing the area by two (2). This shall apply to
nonilluminated, externally illuminated or halo lit cutout letter signs.
Internally illuminated cutout letter signs shall count against the sign
allocation at a two to one (2:1) ratio. The entire area of sign copy other than
letters, such as logos or graphics, shall be counted. In no event shall the
signable area of a building for an individual letter sign exceed, in square
footage, one-third (1/3) of the square footage of the entire facade of the
building. There shall be only one signable area per building frontage. (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-14: UNDER CANOPY SIGNS:
   A.   Limitation On Number; Area: Under canopy signs shall be limited to no
more than one such sign per public entrance to any occupancy, and shall be
limited to an area not to exceed eight (8) square feet. The size of such sign
shall be included in the allowable computation of wall signs.
   B.   Clear Vertical Distance: Such signs shall maintain a clear vertical
distance above any sidewalk or pedestrianway a minimum of eight feet (8'). The
administrator may grant exceptions to this provision based on existing
architecture in place when this regulation is adopted, but in no case shall the
minimum clearance be less than seven feet (7'). (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-15: SIGNS IN RIGHTS OF WAY:
No sign other than an official traffic sign or similar sign shall be erected
within two feet (2') of the lines of any street, or within any public way,
except as authorized in sections
12-14A-10 and
12-14A-14 of this article. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-16: PROJECTIONS OVER PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Special Sign Permit Required: Except for projecting signs allowed by
section
12-14A-10 of this article or under canopy signs allowed by section
12-14A-14 of this article, signs projecting over public walkways may do so only
pursuant to a special permit from the planning commission and subject to a
minimum height of ten feet (10') from grade level to the bottom of the sign.
Signs, architectural projections, or sign structures projecting over vehicular
access areas must conform to the minimum height clearance limitations imposed
by the city for such structures.
   B.   Banners: Banners extending over streets or walkways are permitted in
the old town (OT) zone only with the approval of the administrator; such
approval shall be granted only for banners related to an event of community
interest. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-17: WAYFINDING SIGNS:
Wayfinding signs are deemed essential to the orderly growth of the community,
and especially the downtown area. Wayfinding signs shall be permitted for
groups of three (3) or more users, with designs and locations approved by the
city council. When located on public property, users shall pay an annual fee to
the city, which fee shall be established and amended from time to time by
resolution of the city council. Users shall be selected on a first come, first
serve basis; however, businesses with off premises signs shall be the last
considered. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-14A-18: MONUMENT AND FREESTANDING SIGNS:
   A.   Monument Signs: Monument signs shall be no more than six feet (6') in
height and shall not be placed in the vision clearance triangle as required in
section
12-14-4 of this chapter, unless the sign is no more than forty two inches (42")
in height above the level of the adjacent street or the grade level at the
sign, whichever is lower, and is not located within four feet (4') of the
property line or driveway. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
   B.   Freestanding Signs: The maximum allowable height of a freestanding sign
is as set forth in section
12-14-5 of this chapter. Freestanding signs may be located in the vision
clearance triangle, provided:
      1.   The lowest edge of the sign shall be at least eight feet (8') above
the ground;
      2.   The sign shall be supported by no more than two (2) support columns,
each measuring no more than eight inches (8") in diameter and located at least
three feet (3') apart; and
      3.   The support columns shall be located at least four feet (4') from
the property line and any driveway and the outermost edges of the sign shall be
located at least two feet (2') away from the property line and any driveway.
      4.   Freestanding signs located outside of the VCT are not subject to
these requirements. (Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-14A-19: FEATHERS OR PINS:
Each business with permanent signage installed may also install two (2)
feathers or pins as defined under the definition of "sign types and sign
definitions" in section
12-2-1, "Terms Defined", of this title.
   A.   Maximum height may be sixteen feet (16') from grade.
   B.   Maximum width of flexible panel may be three feet (3').
   C.   For lots with more than fifty feet (50') of frontage, one pin for every
additional fifty feet (50') is allowed. (Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
CHAPTER 15
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS USES 1
SECTION:
12-15-1: Purpose And Intent
12-15-2: Findings Of Fact
12-15-3: Definitions
12-15-4: Business Uses Permitted
12-15-5: Prohibited Activities
12-15-6: Exemptions
12-15-7: Nondiscrimination; Nonliability Of City
12-15-8: License Required
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 4, chapter 5 of this code.
12-15-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of the city council in enacting this chapter is to
maintain and protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to
mitigate the adverse secondary impacts associated with sexually oriented or
adult entertainment businesses, through land use regulation of the location and
operations of such businesses. The land use regulations set forth herein are
intended to prevent health and safety problems and dangerous and unlawful
conduct in and around such uses and premises. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-15-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
Based on information presented before it, the city council makes the following
findings of fact:
   A.   Many cities, in Washington and in other sections of the United States,
have experienced negative secondary impacts from sexually oriented business
land uses.
   B.   Certain conduct occurring on premises offering adult entertainment
creates secondary impacts that are detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and therefore such conduct must be
regulated as provided herein.
   C.   Regulation of the sexually oriented businesses including the adult
entertainment industry is necessary because in the absence of such regulation
significant criminal activity has historically and regularly occurred. This
history of criminal activity has included prostitution, illegal employment of
minors, narcotics trafficking and use, alcoholic beverage law violations,
assault, theft, breaches of the peace, tax evasion, and the presence within the
industry of individuals with outstanding arrest warrants and past criminal
behavior that may be indicative of intended future conduct.
   D.   Sexually oriented businesses that are increasingly associated with
ongoing prostitution, illegal drug transactions, disruptive conduct and other
criminal activity. Such activities constitute a threat to the public peace,
health and safety. The hours of operation of such businesses have a significant
impact on the occurrence of criminal activity.
   E.   Due to the information presented regarding the connection of
prostitution with adult entertainment and other sexually oriented businesses,
there is concern over sexually transmitted diseases which is a legitimate
health concern of the city and thus requires regulation of adult entertainment
and other sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the health, safety
and well being of the public.
   F.   No evidence has been presented to show that the location of sexually
oriented business land uses within the city will improve the commercial
viability of the community, or will otherwise have a beneficial effect, and not
have a detrimental effect.
   G.   The city may rely on the experiences and studies of other cities and
organizations in assessing the need for regulation of sexually oriented
business land use operations and licensing or of regulation.
   H.   Regulation of sexually oriented business land uses is necessary to
prevent deterioration and/or degradation of the vitality of the community
before the problem exists, rather than in response to an existing problem.
   I.   The city comprehensive plan strongly supports that adjacent land uses
be compatible.
   J.   Sexually oriented business land uses are incompatible with certain land
uses such as religious facilities, parks, daycare facilities, libraries, youth
centers and schools (including nursery schools and preschools). Such
incompatibility has been documented in studies performed throughout the United
States.
   K.   Increased levels of criminal activities occur in the vicinity of adult
entertainment and other sexually oriented business land uses, and the patrons
of such businesses are frequently found to be the victims of such criminal
activities.
   L.   Adjacency of residential and many commercial uses to sexually oriented
business land uses reduces the value of residential and commercial property.
   M.   Sexually oriented business land uses are perceived to, and usually do,
negatively impact the character of established neighborhoods.
   N.   Utilizing one thousand feet (1,000') as the requisite spacing between
sexually oriented business land uses and places of worship, libraries, daycare
facilities and youth centers, and schools (preschools or nursery schools
through twelfth grade) and five hundred feet (500') as the requisite spacing
between sexually oriented business land uses and public parks, in existence or
proposed and vested by the effective date hereof, will provide adequate
separation and buffering while providing a reasonable amount of land within the
city to be available for sexually oriented business land uses. (Ord. 849, 8-17-
2009)
12-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter and unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
ADULT ARCADE STATION OR BOOTH: Any enclosure where a patron, member or customer
would ordinarily be positioned while using an adult arcade device or viewing a
live show. An "adult arcade station or booth" shall also refer to the area in
which an adult arcade device is located and from which the adult arcade
picture, view, live show or graphic display is to be viewed. The words "adult
arcade station or booth" do not mean such enclosures that are private offices
used by owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for attending the
tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not held open to the patron,
members or the public for use, for hire or for a fee for the purpose of viewing
the entertainment provided by the arcade device or live show, and are not open
to any persons other than employees. For the purposes of this definition, the
words, "open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to
persons in the adjacent public room" mean that there may be no door, curtain,
partition or other device extending from the floor to the top of the door
frame, or any portion thereof, with the exception of a door which is completely
transparent and constructed of safety glass as specified in the international
building code so that the activity and occupant inside the enclosure may be
clearly and easily viewed or seen by persons outside the enclosure from any
point in the adjacent public room.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition, performance, dance of any type, or other
performance, not exempt from this chapter, where such entertainment involves a
person appearing or performing (either live or recreated) who:
   A.   Is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to
view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or (without
regard to gender) any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks or genitals;
or
   B.   Touches, caresses or fondles the breasts, buttocks, anus, genitals or
pubic region of themselves or a patron, or permits the touching, caressing or
fondling of their own breasts, buttocks, anus, genitals or pubic region by a
patron, another employee or anyone else with the intent to sexually arouse or
excite.
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the following:
   Adult Arcade: An establishment and individual viewing areas or booths where,
for any form of consideration, including a membership fee, one or more still or
motion picture projectors, slide projectors, digital videodisk players, or
similar machines, or other image producing machines are used to show films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, digital images, slides, or other photographic
reproduction of sexual conduct, specified anatomical areas, or specific sexual
activities.
   Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, theater, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
presents adult entertainment.
   Adult Motel: A hotel, motel, or similar establishment which:
   A.   Offers sleeping accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration and provides patrons with closed circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, digital videodisks,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction of or description of sexual conduct, specified anatomical areas, or
specific sexual activities and are not rated G, PG, PG-13, NC-13, NC-17, or R
by the Motion Picture Association of America; or
   B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
ten (10) hours; or
   C.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment or drive-in theater
where at least twenty five percent (25%) of the films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, digital videodisks, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction of or description of sexual conduct,
specified anatomical areas, or specific sexual activities and are not rated G,
PG, PG-13, NC-13, NC-17, or R by the Motion Picture Association of America, and
are shown for any form of consideration.
Adult Retail Establishment: A business having at least twenty five percent
(25%) of its volume of trade devoted to the display, barter, rental, and/or
sale of books, printed matter, videotapes, videodisks, computer software, audio
or video cassettes, films, pictures, or other merchandise, material or
paraphernalia distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct, specified anatomical
areas, or specific sexual activities or adult entertainment. For the purpose of
this chapter, "percent of its volume or trade" means that portion of the
store's display space devoted to such material, or that portion of its gross
receipts received from the sale of such material, whichever is greater.
Other Adult Entertainment Facility: Other adult entertainment facilities
include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Any commercial establishment to which a patron is invited or admitted
and where adult entertainment is presented as a part of the premises activity,
including, but not limited to, escort agencies, seminude or nude modeling or
photography studios, lingerie modeling studios, and body painting studios; or
   B.   Any premises where specified sexual activities are performed or
recorded on film, tape, or other media for commercial purposes.
BODY PAINTING STUDIO: A commercial establishment where patrons are invited to
apply paint or to view the application of paint to a nude human body.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator of the city of Long Beach or his/her
designee.
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent
contractors providing adult entertainment, who work in or at or render any
services directly related to the operation of an adult entertainment premises.
ENTERTAINER: Any person who provides adult entertainment for an "adult
entertainment" premises as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is
charged or accepted for entertainment.
ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition or dance of any type, pantomime, modeling or any
other performance.
MANAGER: Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the
affairs and/or conduct of any sexually oriented business. The term "manager"
also includes any assistant working with or under the direction of a manager to
carry out such purposes.
MASSAGE AND MASSAGE THERAPY: A healthcare service involving the external
manipulation or pressure of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. "Massage
therapy" includes techniques such as tapping, compressions, friction, Swedish
gymnastics or movements, gliding, kneading, shaking, and facial or connective
tissue stretching, with or without the aid of superficial heat, cold, water,
lubricants, or salts. "Massage therapy" does not include diagnosis or attempts
to adjust or manipulate any articulations of the body or spine or mobilization
of these articulations by the use of a thrusting force, nor does it include
genital manipulation.
MASSAGE BUSINESS: The operation of a business where massages are given.
NUDITY: Unclothed, or the showing of the human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, vulva or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of
any part of the female breast below the top of the areola with less than a
fully opaque covering, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernible
turgid state.
OBSCENE: Any matter that:
   A.   The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would
find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; or
   B.   Explicitly depicts or describes patently offensive representations or
descriptions of:
      1. Sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or
      2. Masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, excretory functions,
or lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital areas; or
      3. Violent or destructive sexual acts, including, but not limited to,
human and/or animal mutilation, dismemberment, rape and/or torture; or
      4. A dominant theme that appeals to the prurient interests of minors in
sex; which is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community
standards relating to the description or representation of sexual matters or
sadomasochistic abuse; and
   C.   When considered as a whole, and in the context in which it is used,
lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
OPERATOR: Any person operating, conducting or maintaining any sexually oriented
business.
OWNER: Any person who owns or has an ownership interest in any sexually
oriented business.
PANORAM OR PEEP SHOW: Any device which, for payment of a fee, membership fee or
other charge, is used to exhibit or display a picture, view, film, videotape,
videodisk or similar reproduction means, a live show or other graphic display
of "specified anatomical areas" or "specific sexual activities".
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or
unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental
entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any area generally visible to public view and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways,
parking lots and automobiles whether moving or not.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any adult oriented business or adult entertainment
business, adult or adult retail establishment, adult theater or adult arcade.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1. Human genitals, pubic region;
      2. Human anus; or
      3. Female breast exposing any part below the top of the areola; or
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal;
   B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or bestiality;
or
   C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
human anus or female breast.
STOCK IN TRADE: A. The wholesale dollar value of all merchandise, goods or
services, readily available for purchase, rental, viewing or use by patrons of
the establishment, excluding merchandise located in any storeroom, under the
counter, or in any other portion of the premises not open to patrons; or
   B.   The total volume of shelf space and display area in those portions of
the establishment open to patrons.
THEATER: A place of public assembly intended and expressly designed for the
presentation of motion pictures on a screen or live entertainment on a stage
other than an adult theater. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-15-4: BUSINESS USES PERMITTED 1 :
   A.   Location: Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in the C1
commercial district, RC residential commercial district, and OTW old town west
commercial district; provided, however, that no sexually oriented business may
be permitted within one thousand feet (1,000') of any place of worship, child
daycare facility, community youth center or library, or of any school, public
or private, preschool through twelfth grade, or within five hundred feet (500')
of a public park, existing as of the effective date hereof. Existing places of
worship, child daycare facilities, community youth centers and libraries,
public and private schools, public parks, and the buffers associated with those
areas as of the effective date hereof are illustrated in "Figure 1, Sexually
Oriented Business Buffer Areas", on file in the office of the city clerk.
Parcels outside of a buffer area on which sexually oriented businesses may be
permitted are shaded blue and contain the Pacific County assessor's office
parcel identification number as of the effective date hereof; see table 1 of
this section.
   TABLE 1
   PARCEL IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS WHERE
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES MAY LOCATE
           73011015003 73011019001 73011024007 73011032101
           73011015101 73011019001 73011024007 73051000002
73011008001 73011015104 73011019007 73011027001 74057021001
73011008007 73011015106 73011019007 73011027001 74057021001
73011011001 73011015304 73011020001 73011027003 74057021001
73011011001 73011015306 73011020002 73011027003 74058044001
73011011007 73011016001 73011020003 73011027005 74058044002
73011011007 73011016001 73011020004 73011027005 74058044003
73011015002 73011016107 73011024001 73011027107 74058044007
73011015002 73011016307 73011024001 73011027307 74058044007
 
Upon the adoption of this chapter, a place of worship, public or private
school, daycare facility, community youth center, residence, or library shall
not be permitted to locate within one thousand feet (1,000') of the area
designated for sexually oriented businesses without first obtaining a special
use permit pursuant to the requirements and standards set forth in section
12-11-16 of this title. A public park shall not be permitted to locate within
five hundred feet (500') of the area designated for sexually oriented
businesses without first obtaining a special use permit pursuant to the
requirements and standards set forth in section
12-11-16 of this title.
   B.   Basis For Determining Distance: The distances described in subsection A
of this section shall be a straight, horizontal line, measured from the nearest
point of the parcel proposed to be used for a sexually oriented business to the
nearest point of the parcel from which the proposed land use is to be
separated.
   C.   Design Review Procedures: All sexually oriented businesses shall comply
with the design review procedures set forth in section
12-10A-1 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 12-11-16 of this title.
12-15-5: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverages: No sexually oriented business shall be permitted
to operate in a building where alcoholic beverages are served for consumption
on the premises.
   B.   Display Of Merchandise Visible Outside Premises: No sexually oriented
business shall permit any display of merchandise or services to be visible from
outside the premises in which the business is located. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-15-6: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:
   A.   Plays, operas, musicals or other dramatic works that are not obscene.
   B.   Classes, seminars and lectures held for serious scientific or
educational purposes that are not obscene.
   C.   Exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene.
   D.   Massage facilities employing licensed massage therapists adjunct to
athletic clubs, health clubs, medical facilities, hotels, motels or beauty
salons; or massage facilities licensed by the state. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-15-7: NONDISCRIMINATION; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote
the health, safety and welfare of the general public, to protect property
values and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular
class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or
benefited by the terms of this chapter.
   B.   Duties Of City Discretionary: No provision, nor any term used in this
chapter, is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city or any of its
officers or employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this
chapter is discretionary and not mandatory.
   C.   Nonliability Of City: Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to
be nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the
part of the city, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or
damage resulting from the failure of any owner, operator, manager or other
person in charge of said premises to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice, order,
certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in connection
with the implementation or enforcement pursuant to this chapter, or by reason
of any action or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the
enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 849, 8-
17-2009)
12-15-8: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate unless the
business, its owner(s), managers, and employees are in full compliance with the
licensing requirements established by the city 1 . (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 5 of this code.
CHAPTER 16
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
12-16-1: Existing Buildings Or Uses
12-16-2: Discontinuance Or Abandonment Of Use
12-16-3: Change Of Nonconforming Use
12-16-4: Nonconforming Structure
12-16-5: Expansion Or Alteration
12-16-6: Reconstruction
12-16-7: Replacement Of Nonconforming Mobile Homes Or Manufactured Homes
12-16-8: Replacement Of Nonconforming Residential Uses
12-16-1: EXISTING BUILDINGS OR USES:
The lawful use of land or buildings existing at the effective date hereof may
be continued although such use does not conform to the regulations in this
title; provided, that if such use is abandoned, any future use of land or
building shall be made to conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is
located. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-16-2: DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT OF USE:
The discontinuance of the use of land or abandonment of a use of a building for
one year shall be prima facie evidence of discontinuance, or abandonment. (Ord.
849, 8-17-2009)
12-16-3: CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
If a nonconforming use is changed, it shall be changed to a use conforming to
the regulations of the zone in which it is located, and after change, it cannot
be changed back again to any nonconforming use. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-16-4: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:
A structure conforming with respect to use but nonconforming with respect to
height, yard requirement, coverage or density may be altered or extended;
provided, the alteration or extension does not result in further violation of
this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-16-5: EXPANSION OR ALTERATION:
No existing nonconforming structure may be enlarged, expanded in use or
reconstructed, except to a conforming use in the district. Ordinary maintenance
and repair work may be done in nonconforming uses.
No existing nonconforming use activity shall be expanded, enlarged, or altered
unless the expansion, enlargement, or alteration makes the use more conforming
or is required by law. (Ord. 912, 8-3-2015)
12-16-6: RECONSTRUCTION:
If a nonconforming building or a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire,
explosion, or act of God, to the extent of sixty percent (60%) of its value
before destruction, it may be rebuilt only as a conforming building or use,
unless otherwise recommended by the planning commission and approved by the
city council. A nonconforming building or use, damaged to the extent of less
than sixty percent (60%) of its value, may be rebuilt, provided there is no
expansion of the nonconformity.
   A.   Demolition of a damaged nonconforming building must occur within six
(6) months of its being initially damaged.
   B.   Reconstruction of a damaged nonconforming building must be initiated
within six (6) months and completed within two (2) years of its being initially
damaged. (Ord. 891, 4-13-2013)
12-16-7: REPLACEMENT OF NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOMES OR MANUFACTURED HOMES:
The replacement of a nonconforming mobile home with another mobile home is
prohibited. A nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home that is damaged or
destroyed may only be replaced subject to all requirements of the zone in which
the property is located. Replacement by a manufactured home shall be as
provided in title 10, chapter 3 of this code and in section
12-11-6 of this title. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
12-16-8: REPLACEMENT OF NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL USES:
   A.   Residential uses in zones where residences are not a permitted use may
be replaced if the home is damaged or destroyed.
   B.   The replacement of a home as permitted in subsection A of this section
is subject to and shall meet all the requirements of the zone district in which
the home is located. (Ord. 849, 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 17
MARIJUANA (CANNABIS) RELATED LAND USES
SECTION:
12-17-1: Authority And Purpose
12-17-2: Definitions
12-17-3: No City Liability; Indemnification
12-17-4: Limitations
12-17-5: Licensing
12-17-6: Location
12-17-7: Restrictions On, Requirements For, And Standards Of Operation
12-17-8: Violations
12-17-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
Pursuant to article XI, section 11 of the Washington state constitution,
chapters 69.50 and 69.51A Revised Code Of Washington, and chapter 314-55 WAC,
the city of Long Beach asserts its constitutional, statutory, and common law
authority to make and impose land use regulations and to enforce within its
limits such police, sanitary, and other regulations as are not unreasonable or
in conflict with general laws.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate the siting and operation
of any structure, activity, or land use related to the production, processing,
or retailing of recreational and medical marijuana in order to protect and
maintain the public health, safety, and welfare of the city's citizens, to
address local issues and preferences, and to mitigate potential adverse
impacts. The city intends this chapter to establish a strong and effective
regulatory framework including robust controls and procedures on paper and in
practice. (Ord. 931, 10-3-2016)
12-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in chapters 69.50 and
69.51A Revised Code Of Washington, and chapter 314-55 WAC apply, unless
otherwise stated or defined herein or unless the context clearly requires
otherwise. The following additional definitions also apply:
INDOORS: Any location that:
   A.   Is in a fully enclosed and secure structure that complies with
applicable building regulations adopted by the city of Long Beach, including
the Washington state building code;
   B.   Has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending
from the ground to the roof; and
   C.   Has a foundation, slab, or equivalent base to which the floor is
securely attached.
MARIJUANA BUSINESS: An entity licensed by the Washington state liquor and
cannabis board ("WSLCB") to participate in the recreational and/or medical
marijuana industries. Following are the main four (4) types of marijuana
businesses licensed by the WSLCB:
Marijuana Processor: An entity licensed by the WSLCB to process, package, and
label usable marijuana and marijuana infused products for sale at wholesale to
a licensed marijuana retailer.
Marijuana Producer: An entity licensed by the WSLCB to plant, grow, and harvest
marijuana for sale at wholesale to a licensed marijuana processor.
Marijuana Researcher: An entity licensed by the WSLCB to produce, process, and
possess marijuana for the purposes of conducting research on marijuana and
marijuana derived drug products.
Marijuana Retailer: An entity licensed by the WSLCB to sell only usable
marijuana, marijuana infused products, and marijuana paraphernalia at retail to
qualified patients and/or to persons twenty one (21) years of age and older.
MARIJUANA USE: A "marijuana business", as defined herein, and/or a cooperative
registered with the WSLCB.
OUTDOORS: Any location that is not "indoors" as defined herein.
PARCEL: A parcel of land for which one legal title exists. Where contiguous
legal parcels are under common ownership or control, such legal parcels shall
be counted as a single parcel for purposes of this chapter.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place or property where the general public has unrestricted
right of access and that is generally used by the public, including streets,
alleys, trails, and sidewalks; buildings and grounds used for school purposes;
premises where goods and services are offered to the public for retail sale;
public buildings; public meeting halls; lobbies, halls, and dining rooms of
hotels which are open to and are generally used by the public and to which the
public is permitted to have unrestricted access; restaurants, theaters, stores,
garages, and filling stations which are open to and are generally used by the
public and to which the public is permitted to have unrestricted access; buses
and other public conveyances of all kinds and character, and the depots, stops,
and waiting rooms used in conjunction therewith which are open to unrestricted
use and access by the public; publicly owned beaches, parks, or playgrounds;
and all other places of like or similar nature to which the general public has
unrestricted right of access and which are generally used by the public.
SENSITIVE LAND USES: A land use to be protected by distance and/or other means
from the potential and actual impacts of marijuana related uses. For purposes
of this chapter, the following are considered sensitive land uses: elementary
school; secondary school; playground; childcare center; library; public park;
public transit center; church; game arcade; amusement; recreation center or
facility; residential treatment facility; or juvenile group home. Those
sensitive land uses are defined in WAC 314-55-010 or as follows:
Amusement: An entertainment venue catering to families and/or to children.
Examples include, and are not limited to, movie theaters, miniature golf
courses, golf courses, horse ride rentals, go-cart tracks, and skateboard
parks.
Arcade: An entertainment venue featuring primarily video games, simulators,
and/or other amusement devices, where persons under twenty one (21) years of
age are not restricted.
Childcare Center: Supplementing the definition in WAC 213-55-010(4), childcare
center also includes a nursery school or preschool, meaning a school for
children who are not old enough to attend kindergarten.
Church: A property, structure, leased portion of a structure, or facility used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
Juvenile Group Home: A facility providing sheltered care for those with special
needs and who are under twenty one (21) years of age.
Residential Treatment Facility: A facility providing for treatment of drug and
alcohol dependency. Also called a rehabilitation or "rehab" center. (Ord. 931,
10-3-2016)
12-17-3: NO CITY LIABILITY; INDEMNIFICATION:
Any person or entity conducting a marijuana use in the city of Long Beach
agrees to the following:
   A.   By accepting a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the licensee
waives and releases the city, its officers, elected officials, employees,
volunteers, and agents from any liability of any kind that results from any
arrest or prosecution of business owners, operators, employees, clients, or
customers for a violation of federal, state, or local laws and regulations.
   B.   By accepting a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the licensee
agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, elected
officials, employees, volunteers, agents, insurers, and self-insurance pool
against all liability, claims, and demands on account of any injury, loss, or
damage, including, without limitation, claims arising from bodily injury,
disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind
whatsoever arising out of or in a manner that is subject of the license. (Ord.
931, 10-3-2016)
12-17-4: LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to be, nor should be considered to
be, an allowance for more activity pertaining to the production, processing,
researching, and selling of marijuana than is permitted by state law and by
rules and regulations of the WSLCB.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to be, nor should be considered to
be, a limitation on the city from objecting to an application for a license,
issuance of a license, or renewal of a license by the WSLCB.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede Washington
state law prohibiting the acquisition, possession, manufacture, sale, or use of
marijuana in any manner not authorized by chapter 69.51A or 69.50 Revised Code
Of Washington. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede
legislation prohibiting persons from engaging in conduct that endangers others
or that creates a nuisance. (Ord. 931, 10-3-2016)
12-17-5: LICENSING:
   A.   City License Required: To establish or operate a marijuana business in
the city of Long Beach, a person or entity must obtain and maintain both a city
issued business license and a city issued marijuana operation license. To
establish or operate a cooperative in the city of Long Beach, a person must
obtain and maintain a city issued marijuana operation license.
   B.   State License A Prerequisite To Local Consideration: Only valid state
licensed marijuana businesses and cooperatives properly registered with the
WSLCB may apply for and be eligible to receive the necessary city issued
licenses described herein. The application for each state license must have
first been reviewed by the city of Long Beach before being granted by the
WSLCB.
   C.   Lack Of State License, Registration: Any marijuana related operation,
business, or facility that does not have a valid state license pursuant to
chapter 69.50 Revised Code Of Washington or that has not properly registered
pursuant to chapter 69.51A Revised Code Of Washington cannot obtain a city
issued business license or a city issued marijuana operation license. This
prohibition includes, but is not limited to, cooperatives, medical cannabis
collective gardens, medical cannabis dispensaries, and any marijuana
production, processing, retail, or research business, facility, or operation.
Such operations, businesses, or facilities are prohibited in the city.
   D.   Business License Application: To be eligible to obtain a city issued
business license, the applicant must apply online to receive a business license
and follow the normal business license procedures. The application must clearly
state it is for a marijuana related business.
   E.   Marijuana Operation License Application: To be eligible to obtain a
marijuana operation license, the applicant must apply for a marijuana operation
license on forms made available by the city. The applicant must pay an
application fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00). Before any license is
issued, the proposed use will be evaluated for land use, zoning, and code
compliance and the applicant must successfully pass inspections described
herein evaluating structural suitability, fire safety, and security. Approved
licenses may be reviewed annually.
   F.   Annual Marijuana Operations Licensing Fee: Each city licensed marijuana
use shall pay an annual marijuana operations licensing fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) at the beginning of each operating year. The city will not
prorate or refund marijuana operations licensing fees.
   G.   Initial City Inspections: Prior to the city issuing a marijuana
operation license, the applicant must make the property available for the
following inspections by city personnel or designees. All fees described herein
must be paid in advance of inspection. The following must occur:
      1.   An inspection by the Long Beach building inspector or his/her
designee. The inspection must have no negative findings, or any negative
findings must be addressed and the site reinspected until no negative findings
result. The fee for the initial inspection shall be two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). The fee for each subsequent inspection required to address negative
findings shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      2.   An inspection by the Long Beach fire chief or his/her designee. The
inspection must have no negative findings, or any negative findings must be
addressed and the site reinspected until no negative findings result. The fee
for the initial inspection shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The
fee for each subsequent inspection required to address negative findings shall
be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      3.   An inspection by the Long Beach police chief or his/her designee.
The inspection must have no negative findings, or any negative findings must be
addressed and the site reinspected until no negative findings result. The fee
for the initial inspection shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The
fee for each subsequent inspection required to address negative findings shall
be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   H.   Annual Inspections Required: Every year, the site shall be inspected by
city personnel for structural suitability, fire safety, and security. The cost
of these inspections shall be paid for via the annual marijuana operations
licensing fee.
   I.   Insurance Requirements: To obtain a license, insurance requirements set
forth in WAC 314-55-082 shall be met. In addition, the city and its employees,
agents, and volunteers must be named as an additional insured on all general
liability, umbrella, and excess insurance policies to the same extent as the
state of Washington. The licensee's insurance policies shall be primary to any
insurance that the city may possess and the licensee's insurance policies shall
state this requirement.
   J.   Insurance, License Deficiency; Suspension Or Revocation: If an
insurance or license deficiency exists, the city may suspend or rescind city
issued permits. (Ord. 931, 10-3-2016)
12-17-6: LOCATION:
A validly licensed marijuana use may be sited in the city of Long Beach subject
to the following:
   A.   Marijuana Producer, Processor, Or Researcher: A state licensed
marijuana producer, processor, or researcher may be located as a conditional
use in the L1 (light industrial) and C2 (commercial retail warehouse) zoning
districts but is prohibited in all other zoning districts. The property on
which the producer, processor, or research facility is located shall be a
minimum of two hundred feet (200') from the nearest property on which a
residential land use is located.
   B.   Marijuana Retailer: A state licensed marijuana retailer may be located
as a conditional use in the C1 (commercial) and RC (residential commercial)
zoning districts but is prohibited in all other zoning districts. A proposed
retail business shall not be located on or immediately adjacent to (sharing a
property line with or directly across the street from) a parcel on which a
residential land use is located.
   C.   Cooperative: A state registered cooperative may be located as a
conditional use in the R1 (single-family residential), R1R (single-family
residential restricted), S1 (shoreline single- family residential), RC
(residential commercial), C1 (commercial), C2 (commercial retail warehouse),
and L1 (light industrial) zoning districts but is prohibited in all other
zoning districts.
   D.   Additional Buffer Zones:
      1.   No marijuana use shall be established on a parcel located within one
thousand feet (1,000') of a parcel on which any existing state licensed
marijuana retailer is located.
      2.   No state licensed marijuana producer, processor, retailer, or
researcher shall be established within one thousand feet (1,000') of a parcel
on which any of the following uses is located: elementary school; secondary
school; or playground.
      3.   No state licensed marijuana producer, processor, retailer, or
researcher shall be established within one hundred feet (100') of a parcel on
which any of the following uses is located: childcare center; library; public
park; public transit center; church; game arcade; amusement; recreation center
or facility; residential treatment facility; or juvenile group home.
      4.   No state registered cooperative shall be located within one thousand
feet (1,000') of a parcel on which any of the following uses is located:
elementary school; secondary school; or playground.
      5.   No state registered cooperative shall be located within one hundred
feet (100') of a parcel on which any of the following uses is located:
childcare center; library; public park; public transit center; church; game
arcade; amusement; recreation center or facility; residential treatment
facility; or juvenile group home.
      6.   A state registered cooperative must be twenty feet (20') or more
from any occupied legal residential structure located on a separate parcel or
from any residential accessory structure used primarily by children, for
example a playhouse, measured from the nearest exterior wall of the structure
where the cooperative's operations occur to the nearest exterior wall of the
residential structure or residential accessory structure.
      7.   For a state registered cooperative located in a mobile home park,
the structure where the cooperative operates must be within twenty feet (20')
of an occupied mobile home, measured from nearest exterior wall of the
structure where the cooperative's operations occur to the nearest exterior wall
of the mobile home;
      8.   No state registered cooperative or state licensed marijuana
producer, processor, or researcher can be located within one hundred feet
(100') of Pacific Highway, measured from nearest property line to nearest right
of way line.
      9.   Unless otherwise stated, the distance shall be measured in the most
direct route over or across public walks, streets, or other public passageways
between the property lines of the location of the marijuana use and the
property lines of the location of the sensitive land use(s) that are nearest
one another. The city shall rely upon its sensitive land uses map, adopted by
reference herein and as amended in the future, to determine whether a proposed
marijuana use is located within one thousand feet (1,000') or one hundred feet
(100') of a sensitive land use, except city personnel may also take into
account uses or other changes that have occurred since the sensitive land uses
map was most recently updated. (Ord. 931, 10-3-2016)
12-17-7: RESTRICTIONS ON, REQUIREMENTS FOR, AND STANDARDS OF OPERATION:
Following are restrictions on, requirements for, and standards of operation for
marijuana uses located in the city of Long Beach:
   A.   Compliance With State Law: Chapters 69.50 and 69.51A Revised Code Of
Washington, and chapter 314-55 WAC, which establish and regulate a statewide
regulatory scheme for the production, processing, and retailing of recreational
and medical marijuana, are incorporated by reference to the extent permitted by
law. Marijuana uses within the city must comply with all applicable state laws
and regulations.
   B.   No Delivery Services: No person, business, or entity may operate a
marijuana delivery service in the city of Long Beach.
   C.   No Nonconforming Status: Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 16,
"Nonconforming Uses And Structures", of this title, an existing marijuana use
that is not validly licensed or registered with the WSLCB shall immediately
cease operations and seek legal status via the applicable WSLCB licensing or
registration process.
   D.   Operating Standards: The following restrictions apply to city licensed
marijuana uses' operation, including growing, producing, processing, storing,
displaying, and/or selling marijuana and any other aspect of the marijuana use
licensed by the city:
      1.   Odor: The operation shall not subject occupants of neighboring
parcels who are of normal sensitivity to objectionable odors.
      2.   Lighting: All lights used shall be shielded and downcast or
otherwise positioned in a manner that will not shine light or allow light glare
to exceed the boundaries of the parcel upon which they are placed.
      3.   Noise: Operational noise shall not exceed the noise disturbance
standards as set forth in title 5, chapter 5, "Noise Control", of this code.
Any noise/vibration disturbance shall be abated, whether caused by loud noise
or by low frequency disturbance.
      4.   Visibility: Marijuana plants, products, or related paraphernalia
shall not be visible from the public right of way, publicly traveled private
roads, a public place, or a neighbor's parcel.
      5.   Signage:
         a.   For marijuana businesses, advertising signage must comply with
the requirements of WAC 314-55-155, as may be amended, and may not exceed 11.11
square feet in area. Mandatory cautionary signage must comply with the
requirements of WAC 314-55-086, as may be amended.
         b.   For cooperatives, there shall be no exterior signage or symbology
relating to the cooperative or to marijuana.
      6.   Compliance With City Codes: The location, including the property and
any structures, of a city licensed marijuana use shall be in compliance with
the applicable provisions of the city's building regulations, the currently
adopted edition of the Washington state building code, and all other applicable
building related codes.
      7.   Nuisance: The operation of the city licensed marijuana use shall not
adversely affect the health or safety of the nearby residents or others by
creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic,
vibration, or other adverse impacts and shall not be hazardous due to use or
storage of materials, processes, products, or waste.
      8.   Security: Security measures for a city licensed marijuana use shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
         a.   A burglary alarm system that is professionally monitored and
maintained in good working condition;
         b.   Exterior lighting that illuminates all entry points but does not
scatter light off site; and
         c.   Dead bolt locks on all exterior doors.
   E.   Additional Cooperative Specific Restrictions:
      1.   Gas Prohibited: A cooperative is prohibited from using gas products
(CO2, butane, etc.) for growing and processing marijuana. If propane is the
main source of heat in a domicile when a cooperative is established, it may
continue to be used for that purpose.
      2.   Limitations On Delivery, Sale, And Exchange: No marijuana grown and/
or processed by a cooperative may be delivered to anyone other than one of the
qualifying patients participating in the cooperative. Cooperative members may
not sell any marijuana plants or products or exchange any marijuana plants or
products for any item(s) of value.
      3.   No On Site Display Or Sale: At a cooperative location, there shall
be no on site display or sale of paraphernalia related to the use or
consumption of marijuana.
      4.   Location Limitation: All aspects of a cooperative's operation,
including, but not limited to, growing and processing marijuana, must be
located indoors, in a permanent building or a greenhouse permanently affixed to
the ground. No aspect of a cooperative's operation is permitted outdoors.
   F.   Restrictions On Quantities: The quantity of any marijuana plants or
products at any single location shall conform to state laws and regulations.
The possession or cultivation of more than the authorized number of marijuana
plants or products on one parcel, either indoors or outdoors, is prohibited.
(Ord. 931, 10-3-2016)
12-17-8: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Failure To Comply: Failure to comply with any restriction, requirement,
or standard described herein or with state laws and regulations shall result in
the suspension or revocation of the city issued marijuana operations license
and, if applicable, the city issued business license. Such a failure to comply
requires immediate cessation of the marijuana use.
      1.   The city shall notify the licensee in writing by certified mail that
a city issued marijuana operation license has been revoked or suspended and the
grounds therefor. Upon receipt of such notice or within three (3) days of the
date of mailing, whichever is earlier, the licensee must immediately correct
the identified violations or cease all operation of the marijuana use.
      2.   Failure to correct the identified violations or to cease operation
is designated as a civil infraction and may be enforced as such, although this
designation shall not be construed to limit any other enforcement mechanism.
      3.   A licensee may, within seven (7) days from the date that the license
suspension or revocation notice was mailed to the licensee, appeal from such
suspension or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the
grounds therefor with the city clerk. The city clerk shall set a date for
hearing said appeal and notify the licensee by mail of the time and place of
the hearing. After the hearing thereon the hearings examiner shall, after
appropriate findings of fact and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or
overrule the suspension or revocation and may impose any terms upon the
continuance of the license. The decision of the hearings examiner shall be
final. The licensee and/or the city may seek review of the decision by the
superior court of Washington in and for Pacific County within thirty (30) days
from the date of the decision. The suspension or revocation shall remain in
effect during any appeal process.
   B.   Improper Use Of Land: It is a violation of this chapter for any person
or entity owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any
parcel of land within any incorporated area of the city of Long Beach to cause
or allow such parcel of land to be used for marijuana related purposes in
excess of the limitations of or in noncompliance with the requirements and
standards set forth herein. Such violations are designated as civil infractions
and may be enforced as such, although this designation shall not be construed
to limit any other enforcement mechanism.
   C.   Nuisance: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on
the city's authority to abate any nuisance violation that may exist from the
otherwise legal production, processing, or retailing of recreational marijuana
on any parcel, including from within a fully enclosed and secure building. In
addition, all violations of this chapter are deemed to be a public nuisance and
may be abated by the city under the procedures set forth in title 5, chapter 2,
"Public Nuisances", of this code or in state law for the abatement of public
nuisances.
   D.   Enforcement: Any violation(s) of this chapter or of state law may be
enforced as set forth in title 14, "Enforcement Procedures", of this code. In
addition, a violation of this chapter or of state law may be enforced as a
civil infraction where applicable or, where the violation is also a violation
of chapters 69.50 and 69.51A Revised Code Of Washington or related regulations,
prosecuted as set forth in title 6, chapter 5, "Criminal Code; Miscellaneous
Offenses", of this code. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a
limitation on the city's authority to enforce any other violations of this
code. (Ord. 931, 10-3-2016)
CHAPTER 18
FOOD VENDORS
SECTION:
12-18-1: Intent
12-18-2: Definitions
12-18-3: Licensing And Site Plan Review Application And Approval Required
12-18-4: Design Standards For Food Vendors
12-18-5: Safety
12-18-6: General Location Standards
12-18-7: Permit Limitations
12-18-8: Permit Revocation
12-18-9: Appeals
12-18-1: INTENT:
   A.   Provide an opportunity for food vendors in zones where the use would
enhance the pedestrian experience and be supportive of the intent and vision of
the commercial zone in which it's located.
   B.   Provide regulations for the appropriate siting and design of food
vending activities to provide for the compatibility of such use with adjacent
retail activities.
   C.   Provide standards that protect the public's health, safety and welfare
with operation of these activities.
   D.   Provide standards that protect the aesthetic requirements of the zone
in which it's located. (Ord. 1008, 11-21-2022)
12-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                    A small vehicle with wheels but no engine from which is
                    equipped to cook, prepare, serve, sell food. Some sell
                    frozen or prepackaged food; others have on-board kitchens
FOOD CART:          and prepare food from scratch, or they heat up food that
                    was prepared in a brick-and-mortar commercial kitchen. Food
                    carts are to be located onsite each day and removed each
                    evening.
                    A food truck is a large, motorized vehicle or trailer,
                    equipped to cook, prepare, serve, and sell food. Some sell
FOOD TRUCK:         frozen or prepackaged food; others have on-board kitchens
                    and prepare food from scratch, or they heat up food that
                    was prepared in a brick-and-mortar commercial kitchen.
FOOD VENDOR:        Describes either a food truck or food cart.
                    Outdoor dining facilities that are associated with and in
OUTDOOR FOOD COURT: the immediate vicinity of a permitted group of food trucks
                    that serves food or drinks for on-site consumption. (Ord.
                    1008, 11-21-2022)
 
12-18-3: LICENSING AND SITE PLAN REVIEW APPLICATION AND APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   All business activities shall meet requirements of section
4-1-2 for City business licensing.
Site plan review approval required:
      1.   No food truck or food cart shall be permitted to operate within the
City of Long Beach without first obtaining site plan approval pursuant to the
requirements of chapter 12-10.
   B.   Site Plan Review Application: Food trucks, food cart and court
applications shall include detailed scale drawings of the location, materials
specifications and drawings showing all four (4) sides of the trucks or carts
and any logos, printing or signs which will be incorporated. The application
shall contain a plan for scheduled hours of operation that includes time of
day, days of week, months of the year, and scheduled closings. Written approval
of the landowner shall also be submitted at the time of application. The plan
will also show distance to adjoining property lines, any appurtenances such as
picnic tables, seating areas, garbage cans, Sani cans, screenings and
plantings, lighting fixtures and proposed signage locations.
   C.   Site Plan Review Consideration And Decision:
      1.   The City staff shall review each application for consistency with
the standards and intent of this chapter.
      2.   Each food truck and food cart shall be placed on private property,
so it does not obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1008,
11-21-2022; amd. Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
12-18-4: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR FOOD VENDORS:
   A.   All sides of the food truck must have screening. The non-customer side
must be screened from residential view. The use of vegetation for screening is
acceptable. At a minimum lattice or a small picket fence is required,
surrounding the food truck. All other materials must be approved by the city.
The combination of screening and vegetation is also acceptable; any screening
must go through design review. Food carts do not require screening.
   B.   The trucks must have water, sewer, and power. The connections will meet
the same requirements that the city holds RV hook-ups (each food truck will
have a water connection with a ¾" faucet and a 4" sewer connection, along with
a power junction box with a breaker). The power must be installed underground.
Food carts are self-contained and not required to connect to any utility. Food
carts must dispose of trash and grey water as required by State of Washington
Codes.
   C.   All signage will be subject to design review. No signage is allowed on
public property.
   D.   All lighting must face down and not act as a distraction to drivers. No
flashing or moving lighting is permitted. Lantern lights are preferred.
   E.   A canopy, awning or umbrella may be included with the food truck. The
canopy, awning or umbrella shall be of vinyl, canvas, or similar durable
material. All parts of such umbrella or canopy must have a minimum of eight
feet (8') of vertical clearance to the ground. Food carts may use an umbrella
with the same requirements as food trucks.
   F.   Each food truck shall provide a minimum of two (2) picnic tables and
two (2) garbage cans. Both of which are the sole responsibility of the property
owner. The city requires the use of planters throughout the court, each truck
should have a minimum of two (2) planters. Food carts shall provide a minimum
of one garbage can and are not required to have a planter.
   G.   Each food court must provide a minimum of two (2) sani-cans if public
restrooms are not located within one hundred feet (100'). These portable
restrooms must be properly screened as described through the design review
process.
Food vendors siding materials shall be low maintenance and cleanable,
preferably painted or wrapped and of non-corrosive metal, including stainless
steel or aluminum. The aesthetics of the food truck must match the city's early
seashore theme.
   H.   Each food truck shall be a self-contained unit. Utility service
connections shall be required. Electrical service connections are required:
      1.   Main power supply lines are not allowed overhead.
      2.   The outlet location must be placed outside the walkways which are
accessible to public and private use.
      3.   Length of electrical hookup must be within fifteen feet (15') of the
stand.
      4.   No extension cords will be allowed.
      5.   Each food truck shall require an electrical permit and will require
inspection prior to operation. A copy of the permit must be provided to the
city.
   I.   Food vendor operations must have a permit from the Pacific County
Health Department when required and must comply with all applicable Health
Department requirements.
   J.   All persons conducting a food vendor business within the City must keep
the site clean and orderly at all times and pick up any refuse or debris and
clean up liquid spillage deposited by any person using the business location.
   K.   Support equipment and accessories shall generally be self-contained
within the food vendors' stand. Support equipment and accessories must not be
placed so as to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or distract from the
pedestrian experience. (Ord. 1008, 11-21-2022)
12-18-5: SAFETY:
   A.   Noise-making devices designed to attract attention and loud shouting or
yelling to attract attention are prohibited, must comply with the city's noise
ordinance (chapter 5-5) must comply with all applicable state, county, and city
regulations.
   B.   All food trucks shall have fire extinguisher(s) available according to
current Uniform Fire Code requirements.
   C.   There must be four (4) external hand sanitizing stations at each food
court. Food trucks and food carts must have hand sanitizer available. (Ord.
1008, 11-21-2022)
12-18-6: GENERAL LOCATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Food vendors and maximum food vendors allowed may be located in the
following zones:
      1.   Residential Commercial: Two (2) total in the RC Zone (RC - 3rd ST N
to Pioneer Rd - generally the first block off of Pacific Hwy, both east and
west).
      2.   Commercial: Two (2) total in the C1 Zone (C1 - North of Pioneer
generally the first block off of Pacific Hwy, both east and west and 11th ST
South to southern city limits, first block off of Pacific Hwy, both east and
west).
      3.   Old Town Zone: Twelve (12) total in groups of four (4) at each
location. Downtown core - 11th ST S north to 3rd ST N - generally the first
block off of Pacific Hwy, both east and west.
      4.   Shoreline Resort And Shoreline Resort Restricted: Two (2) total
between both zones. May be in groups or individual. West of 1889 line Sid
Snyder to 5th ST SW, 14th to 16th ST NE, 22nd to 23rd NE and 26th to 28th NE.
City of Long Beach zoning map can be accessed at the City's website:
www.longbeachwa.gov.
   B.   In determining whether or not the proposed location would be permitted,
the following criteria shall be considered:
      1.   The type and intensity of the proposed use and the type and
intensity of existing uses.
      2.   The width of the sidewalk, or parking available.
      3.   The proximity and location of existing street furniture.
      4.   Established or proposed pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns.
   C.   The site and food vendor together shall not create a pedestrian or
vehicular traffic hazard.
   D.   The food vendor location shall promote the pedestrian nature of the
general area in which it is located. (Ord. 1008, 11-21-2022)
12-18-7: PERMIT LIMITATIONS:
   A.   A food vendor site plan review approval may not be transferred.
   B.   Any permit or approval issued by the City for a food vendor on private
property does not affect the permittee's responsibility to secure and maintain
a contract or written approval from the property owner. (Ord. 1008, 11-21-2022)
12-18-8: PERMIT REVOCATION:
The City Administrator, Police Chief, or designee may immediately revoke or
suspend a permit or deny either the issuance or renewal thereof if City staff
finds that:
   A.   The applicant or permittee has violated or failed to meet any of the
provisions of this chapter or conditions of the permit;
   B.   The food truck or food cart is detrimental to the surrounding
businesses or to the public due to either appearance or condition of the stand;
   C.   Any required licenses have been suspended, revoked or cancelled or
violated.
The property owner has withdrawn approval or revoked the contract allowing the
use on his or her property.
Upon denial, suspension or revocation, the City Administrator or designee shall
notify the applicant or permittee in writing of the action the city has taken
and the reasons why the permit is being denied, suspended or revoked. After
giving such notice by mail or in person, if the food vendor has not been
removed within fifteen (15) days, legal action will be taken according to City
Code. The city may cause a removal of any food vendor found in violation of
this chapter. The penalty for this section is assessed under section
14-3-3. (Ord. 1008, 11-21-2022)
12-18-9: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city may appeal the decision pursuant
to the requirements of section
12-10-8. (Ord. 1008, 11-21-2022)
TITLE 13
CRITICAL AREAS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
13-1-1: Title
13-1-2: Authority
13-1-3: Purpose
13-1-4: Jurisdiction Over And Designation Of Critical Areas
13-1-5: Applicability
13-1-1: TITLE:
The title shall be known as the CRITICAL AREAS REGULATIONS ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF LONG BEACH. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This title is established pursuant to the requirements of the Growth Management
Act RCW 36.70A. The Director of the Department of Community Development (“the
Director”) or his or her designee(s) shall be responsible for administering the
provisions and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-1-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to:
   A.   Protect the public health, safety and welfare by preventing and
minimizing adverse impacts of development;
   B.   Protect the public and public resources and facilities from injury,
loss of life, property damage or financial loss due to flooding, erosion, , or
soils subsidence;
   C.   Implement goals, policies, guidelines and requirements of the City of
Long Beach Comprehensive Plan and the Washington State Growth Management Act.
   D.   Preserve and protect critical areas functions and values as required by
the Washington State Growth Management Act by regulating development within and
adjacent to critical areas, while allowing for the reasonable use of private
property;
   E.   Protect critical areas in accordance with the Growth Management Act and
through inclusion of best available science in development of these regulations
pursuant to WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-1-4: JURISDICTION OVER AND DESIGNATION OF CRITICAL AREAS:
   A.   The City shall regulate all uses, activities, and developments within,
adjacent to, or likely to affect one or more critical areas, consistent with
provisions of this chapter. All areas within the City meeting the definition of
one or more critical areas are subject to provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Critical areas regulated by this chapter include:
      1.   Wetlands.
      2.   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas.
      3.   Frequently Flooded Areas.
      4.   Critical aquifer recharge areas.
      5.   Geologically Hazardous Areas.
   C.   The City has designated critical areas by defining their
characteristics. An applicant shall determine whether his or her property is
wholly or partially one or more critical area(s) as defined in this chapter, or
whether the subject property is proximate to one or more critical area(s) that
would require a setback or buffer. The City shall verify the determination of
the applicant pursuant to definitions in this chapter.
   D.   Requirements of this chapter shall not remove a person’s obligation
with respect to applicable provisions of any other Federal, State, or local law
or regulation, including, but not limited to, the acquisition of any other
required permit or approval. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-1-5: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands, all land uses
and development activity, and all structures and facilities in the City,
whether or not a permit or authorization is required, and shall apply to every
person, firm, partnership, corporation, group, governmental agency, or other
entity that owns or leases land within the City of Long Beach. No person,
company, agency, or applicant shall alter a critical area or buffer except as
consistent with the purpose and requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The City of Long Beach shall not approve any development proposal, as
defined below, or otherwise issue any authorization to alter the condition of
any land, water, or vegetation, or to construct or alter any structure or
improvement in, over, or on a critical area or associated buffer, without first
assuring compliance with requirements of this chapter. Any cumulative filling,
grading, or clearing activity in excess of twenty (20) cubic yards of material
per parcel is also subject to requirements of this chapter.
   Development proposals include proposed activity that require any of the
following, or any subsequently adopted permits or required approvals not
expressly exempted from these regulations:
      1.   Building Permit.
      2.   Unclassified Use Permit.
      3.   Grading Permit.
      4.   Subdivision.
      5.   Conditional Use Permit.
      6.   Variance Approval.
      7.   Binding Site Plan.
      8.   Short Subdivision.
      9.   Right-of-Way Disturbance Permit Shoreline Variance.
      10.   Public Agency or Utility Exception.
   When an applicant knows or suspects that critical areas are located on or
near the subject property, the applicant shall contact the City prior to
applying for development permits. Disclosure of critical areas early will
reduce delays during the permit review process.
   In addition to information required for a development permit, any
development activity subject to provisions of this chapter may be required to
submit a Critical Areas Report as described in this chapter.
   C.   Properties and activities subject to this title may also be subject to
other regulations. In the event of any conflict within this title or between
this title and any other regulation of the City, the regulation that provides
the greater protection for the particular critical area shall apply.
   D.   Failure to comply with provisions of this chapter shall cause the
violator to be subject to enforcement procedures under this chapter and the
applicable requirements of the Long Beach City Code, including the provisions
of Title 14, Penalties. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
13-2-1: Terms Defined
13-2-1: TERMS DEFINED:
ADAPTIVE      A management or regulatory approach designed to “learn by doing,” and to actively
MANAGEMENT:   test hypotheses and adjust elements of the approach as new information becomes
              available.
              Immediately adjoining (in contact with the boundary of the influence area) or within
              a distance less than that needed to separate activities from critical areas to ensure
              protection of the functions and values of the critical areas. Adjacent shall mean any
ADJACENT:     activity or development located:
              •   On site immediately adjoining a critical area; or
              •   A distance equal to or less than the required critical area buffer width and
              building setback.
AGENCY:       An administrative division of a government or a governmental bureau.
              Any human-induced change in the existing condition of a critical area or its buffer.
              Alteration includes, but is not limited to: grading, filling, dredging, channelizing,
              clearing (vegetation), applying pesticides, discharging waste, construction,
ALTERATION:   compaction, excavation, modifying for storm water management, relocating, or other
              activities that change the existing landform, vegetation, hydrology, wildlife, or
              habitat value, of critical areas. This definition of alteration differs from the
              definition as it is used in the Title 12 (Zoning).
ANADROMOUS:   Fish that spawn in fresh water and mature in the marine environment.
              An entity that files an application for a permit under this chapter and who is either
APPLICANT:    the owner of the land on which that proposed activity would be located, a contract
              purchaser, or the authorized agent of such a person.
AQUATIC       Ecological systems where the regular or occasional presence of water is the dominant
HABITAT:      factor determining characteristics of the site. Aquatic systems are made up of
              wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes and/or other deepwater habitats.
AQUIFER:      A geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation capable of storing
              groundwater and yielding that groundwater to wells or springs.
AQUIFER
RECHARGE      A surface land or water area through which an aquifer is replenished.
AREA:
BEST          Research conducted by qualified individuals using documented methodologies that lead
AVAILABLE     to verifiable results. BAS is used in development and implementation of critical
SCIENCE       areas policies and regulations pursuant to WAC 365-195-900 through WAC 365-195-925,
(BAS):        as may be amended.
              Practices or systems of practices and management measures that:
              •   Control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation;
BEST          •   Minimize adverse impacts to surface water and ground water flow, circulation
MANAGEMENT    patterns, and to the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of wetlands;
PRACTICES:    •   Protect trees and vegetation designated to be retained during and following site
              construction; and
              •   Provide standards for proper use of chemical herbicides within critical areas.
BUFFER:       An area contiguous to and protective of a critical area that is required for the
              continued maintenance, function, and/or structural stability of the critical area.
CITY:         The City of Long Beach.
CLEARING:     Removal of vegetation by any means; includes but is not limited to cutting or
              grubbing vegetation.
CLUSTERING:   Lots or other development grouped rather than spread uniformly across a site, so that
              other areas of the site remain undisturbed as open space.
              A plan outlining actions that would be triggered if monitoring of a project revealed
CONTINGENCY   a problem that would prevent the site from reaching its stated goals, objectives, or
PLAN:         performance standards. Contingency plans should identify anticipated problems and the
              specific activity that would be implemented to rectify each problem.
CRITICAL
AQUIFER       An area determined to have critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable
RECHARGE      water as defined by WAC 365-190-080(2).
AREA:
              Aquifer recharge areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, frequently
CRITICAL      flooded areas, geologically hazardous areas and wetlands as defined in RCW 36.70A.030
AREAS:        and described by WAC 365-190-030(2). Also shellfish, kelp, eelgrass, herring, and
              smelt spawning areas, as those terms are used and defined by the Growth Management
              Act (RCW 36.70A.170).
              A checklist provided by the City and completed by an applicant that is used to assist
CRITICAL      the City to determine whether critical areas are present on or proximate to the
AREAS         subject property. This is an initial screening, a pre-application tool that aids in
CHECKLIST:    identifying the type and extent of information that will be required in the formal
              application as well as the permits that may be required for the proposal.
              Any activity relating to use or alteration of land requiring a permit or approval
              from the city, including, but not limited to: commercial or residential building
              permit; binding site plan; conditional use permit; franchise; right-of-way permit;
DEVELOPMENT:  grading and clearing permit; mixed use approval; planned residential development;
              shoreline conditional use permit; shoreline substantial development permit; shoreline
              variance; short subdivision; special use permit; subdivision; flood hazard permit;
              unclassified use permit; utility and other use permit; variance; rezone; or any
              required permit or approval not expressly exempted by this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT   Any permit issued by the City of Long Beach or other authorized agency for
PERMIT:       construction, land use, or the alteration of land.
DIRECTOR:     The Director of the Department of Community Development for the City of Long Beach or
              his or her designee(s).
EMERGENCY     Action taken to address an unanticipated and imminent threat to public health,
ACTION:       safety, or the environment which requires immediate action within a time period too
              short to allow full compliance with this chapter.
              An action taken to improve the condition and function of a critical area. In the case
ENHANCEMENT:  of wetland or stream, the term includes a compensation project performed to improve
              the conditions of an existing degraded wetland or stream to increase its functional
              value.
EROSION:      The process by which soil particles are mobilized and transported by natural agents
              such as wind, rain, frost action, or stream flow.
EROSION       On-site and off-site control measures that are used to control conveyance and/or
CONTROL:      deposition of earth or sediments associated with development.
EROSION       Those areas that because of natural characteristics, including vegetative cover, soil
HAZARD AREA:  texture, slope gradient, and rainfall patterns, or human-induced changes to such
              characteristics, are vulnerable to erosion.
              Areas necessary for maintaining species in suitable habitats within their natural
              geographic distribution so that isolated subpopulations are not created as designated
              by WAC 365-190-080(5). These areas include:
              •   Areas with which state or federally designated endangered, threatened, and
              sensitive species have a primary association;
FISH AND      •   Habitats of local importance, including, but not limited to, areas designated as
WILDLIFE      priority habitat by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife;
HABITAT       •   Naturally occurring ponds under twenty acres and their submerged aquatic beds
CONSERVATION  that provide fish and wildlife habitat;
AREAS:        •   Waters of the state, including lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters,
              underground waters, salt waters and all other surface water and watercourses within
              the jurisdiction of the state of Washington;
              •   Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a governmental or
              tribal entity;
              •   State natural area preserves and natural resources conservation areas; and
              •   Land essential for preserving connections between habitat blocks and open spaces.
FLOOD/        A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normal dry-land
FLOODING:     areas from the overflow waters.
              Those floodways and associated floodplains designated by the Federal Emergency
              Management Act (FEMA) flood hazard classifications and as delineated on the area
FREQUENTLY    flood hazard maps for the City of Long Beach dated 1979, or as subsequently revised
FLOODED AREAS by FEMA, as being within the 100-year floodplain, or those floodways and associated
(Flood Hazard floodplains delineated by a comprehensive flood hazard management plan adopted by the
Areas):       City of Long Beach, as being within the 100-year floodplain or having experienced
              historic flooding. For the purpose of this chapter, in case of conflict between FEMA
              flood hazard maps and the comprehensive flood hazard management plan designations,
              the more restrictive designation shall apply.
FUNCTIONALLY
ISOLATED      Areas which are functionally separated from a wetland and do not protect the wetland
BUFFER AREA   from adverse impacts due to preexisting roads, structures, or vertical separation.
(FIBA):
              Physical, chemical, and biological processes or attributes of a critical area.
              Functions and values include natural processes performed by wetlands and some other
FUNCTIONS     critical areas, such as facilitating food chain production; providing wildlife
(also         habitat for nesting, rearing, resting, or foraging; maintaining availability and
values):      quality of water; acting as recharge and/or discharge areas for groundwater aquifers;
              and moderating surface water and storm water flows (flood control). In addition,
              functions and values include views and recreation.
GEOLOGICALLY  Areas that because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other
HAZARDOUS     geological events as designated by WAC 365-190-080(4), pose a health and safety
AREAS:        threat when incompatible commercial, residential, or industrial development occurs.
GRADING:      Any excavation, clearing, filling, leveling, or contouring of the ground surface by
              human or mechanical means.
GROUNDWATER:  That part of the subsurface water that is in the zone of saturation (below the water
              table), as distinct from vadose water (above the water table).
              A plan prepared in compliance with this chapter that identifies the qualities that
HABITAT       are essential to maintain feeding, breeding, and nesting habitat of listed
MANAGEMENT    threatened, endangered or sensitive priority species using the affected fish and
PLAN:         wildlife habitat conservation area (HCA) and which identifies measures to minimize
              the impact on these ecological processes from proposed activities.
LAKE:         An area permanently inundated by water in excess of two meters deep and greater than
              twenty (20) acres in size measured at the ordinary high water mark.
              A human-induced action that materially affects the long-term physical condition of
LAND          land or improvements, including, but not limited to those activities that are
ALTERATION:   commonly referred to as clearing, grubbing, excavation, filling, grading, surfacing,
              paving, compaction, stockpiling, and stabilizing.
LAND USE      Land use that is commercial, urban, industrial, institutional, retail, residential
INTENSITY,    with greater than one unit per acre, or active recreation (golf courses, ball fields,
HIGH:         etc.).
LAND USE      Land use that is timber management, passive recreation (hiking, bird-watching, etc.),
INTENSITY,    unpaved trails, or utility corridors without a maintenance road and with little or no
LOW:          vegetation management.
LAND USE      Land use that is residential with one or less unit per acre, semi-active recreation
INTENSITY,    (parks with jogging, biking, etc.), paved trails, or utility corridors or rights-of-
MODERATE:     way shared by several utilities and including access/maintenance roads.
              The process of correcting the effects of adverse environmental impact(s) to critical
              areas. The following actions are mitigation, in order of preference, and this ordered
              preference is termed mitigation sequencing:
              •   Avoid the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
              •   Minimize the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its
              implementation via the use of appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps
              such as project redesign, relocation, or timing;
MITIGATION:   •   Reduce or eliminate the original impact over time via preservation and
              maintenance operations during the life of the action;
              •   Rectify the impact via repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected
              environment to the historical conditions or the conditions existing at the time of
              project initiation;
              •   Compensate for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute
              resources or environments; and/or
              Mitigation by reduction, rectification, or compensation must be monitored for success
              and remedial action taken when necessary (adaptive management).
              Mitigation used to replace project-induced critical area or buffer losses or impacts
              to a critical area, and includes but is not limited to, the following.
              •   Restoration - Measures taken to reestablish an altered or damaged natural feature
              or its buffer that have been damaged or lost by alteration, past management
              activities, or catastrophic events.
              •   Creation - Measures taken to establish a wetland at a site where it did not
MITIGATION,   formerly exist.
COMPENSATORY: •   Enhancement - Measures taken to improve condition of existing degraded wetlands
              so the functions they provide are of a higher quality.
              •   Preservation - Measures taken to ensure permanent protection of existing, high-
              quality wetlands.
              Generally, compensatory mitigation is spoken of in terms of ratios, whereby the
              amount of mitigation is a multiple of the amount of impact. For example a 2:
              1 compensatory mitigation ratio means that for every one (1) unit of impact, two (2)
              units of mitigation must be provided.
              Compensatory mitigation that is the same type as that of the impacted resource (e.g.,
MITIGATION,   for wetlands, the same Cowardian class or hydrogeomorphic type). For example, in-kind
IN-KIND:      mitigation requires Class II emergent wetland impacts to be compensated for with
              Class II emergent wetlands.
              Compensatory mitigation in which the wetland and its associated functions used to
MITIGATION,   compensate for the impacts are of a different (superior) class or type than those
OUT-OF-KIND:  impacted. In other words that substitutes (1) Category I, II, or III wetlands for
              Category IV wetlands; (2) Category I or II wetlands for Category III wetlands; or (3)
              Category I wetlands for Category II wetlands.
MITIGATION    Actions such as restoring, creating, enhancing, or preserving critical areas as
PROJECT:      necessary to reduce, rectify, or compensate for project-induced adverse impacts to
              critical areas and/or associated buffers.
MITIGATION    See “Compensatory Mitigation”.
RATIOS:
MITIGATION    See “Mitigation”.
SEQUENCING:
              Collection of data for the purpose of understanding natural systems and features,
MONITORING:   evaluating the impact of development proposals on such systems, and/or assessing the
              performance of mitigation measures or regulations.
NATIVE        Plant species indigenous to the site in question.
VEGETATION:
              Defined in Chapter 173-22 WAC as that mark that will be found by examining the bed
              and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and
              usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a
              character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that
ORDINARY HIGH condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter or as it may
WATER MARK:   change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government or the
              Department of Ecology; Provided that in any area where the ordinary high water mark
              cannot be found, the ordinary high water mark adjoining salt water shall be the line
              of mean higher high tide and the ordinary high water mark adjoining fresh water shall
              be the line of mean high water.
              An individual, a partnership (including partners and managers), a corporation
              (including board members, officers, and managers), or any other entity or agency of
PERSON:       any kind. Also includes an applicant, a re-applicant, a permit holder or transferee,
              an authorized agent of any entity or agency, or any third party acting on behalf of
              any entity.
PRACTICABLE   An alternative that is available and capable of being carried out (feasible) after
ALTERNATIVE:  taking into consideration cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of
              overall project purposes, and having less impact to critical areas.
              Removing a threat to, or preventing the decline of, wetland conditions by an action
              in or near a wetland. This includes the purchase of land or easements, repairing
              water control structures or fences, or structural protection such as repairing a
PRESERVATION: barrier island. This term also includes activities commonly associated with the term
              preservation (in a regulatory context).
              Under regulatory actions preservation does not result in a gain of wetland acres, but
              may result in a gain in functions over the long term, and is used only in exceptional
              circumstances.
PRIORITY      Habitat types or elements with unique or significant value to one or more species as
HABITAT:      classified by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife.
              Action to avoid or otherwise mitigate impacts to critical areas consistent with
PROTECTION:   requirements of this chapter in order to preserve the structure, values, and
              functions of the natural environment.
              Means a person with sufficient experience, education, and professional degrees and
              training pertaining to the critical area in question, and with experience in
              performing delineations, analyzing critical area functions and values, analyzing
              critical area impacts, and recommending critical area mitigation and restoration. For
QUALIFIED     wetlands, a qualified professional should be a professional wetland scientist with at
CRITICAL AREA least two years of full-time work experience as a wetlands professional, including
PROFESSIONAL: delineating wetlands using the state or federal manuals, preparing wetland reports,
              conducting function assessments, and developing and implementing mitigation plans.
              The Director shall require professionals to demonstrate the basis for qualifications
              and shall make final determination as to qualifications. Demonstration of
              qualifications may include, but shall not be limited to, professional certification.
              A legal concept articulated by federal and state courts in regulatory taking cases.
              It means the minimum use to which a property owner is entitled under applicable state
              and federal constitutional provisions in order to avoid a taking and/or violation of
REASONABLE    substantive due process. Reasonable [economic] use shall be liberally construed to
USE:          protect the constitutional property rights of the applicant. For example, the minimum
              reasonable use of a residential lot which meets or exceeds minimum bulk requirements
              is use for one single family residential structure. Determination of reasonable
              [economic] use shall not include consideration of factors personal to the owner such
              as a desire to make a more profitable use of the site.
RECHARGE:     Percolation of surface water to an underlying aquifer. The “recharge area” is the
              pervious location where this recharge occurs.
              Actions necessary to return a stream, wetland or other critical area to a state in
RESTORATION:  which its stability as well as its functions and values approach its unaltered state
              as closely as possible.
SEISMIC       Areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground
HAZARD AREAS: shaking, slope failure, settlement, or soil liquefaction.
SENSITIVE,
THREATENED,
AND           The categorization set forth in WAC 232-12-011 and WAC 232-12-014.
ENDANGERED
SPECIES:
SEPTAGE       Application (to the ground) of the mixture of solid wastes, scum, sludge, and liquids
APPLICATION:  pumped from within septic tanks, pump chambers, holding tanks, and other on-site
              sewage system components.
SETBACK:      The distance that buildings or uses must be removed from lot lines or the edges of
              critical areas.
              Those slopes forty percent (40%) or steeper within a vertical elevation change of at
STEEP SLOPES: least ten (10) feet. A slope is defined by establishing its toe and top and is
              measured by averaging the inclination over at least ten (10) feet of vertical relief.
              Water coming from rain or snow that runs off impervious or semi-impervious surfaces
STORMWATER:   such as rooftops, paved streets, highways, and parking lots. It can also come from
              hard grassy surfaces like lawns, play fields, and from graveled roads and parking
              lots.
STORMWATER    Biofiltration swales, filter strips, bubble diffusers, detention ponds, retention
MANAGEMENT    ponds, wet ponds, and similar facilities designed and intended to control and treat
FACILITIES:   stormwater, and include ditches designed and intended primarily for conveyance.
              Areas where naturally occurring surface waters flow sufficiently to produce a defined
              channel or bed which demonstrates clear evidence of the passage of water, including,
              but not limited to, bedrock channels, gravel beds, sand and silt beds, and defined-
              channel swales. The channel or bed need not contain water during the entire year.
STREAM:       This definition does not include water courses which were created entirely by
              artificial means, such as irrigation ditches, canals, roadside ditches, or storm or
              surface water run-off features, unless the artificially created water course contains
              salmonids or conveys a stream that was naturally occurring prior to the construction
              of the artificially created water course.
STREAM,       A stream that has water flow all year.
PERENNIAL:
UNAVOIDABLE:  Adverse impacts that remain after all appropriate and practicable avoidance and
              minimization have been achieved.
              Pipe, conduit, cable, or other similar facility by which services are conveyed to the
UTILITY       public or individual recipients. Such services shall include, but are not limited to,
LINES:        water supply, electrical power, gas, communications, and stormwater or sanitary sewer
              transport facilities.
VEGETATION:   Any plant life growing below, at or above the soil surface.
VEGETATION    Any clearing, grading, cutting, topping, limbing, or pruning of vegetation.
ALTERATION:
VEGETATION    A strategy, plan or mitigation measures related to any planting, clearing, grading,
MANAGEMENT:   cutting, topping, limbing, pruning or other maintenance activities (such as pesticide
              or fertilizer application) of vegetation.
              A use or portion of a use that cannot exist in a location not adjacent to water, but
WATER         is dependent on water by reason of the use’s intrinsic nature. A use that can be
DEPENDENT     carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water. Examples of water dependent uses
ACTIVITIES:   include fishing; marinas, moorage, and boat launching facilities; aquaculture;
              surface water intake; and sanitary sewer and storm drain outfalls.
WATERS OF THE Lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, underground waters, salt waters and all
STATE:        other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the state of
              Washington (RCW Chapter 90.48.020).
WATERSHED:    An area draining to the surface water systems of Willapa Bay, the Columbia River, and
              the Pacific Ocean.
              Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency
              and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a
              prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
              Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not
WETLAND OR    include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland sites,
WETLANDS:     including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales,
              canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and
              landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were
              unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or
              highway; with the exception that wetlands shall include those artificial wetlands
              intentionally created from non-wetland areas to mitigate conversion of wetlands.
              Wetlands that meet one or more of the following criteria: 1) represent a unique or
WETLAND,      rare wetland type; 2) are more sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; 3) are
CLASS I:      relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to
              replace within a human lifetime; or 4) provide a high level of functions.
WETLAND,      Wetlands are difficult, though not impossible, to replace, and which provide high
CLASS II:     levels of some functions.
WETLAND,      Wetlands that are: 1) wetlands with a moderate level of functions; or 2) interdunal
CLASS III:    wetlands between 0.1 and 1 acre in size.
WETLAND,      Wetlands with the lowest levels of functions that are often heavily disturbed.
CLASS IV:
WETLAND       Conversion of non-wetland (upland) area to Category I, II, III, or IV wetlands and
CREATION:     the associated alterations to soil, vegetation and/or hydrology required to establish
              and maintain the resultant wetland in a perpetually self sustaining state.
              Manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a wetland
              site to heighten, intensify, or to improve specific function(s) or to change the
              growth stage or composition of the vegetation present. Enhancement is undertaken for
WETLAND       specified purposes such as water quality improvement, floodwater retention, or
ENHANCEMENT:  wildlife habitat. Enhancement results in a change in some wetland functions and can
              lead to a decline in other wetland functions, but does not result in a gain of
              wetland acres. Activities typically consist of planting vegetation, controlling non-
              native or invasive species, modifying site elevations or the proportion of open water
              to influence hydroperiods, or some combination of these activities.
              Those ecological functions associated with wetlands that result in benefits (see
WETLAND       wetland values) to society, such as fish and wildlife habitat, natural water quality
FUNCTIONS:    improvement, flood storage, shoreline erosion protection, and opportunities for
              recreation and aesthetic appreciation.
              Wetlands that form in the “deflation plains” and “swales” that are geomorphic
WETLAND,      features in areas of coastal dunes. These dune forms are the result of the
INTERDUNAL:   interaction between sand, wind, water, and plants. The dune system immediately behind
              the ocean beach (i.e., the primary dune system) is very dynamic and can change from
              storm to storm. Interdunal wetlands may provide important habitat in this ecosystem.
WETLAND,      Those wetlands that have no surface water connections to other aquatic resources.
ISOLATED:
              The circumstance where 1) each wetland patch is less than one (1.0) acre in size; 2)
              the patches on the average are separated from each other by one hundred feet (100')
WETLAND       or less of upland; and 3) the areas delineated as vegetated wetlands comprise greater
MOSAIC:       than fifty percent (50%) of the total combined area of wetland and upland.
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/cb2b2a551d24f71b8ca6467b5f7c336616c9664f/IMAGES/0-
              0-0-2038.png]
WETLAND       The classification system used in this regulation and located at Washington State
RATINGS:      Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, Department of Ecology, Publication #04-
              06-025, August 2004, or as revised.
              Manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a site with
              the goal of returning natural or historic functions to a former or degraded wetland.
              For the purpose of tracking net gains in wetland acres, restoration is divided into:
              •   Re-establishment. Manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological
              characteristics of a site with the goal of returning natural or historic functions to
              a former wetland. Re-establishment results in a gain in wetland acres (and
WETLAND       functions). Activities could include removing fill material, plugging ditches, or
RESTORATION:  breaking drain tiles.
              •   Rehabilitation. Manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological
              characteristics of a site with the goal of repairing natural or historic functions to
              a former wetland. Rehabilitation results in a gain of wetland function but does not
              result in a gain in wetlands acres. Activities could include breaching a dike to
              reconnect wetlands to a floodplain or return tidal influences to a wetland. (Ord.
              985, 10-5-2020)
 
CHAPTER 3
REVIEW OF CRITICAL AREAS
SECTION:
13-3-1: Approval Required
13-3-2: Review Procedures
13-3-3: Bonds Or Performance Security
13-3-4: Notice On Title
13-3-5: Inspection And Right Of Entry
13-3-6: Enforcement
13-3-7: Fees
13-3-8: Appeals
13-3-9: Exemptions
13-3-10: Exceptions
13-3-11: Nonconforming Uses And Structures
13-3-12: General Provisions
13-3-13: Savings And Severability
13-3-1: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
No alteration of critical areas as defined or designated by this chapter shall
occur in the absence of express approval by the City of Long Beach. Any
alteration of any critical areas as defined or designated by this chapter shall
occur only through the issuance of a development permit. For any critical areas
alteration not requiring any other land development permit, such alteration
shall not proceed in the absence of approval of a critical area alteration
permit issued under this chapter. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-2: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
Following are the procedure for critical areas review.
   A.   The Director shall first determine whether the proposed activity fits
within any of the exemptions to this chapter. Some of those exemptions apply
only if the activity complies with applicable best management practices or
includes restoration after the activity is completed. If the proposed activity
meets any of the listed exemptions, including best management practices and/or
restoration requirements, no critical areas checklist or other critical areas
review is required.
   B.   If the proposed activity is not exempt, an applicant seeking a
development permit or otherwise engaging in an activity covered under this
chapter shall complete a critical areas checklist on forms to be provided by
the City. City staff will then review the checklist, available maps and other
resource information, make a site visitation, and determine whether critical
areas or their buffers are affected by the proposed activity. The applicant is
responsible for providing accurate information sufficient to make this
determination. When sufficient information to evaluate a proposal is not
available, the Director shall notify the applicant that a critical areas study
and report are required. The Director may hire at the applicant’s expense an
independent qualified professional to verify that a critical areas report is
necessary.
   C.   If a critical areas report is required, the Director may retain
independent qualified consultants at the applicant’s expense to assist in
review of studies outside the range of staff expertise.
   D.   If the checklist, maps, other references, site visitation and other
information supplied by an applicant or person otherwise engaging in an
activity covered under this chapter, do not indicate the presence of any
critical areas associated with the proposed activity, the review required
pursuant to this chapter is complete.
   E.   If at any time prior to completion of the public input process for the
proposed activity, the Director receives evidence that critical areas may be
associated with the proposed activity, the Director shall reopen the critical
areas review process pursuant to this chapter and shall require the requisite
level of critical areas review and mitigation required by this chapter. Once
the public input process is completed and the record is closed, then the City’s
determination regarding critical areas pursuant to this chapter shall be final,
unless appealed as described in section
13-3-8 of this title and pursuant to Section
11-2C-14 of Title 11, Unified Development, of the Long Beach City Code.
   F.   If the checklist, maps, site visitation, or other references indicate
that critical areas are associated with the proposed activity, then a critical
areas report shall be completed.
   G.   If, as a result of the critical areas report recommendations, a person
believes that he or she is entitled to a variance from one or more of the
requirements of this chapter, then a person may request a variance as described
in this chapter.
   H.   If, as a result of the critical areas report recommendations, a person
believes requirements of this chapter, including any request for a variance,
leave the applicant with no economically reasonable use of his property, then a
person may apply for a reasonable use exception pursuant to this chapter. (Ord.
985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-3: BONDS OR PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
   A.   Prior to issuance of any permit or approval that authorizes site
disturbance under provisions of this chapter, the City shall require
performance security to:
      1.   Assure all work or actions required by this chapter are
satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved plans, specifications,
permit or approval conditions, and applicable regulations,
      2.   Assure all work or actions not satisfactorily completed will be
corrected to comply with the approved plans, specifications, permit or approval
conditions, and applicable regulations.
      3.   Eliminate hazardous conditions, restore environmental damage or
degradation, and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
   B.   The City may require the applicant to post a performance bond or other
security for completion of any work required to comply with this code at the
time of construction. If the development proposal is subject to mitigation, the
applicant shall post a performance bond or other security to cover long term
monitoring, maintenance, and performance to ensure mitigation is fully
functional for the duration of the monitoring period.
   C.   The performance bond shall be in the amount of one hundred twenty-five
percent (125%) of the estimated cost of the completed action, or the estimated
cost of restoring the functions and values of the critical area at risk,
whichever is greater.
   D.   The bond shall be in the form of a surety bond, performance bond,
assignment of savings account, or an irrevocable letter of credit guaranteed by
an acceptable financial institution with terms and conditions acceptable to the
City.
   E.   Bonds or other security authorized for mitigation by this section shall
remain in effect until the City determines, in writing, that standards bonded
have been met. Bonds or other security for required mitigation projects shall
be held by the City for a minimum of five (5) years to ensure the mitigation
project has been fully implemented and demonstrated to function. The bond may
be held for longer periods upon written finding by the City that it is
necessary to hold the bond to ensure the mitigation project has meet all
elements of the approved mitigation plan.
   F.   Depletion, failure, or collection of bond funds shall not discharge the
obligation of an applicant or violator to complete required mitigation,
maintenance, monitoring, or restoration.
   G.   Any failure to satisfy critical area requirements established by law or
condition including, but not limited to, the failure to provide a monitoring
report within thirty (30) days after it is due or comply with other provisions
of an approved mitigation plan shall constitute a default, and the City may
demand payment of any financial guarantees or require other action authorized
by municipal code.
   H.   Any funds recovered pursuant to this section shall be used to complete
required mitigation. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-4: NOTICE ON TITLE:
   A.   To inform subsequent purchasers of real property of the existence of
critical areas excluding soil liquefaction (seismic hazard area), tsunami
hazard areas, critical aquifer recharge areas, and floodplain outside of the
floodway or channel migration area, the owner of any real property containing a
critical area or buffer on which a development proposal is submitted and
approved shall file a notice with the Records Division of Pacific County. The
notice shall run with the property. The applicant shall submit proof that the
notice has been filed for public record prior to building permit approval or
prior to recording of the final plat in the case of subdivisions. The notice
shall state:
      1.   The presence of the critical area or buffer on the property;
      2.   The use of this property is subject to provisions of this title of
the city code, and
      3.   That limitations on actions in or affecting the critical area and/or
buffer may exist.
   B.   The notice on title shall not be required where proposed work on
existing structures or uses is valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of the
assessed value of the existing structure or use and does not increase the area
of impact to the critical area or its buffer.
   C.   The notice on title shall not be required for a development proposal by
a public agency or public or private utility:
      1.   Located within a recorded easement or right-of-way; or
      2.   Where the agency or utility has been adjudicated the right to an
easement or right-of-way. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-5: INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The Director may inspect any development activity to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. The applicant consents to entry upon the site by the Director
during regular business hours for the purposes of making reasonable inspections
to verify information provided by the applicant and to verify that work is
being performed in accordance with the approved plans and permits and
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Provisions of the Long Beach City Code, Title 14, Penalties, shall
regulate enforcement of these Critical Areas Regulations.
   B.   Adherence to the provisions of this chapter and to the project
conditions of approval shall be required throughout construction of the
development; non-adherence to same shall constitute a violation. Should the
Director determine that a violation has occurred, a stop work order may be
issued.
   C.   When a stop work order has been issued, construction shall not continue
until such time as the violation has been corrected and measures have been
taken to assure the same or similar violation is not likely to reoccur.
   D.   In the event of a violation, the Director shall have the power to order
complete restoration of the critical area by the person responsible for the
violation. If such responsible person does not complete such restoration within
a reasonable time following the order, the Director shall have the authority to
restore the affected critical area to the prior condition wherever practicable,
and the person responsible for the original violation shall be indebted to the
City for the cost of restoration. The City may lien the property for the full
cost of restoration, pursuant to the process described in Title 14, Penalties.
(Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-7: FEES:
   A.   The applicant is responsible for initiation, preparation, submission
and expense of all required reports, assessment(s), studies, plans,
reconnaissance(s), peer review by qualified consultants, and other work or
verification prepared in support of, or necessary for, the City of Long Beach
critical areas review processing. Applications shall be submitted pursuant to
the requirements of Section
11-2C-7 of Title 11, Unified Development, of the Long Beach City Code.
   B.   The applicant shall also be responsible for monitoring and maintenance
of critical areas that may be required as a condition of permit approval.
Performance bonds may be withheld until all work is satisfactorily completed,
including post-construction mitigation activity.
   C.   The applicant shall also be responsible for the cost of city review or
peer review of performance as constructed, and for review of monitoring and
maintenance reports. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-8: APPEALS:
Appeals of administrative decisions shall be governed by Section
11-2C-14 of Title 11, Unified Development, of the Long Beach City Code. (Ord.
985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-9: EXEMPTIONS:
The following developments, activities, or associated uses are exempt from
provisions of this title, provided they are consistent with provisions of other
applicable local, state, and federal laws and requirements:
   A.   Emergencies:
      1.   Emergency activities that threaten public health, safety, welfare,
or risk of damage to private property and that require remedial or preventative
action in a time frame too short to allow for review of compliance with
requirements of this chapter may be exempted by written determination of the
director.
      2.   Emergency actions that create an impact to a critical area or its
buffer shall use reasonable methods to address the emergency; in addition, they
must have the least practicable impact to the critical area and/or its buffer.
      3.   After the emergency, the entity undertaking the action shall fully
restore and/or mitigate any impacts to the critical area and buffers resulting
from the emergency action consistent with the approved critical areas report
and mitigation plan prepared in accordance with the procedures outlined in this
chapter for a new development permit.
   B.   Vegetation management that is part of ongoing maintenance of
facilities, infrastructure, public rights-of-way, or utilities, provided the
vegetation management activity does not expand further into the critical area
or its buffer is exempt.
   C.   Maintenance, repair, or operation of existing structures, utilities,
sewage disposal systems, water systems, drainage facilities, ponds, flood
control facilities, electric and communications facilities, public and private
roads and driveways, and improved areas accessory to a single family
residential use including, but not limited to, landscaping, yard maintenance,
and gardening is exempt. However, any person engaging in maintenance or repair
activities shall use reasonable methods with the least practicable impact to
critical areas. Any impacted critical area or its buffer shall be restored
after the completion of maintenance/repair activities to the maximum extent
practicable.
   D.   Modification, expansion, or replacement of any building in existence
prior to July 1, 1990 that does not expand the building footprint area by more
than fifteen percent (15%) or increase septic effluent according to Chapter
246-272 WAC is exempt, provided the following:
      1.   For existing buildings to be modified/expanded that are not located
in the critical area, no portion of the expansion or modification shall be
located closer to the critical area.
      2.   For existing buildings to be modified/expanded that are located in
the critical area or its buffer, no portion of the modification or expansion
shall extend further into the critical area and shall not result in an increase
in impact to the critical area.
      3.   For replacement of an existing building or manufactured home, the
replacement shall not increase the number of bedrooms or exacerbate
nonconformity with critical area setbacks or buffer standards identified in
this title.
      A person granted an exemption under this section for a building cannot
receive another exemption under this section for the same building unless ten
(10) years has elapsed from the date of the previous exemption.
   E.   Passive recreation such as hiking, fishing, wildlife viewing, and
scientific and educational endeavors that does not involve construction of
trails, or similar minimal impact, non-development activities is exempt.
   F.   Construction or modification of navigational aids and boundary markers
is exempt.
   G.   Site investigation or data collection necessary for land use
applications such as surveys, soil logs, percolation tests and other related
activities is exempt. However, critical area impacts shall be minimized and
disturbed areas shall be restored to the maximum extent practicable.
   H.   Existing on-going agricultural operations including related development
and activities that do not result in expansion into a critical area or its
buffer or do not result in an increase in impact to a critical area are exempt.
(Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-10: EXCEPTIONS:
Certain developments, activities, or associated uses not exempted from
provisions of this title as described in section
13-3-9, may nevertheless be excepted from its provisions under specific
conditions and circumstances identified in this section, provided they are
consistent with the provisions of other applicable local, state, and federal
laws and requirements. Exceptions may be granted on a case-by-case basis and
depending on circumstances, by the Director of Community Development or by the
Hearing Examiner:
   A.   Exceptions Considered by the Director. An Applicant shall submit a
written request for exception that describes the proposed activity and
identifies the exception that applies. The Director shall review the exception
requested to verify that it complies with this title and shall approve or deny
the exception in writing. Exceptions may be requested of the Director for the
following:
      1.   Single family residential building permits for new structures.
Construction of a new residential structure where construction and associated
disturbance does not increase the footprint of any existing structure, and
which is not located within a designated Wetlands, Fish and Wildlife Habitat
Conservation, or Frequently Flooded critical area or its buffer.
      2.   Modification, expansion, or replacement of structures constructed
after July 1, 1990. Structural modifications/expansion or replacement of an
existing single-family residential structure where the footprint of the
structure does not increase; the modification/expansion or the replacement
structure is not located closer to the critical area than the existing
structure; the existing impervious surface within the critical area or buffer
is not expanded; and which is not located within a designated Wetlands, Fish
and Wildlife Habitat Conservation, or Frequently Flooded critical area or its
buffer.
      3.   Operation, maintenance or repair of dikes, levees, or drainage
systems, including routine vegetation management activities when performed in
accordance with approved best management practices, if the activity does not
increase risk to life, property, or the environment as a result of the proposed
operation, maintenance, or repair.
      4.   Activities within the improved right-of-way. Replacement,
modification, installation or construction of utility facilities, lines, pipes,
mains, and equipment or appurtenances - but not including substations - when
such facilities are located within the improved portion of the public right-of-
way or a city-approved private roadway, except those activities that alter a
wetland or watercourse, such as culverts or bridges, or result in the transport
of sediment or increased stormwater, subject to the following:
         a.   The activity shall result in the least practicable impact and
have no practical alternative with less impact on the critical area and/or its
buffer;
         b.   An additional, contiguous and undisturbed critical area buffer
shall be provided, equal in area to the disturbed critical area buffer; and
         c.   Retention and replanting of native vegetation shall occur
wherever possible along the right-of-way improvement and resulting disturbance.
      5.   Minor utility projects. Utility projects that result in minor or
short-term impacts (short-term meaning of less than 3 months’ duration) to
critical areas, as determined by the Director in accordance with the criteria
below, and that do not significantly impact the functions and values of a
critical area(s), such as the placement of a utility pole, street sign, anchor,
vault, or other small component of a utility facility; provided that such
projects are constructed with best management practices and additional
restoration measures are provided. Minor activities shall not result in the
transport of sediment or increased stormwater runoff. Such exceptions shall
meet the following criteria:
         a.   There is no practical alternative to the proposed activity with
less adverse impacts to critical areas, and all feasible attempts have been
made to first avoid impacts, minimize impacts, and lastly mitigate unavoidable
impacts;
         b.   The activity will not change or diminish the overall critical
area hydrology or flood storage capacity;
         c.   The project shall be designed and constructed to prevent spills
and leaks into critical areas;
         d.   The activity will not reduce the existing functions and values of
the affected critical areas;
         e.   To the maximum extent practicable, utility corridor access for
maintenance is at limited access points into the critical area buffer rather
than by a parallel access road; and
         f.   Unavoidable impacts will be mitigated pursuant to an approved
mitigation plan.
      6.   Non-emergency hazardous tree removal, provided the hazard is
documented by a certified arborist or professional forester.
      7.   Enhancement and restoration activities for the purpose of restoring
functions and values of critical area(s) that do not require construction
permits.
   B.   Exceptions Considered by the Hearing Examiner. An Applicant shall
submit a written request for exception that describes the proposed activity and
identifies the exception that applies. After holding a public hearing pursuant
to Section
11-2C-11 of Title 11, Unified Development, Long Beach City Code Exceptions may
be requested of the Hearing Examiner for the following:
      1.   Public Agency or Utility Exception. If the application of this title
would prohibit a development proposal by a public agency or public utility that
is essential to its ability to provide service, the agency or utility may apply
for an exception pursuant to this section.
      2.   Reasonable Use. If the application of this chapter would deny all
reasonable use of the property, the applicant may apply for an exception
pursuant to this section. The Hearing Examiner may approve the exception after
finding that:
         a.   This title would otherwise deny all reasonable use of the
property;
         b.   There is no other reasonable use consistent with the underlying
zoning of the property that has less adverse impact on the critical area and/or
associated buffer;
         c.   The proposed development does not pose an unreasonable threat to
the public health, safety or welfare on or off the property;
         d.   Any proposed alteration is the minimum necessary to allow for
reasonable use of the property;
         e.   The inability of the applicant to derive reasonable use of the
property is not the result of actions by the applicant after the effective date
of this chapter or its predecessor; and
         f.   The requested exception provides relief not otherwise available
from a variance approval.
      3.   Variance. Where unavoidable adverse impacts to wetlands, streams,
fish and wildlife habitat or critical aquifer recharge areas occur, a variance
shall be obtained to permit the impact. Variances shall be considered as set
forth in Section
11-2D-1 of Title 11, Unified Development, of the Long Beach City Code, except
that required findings shall be as set forth in this section. Variances will be
granted on the basis of a finding of consistency with all criteria listed
below. The Hearing Examiner shall not consider the fact the property may be
utilized more profitably.
         a.   The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege
inconsistent with the limitation on use of other properties similarly affected
by the code provision for which a variance is requested;
         b.   That such variance is necessary, because of special circumstances
and/or conditions relating to the size, shape, topography, environmentally
sensitive areas, location, or surroundings of the subject property, to provide
it with those relative rights and privileges permitted to other properties in
the vicinity and in the zone in which the subject property is located. The
phrase “relative rights and privileges” is to ensure that the property rights
and privileges for the subject property are considered primarily in relation to
current City land-use regulations;
         c.   That special conditions and/or circumstances identified in
paragraph b. (immediately above) of this section giving rise to the variance
application do not result from the actions of the applicant, property owner, or
recent prior owner(s) of the subject property;
         d.   That granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental
to the public welfare or injurious to the property, neighborhood, or
improvements in the vicinity and zone in which subject property is situated;
         e.   That reasons set forth in the application and the official record
justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum
variance necessary to grant relief to the applicant;
         f.   That alternative development concepts in compliance with
applicable codes have been evaluated, and that undue hardship would result if
strict adherence to the applicable codes is required; and
         g.   That granting of the variance will not adversely affect
implementation of the comprehensive plan or policies adopted thereto and the
general purpose and intent of the zoning title or other applicable regulations.
   C.   The Hearing Examiner may approve the exception if the hearing examiner
finds that:
      1.   There is no other practical alternative to the proposed development
with less impact on the critical area(s), based on the demonstration by the
applicant of the following factors:
         a.   The applicant has considered all reasonably possible construction
techniques based on available technology that are feasible for the proposed
project and eliminated any that would result in unreasonable risk of impact to
the critical area; and
         b.   The applicant has considered all available sites and alignments
within the range of potential sites and alignments that meet the project
purpose and for which operating rights are available.
      2.   The proposal minimizes and mitigates unavoidable impacts to critical
areas and/or critical areas buffers.
   D.   Mitigation Required. Any authorized alteration to a wetland or stream
or its associated buffer, or alteration to a fish and wildlife habitat
conservation area, as allowed under an exception granted under this section,
shall be subject to conditions established by the City and shall require
mitigation under an approved mitigation plan pursuant to this Title. (Ord. 985,
10-5-2020; amd. Ord. 1036, 8-19-2024)
13-3-11: NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section establishes the terms and
conditions for continuing non-conforming uses, structures and lots located
within designated critical areas that are lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this title.
   B.   Establishment of Status. A legally established non-conforming lot, use,
or non-signage structure may be continued, transferred, or conveyed and/or used
as if conforming. The burden of establishing that any non-conforming lot, use
or non-signage structure lawfully existed as of the effective date of this
chapter shall, in all cases, rest with the owner and not with the City. A non-
conforming lot, use, or structure may be deemed legally non-conforming by
providing documentation from either a local agency permit or suitable aerial
photo or scaled map recognized as legitimate by the City.
   C.   Maintenance and Repair of Non-Conforming Structures. Normal maintenance
and incidental repair of legal non-conforming structures shall be permitted,
provided that it complies with all sections of this Title and other applicable
Titles of the Long Beach City Code.
   D.   Reconstruction. Reconstruction, restoration or repair (and remodeling)
of a legal non-conforming non-signage structure damaged by fire, flood,
earthquake, falling trees or limbs, or other disasters, shall be permitted,
subject to the provisions of Section
12-16-6, Title 12, Zoning, of the Long Beach City Code and of this title;
provided that such reconstruction shall not result in the expansion of the non-
conforming structure into or towards the critical area, or in a manner that
increases the potential impact to the critical area or risk of harm to public
safety. Legal non-conforming status will be lost if a building permit is not
secured within one year of the date damage is incurred.
   E.   Expansion of Non-Conforming Use or Structure. No legal non-conforming
use or structure may be expanded, enlarged, extended, or intensified in any way
(including extension of hours of operation) unless such modification is in full
compliance with this chapter or the terms and conditions of approved permits
pursuant to this chapter.
   F.   Discontinuance of Non-Conforming Use or Structure. All legal non-
conforming uses shall be encouraged to convert to a conforming use whenever
possible. Conformance shall be required when:
      1.   A change of use is proposed;
      2.   The use is terminated or discontinued for more than one (1) year, or
the structure(s) that houses the use is vacated for more than one (1) year;
      3.   The structure(s) or area in which the use is conducted is proposed
for relocation; or
      4.   In the circumstance of a sign structure, in accordance with Chapter
12-14-12 of the Long Beach City Code. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-12: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   All proposed alterations of critical areas shall include mitigation
sufficient to maintain the functional values of the critical area or to prevent
risk from a critical area hazard and shall give adequate consideration to the
economically viable use of the property. Mitigation of one critical area impact
should not result in unmitigated impacts to another critical area. Mitigation
may include, but is not limited to: increasing or enhancing buffers, increasing
building setbacks, instituting limits on clearing and grading, implementing
best management practices for erosion control and maintenance of water quality,
or other conditions appropriate to avoid or mitigate identified adverse
impacts. Subject to the reasonable use exception provisions of this chapter,
any proposed critical area alteration that cannot adequately mitigate its
impacts to a critical area shall be denied.
   B.   Mitigation includes the following processes of correcting the effects
of adverse environmental impact(s) to critical areas, in order of preference:
      1.   Avoid the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts
of an action;
      2.   Minimize the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the
action and its implementation via the use of appropriate technology, or by
taking affirmative steps such as project redesign, relocation, or timing;
      3.   Reduce or eliminate the original impact over time via preservation
and maintenance operations during the life of the action;
      4.   Rectify the impact via repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the
affected environment to the historical conditions or the conditions existing at
the time of project initiation;
      5.   Compensate for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing
substitute resources or environments; and/or
   Mitigation by reduction, rectification, or compensation must be monitored
for success and remedial action taken when necessary (adaptive management).
   C.   Buffers:
      1.   Buffers in some cases have been determined to be necessary and
appropriate to protect critical areas and their functions or to prevent risk
from a critical area hazard. In those sections of this Title where specific
buffers are identified, those buffers are deemed “required” or “ standard”
buffers. If a project does not propose any alteration of those buffers or of
the associated critical area, then no additional mitigation will be required to
protect the critical area. The standard buffer widths presume the existence of
a relatively intact native vegetation community in the buffer zone adequate to
protect the critical area functions and values at the time of the proposed
activity. If the vegetation or protection area is inadequate, the City may
require an increase in the buffer width or additional native plantings within
the standard buffer width. Provisions to reduce or to average buffer widths in
order to obtain optimal habitat value are described under the development
standards for each critical area.
      2.   The Director will consider wetland or stream buffer averaging for a
proposal only when the buffer area width after averaging will not adversely
impact the critical area or buffer functions and values. At a minimum, any
proposed buffer averaging shall meet the following criteria:
         a.   The buffer area after averaging is no less than that which would
be contained within the standard buffer;
         b.   The buffer area shall be enhanced where the buffer is averaged;
         c.   The additional buffer is contiguous with the standard buffer; and
         d.   Encroachment does not occur into the buffer of an associated
wetland except as otherwise allowed.
      3.   The Director may require increased buffer sizes as necessary to
protect critical areas when either the critical area is particularly sensitive
to disturbance or the development poses unusual impacts. Examples of
circumstances that may require buffers beyond minimum requirements include, but
are not limited to:
         a.   Uses unclassified in the Zoning Code (Title 12 of the Long Beach
City Code);
         b.   The critical area is in a critical drainage basin or documented
salmonid spawning or rearing habitat;
         c.   The critical area is a critical fish or wildlife habitat for
spawning or rearing as determined by the Washington Department of Fish and
Wildlife;
         d.   The land adjacent to the critical area and its associated buffer,
and located within the development proposal, is classified as an erosion hazard
area; or
         e.   A trail or utility corridor in excess of ten percent (10%) of the
buffer width is proposed for inclusion in the buffer.
      4.   The Director may reduce up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
critical area buffer requirement for high intensity land uses only, and only if
sufficient information is available showing the following in a critical area
study:
         a.   The applicant has demonstrated that mitigation sequencing efforts
have been appropriately utilized: avoid, minimize, rectify, reduce, and/or
compensate, with monitoring and adaptive management for the latter three types
of mitigation;
         b.   The proposed buffer reduction shall be accompanied by a
mitigation plan per this chapter that includes enhancement of the reduced
buffer area, except that mitigation for wetland buffer area reductions shall be
governed by the provisions of Section
13-4-4(B) of this title;
         c.   The reduction will not adversely affect water quality;
         d.   The reduction will not destroy, damage, or disrupt a significant
habitat area;
         e.   The reduction is necessary for reasonable development of the
subject property; and
         f.   Additional specific buffer reduction criteria for wetlands have
been satisfied as set forth in Section
13-4-4(B) of this title.
      5.   Where a functionally isolated buffer area (FIBA) exists, the minimum
buffer width may be reduced to the edge of the isolating road, structure, or
grade separation, if that portion of the buffer sought to be reduced:
         a.   Does not provide additional protection to the proposed
development or the critical area; and
         b.   Does not perform any biological, geological, or hydrological
buffer functions to undisturbed portions of the critical area or its buffer.
      6.   If a person seeks a variance to reduce buffers or to alter the
critical area or its required buffer, then the person shall demonstrate why the
proposed buffer and/or critical area modification, together with alternative
mitigation proposed in the critical areas report, is sufficient to adequately
protect the function(s) of the critical area. If necessary, variances shall
provide for long-term buffer protection.
      7.   Critical areas assessments and conditions of approval shall provide
for long-term buffer protection. In land division, critical areas and their
associated buffers may be placed in one or more separate tracts to be owned and
maintained by all lot owners in common, by a homeowners association, or some
other separate legal entity such as a land trust.
      8.   Periodic inspection of buffers may be required if necessary to
ensure long-term buffer protection.
   D.   Building Setback Line. Unless otherwise specified, a minimum of fifteen
(15) feet is required from the edge of any buffer or separate critical area
tract.
   E.   Land Segregation. Subdivisions, short subdivisions, boundary line
adjustments, and planned residential developments of land in critical areas and
associated buffers are subject to the following:
      1.   Land located wholly within a wetland or stream critical area or
associated buffer may not be subdivided.
      2.   Land located partially within a wetland or stream critical area or
associated buffer area may be subdivided or the boundary line adjusted provided
that an accessible and contiguous portion of each new or adjusted lot is
located outside the critical area and buffer, and is large enough to
accommodate the intended use.
      3.   Accessory roads and utilities serving a proposed subdivision may be
permitted within the wetland or stream critical area and/or associated buffer
only if the City determines that no other feasible alternative exists based on
the applicant securing an exception consistent with this title.
      4.   Critical Area Tracts. Critical areas tracts are legally created non-
building lots containing critical areas and their buffers that shall remain
undeveloped pursuant to the provisions of this title. Separate critical area
tracts are not intended for sale, lease or transfer; and shall be incorporated
in the area of the parent lot for purposes of subdivision and method of
allocation and minimum lot size. The following development proposals shall
identify such areas as separate tracts:
         a.   Subdivisions.
         b.   Short subdivisions.
         c.   Contract rezones.
         d.   Binding site improvement plans.
         e.   Master site plans.
         f.   Site plan/design review.
      Responsibility for maintaining critical area tracts shall accrue to a
homeowners association, adjacent parent lot owners, the permit applicant or
designee, or other appropriate entity as approved by the City.
      The following note shall appear on the face of all plats, binding site
improvement plans, master site plans, site plan/design review, or contract
rezones and shall be recorded on the title for all affected lots:
      NOTE: All lots adjoining separate tracts identified as Critical Area
Tracts are jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and protection
of the tracts. Maintenance includes ensuring that no alteration occurs within
the separate tract and that vegetation remains undisturbed unless the express
written permission of the City of Long Beach has been received.
   F.   Marking and/or Fencing Critical Areas
      1.   Temporary Markers. In order to prevent unauthorized intrusion during
construction, the perimeter of a wetland, stream, fish and wildlife
conservation area, steep slope, as well as the associated buffer and the limit
of the area to be disturbed pursuant to an approved permit or authorization,
shall be marked on site in a manner approved by the City. Markers or fencing
shall be subject to inspection by the Director or his designee prior to
commencement of permitted activities. This temporary marking shall be
maintained throughout construction and shall not be removed until ordered by
the Director, or until permanent signs and/or fencing, if required, are in
place.
      2.   Permanent Markers. Following approved development or alteration, the
outer perimeter of the undisturbed critical area or buffer shall be permanently
identified. This identification shall be permanent wood or metal signs on
treated wood or metal posts. Signs shall be worded as follows:
      Critical Area Boundary
      This natural area is a valuable resource and its protection is in your
care. Alteration or disturbance is prohibited, as is removal of this sign. For
more information, call the City of Long Beach: 360/642-4421.
      The Director shall approve sign locations during review of the
development proposal. Along residential boundaries, the signs shall be at least
12" X 18" in size and spaced one per centerline of lot or every seventy five
feet (75') for lots whose boundaries exceed one-hundred-fifty feet (150'). At
road endings, crossings, and other areas where public access to the critical
area is allowed, the sign shall be the size of a regulatory traffic sign or
larger and spaced one every seventy-five feet (75').
      3.   Permanent Fencing. Where there is substantial evidence that
destructive intrusion into a critical area would occur with a specific
development proposal, the Director shall require permanent fencing of the
critical area. The Director shall also require such fencing when, subsequent to
approval of the development proposal, intrusions threaten conservation of
critical areas. The Director may use any appropriate and legal enforcement
actions including, but not limited, to fines, abatement, or permit denial to
ensure compliance. The fencing may provide limited access to the stream or
wetland for stock watering purposes, but shall minimize bank disturbance.
   G.   Critical Areas Studies/Reports
      1.   Timing of Studies. When an applicant submits an application for a
development proposal, it shall indicate whether any critical areas or buffers
are located on or could be adjacent to the subject site. The presence of
critical areas may require additional studies and time for review. However,
disclosure of critical areas early will reduce delays during the permit review
process. If the applicant states there are no known critical areas, further
studies may be required for verification.
      2.   Studies Required.
         a.   When sufficient information to evaluate a proposal is not
available, the Director shall notify the applicant that a critical areas study
and report is required. The Director may hire, at the applicant’s expense, an
independent qualified professional to verify that a critical areas report is
necessary.
         b.   If a critical areas report is required, the Director may retain
independent qualified consultants, at the applicant’s expense, to assist in
review of studies that are outside the range of staff expertise.
         c.   A critical areas report shall be written by a qualified
professional, as defined in this title. A critical areas report shall include
all information required pursuant to this section. Where mitigation is
required, a monitoring and maintenance program shall be required to evaluate
the effectiveness of mitigation measures.
         d.   Studies/reports generated as part of an expanded SEPA
environmental checklist or an environmental impact statement may qualify as a
critical areas report if the project is developed in enough detail to have
provided an evaluation of site-specific impacts and mitigation measures.
      3.   General Critical Areas Report Requirements.
         a.   A critical areas report shall have three components: a) a site
analysis, b) an impact analysis, and c) proposed mitigation measures. The
required level of detail in the report shall depend on the size of the project,
intensity of development, and potential impacts. The Director may waive the
requirement of any component of the critical areas report when adequate
information is otherwise available.
         b.   In addition to requirements presented in the specific section of
this title for each type of critical area, all studies shall contain the
following information unless it is already available in the permit application:
            (1)   Site map of the project area at a 1:20 or larger scale,
dimensioned and including:
               (A)   Reference streets and property lines.
               (B)   Existing and proposed easements, rights-of-way, trail
corridors and structures.
               (C)   Contour intervals (2 feet or less).
               (D)   Edge of the 100 year floodplain and floodway, if present
on or near the site.
               (E)   Seashore conservation lines, if relevant.
               (F)   Erosion hazard areas, if relevant.
               (G)   Line of mean high tide, if relevant.
               (H)   Shoreline Management Plan environment designation, if
relevant.
               (I)   Hydrology: show surface water features on and adjacent to
the site; indicate water movement into, through, and off the site, including
floodway and channel migration area; show wetland and stream classifications,
seeps, springs and saturated soils.
               (J)   Identification of all site preparation, grading
activities, and dimensioned location of proposed structures, roads, stormwater
facilities, impervious surfaces, and landscaping relative to critical areas.
               (K)   All drainage plans for discharge of stormwater runoff from
developed areas.
               (L)   Location of buffer and building setback lines, if required
or proposed.
               (M)   Location of critical area tract(s) and/or easement(s).
            (2)   Written report detailing:
               (A)   How, when, and by whom the report was performed, including
methodologies and techniques used.
               (B)   Weather conditions during and prior to any field studies
if relevant to conclusions and recommendations.
               (C)   Description of the project site and its existing
condition, including any degraded critical areas.
               (D)   Description of existing critical area and buffer functions
and values.
               (E)   Description of habitat features present and determination
of actual use of the critical area by any endangered, threatened, rare,
sensitive, candidate, or unique species of plants or wildlife as listed by the
federal government or state of Washington.
               (F)   The total acreage of the site in each type of critical
area(s) and associated buffers.
               (G)   The proposed action; including but not limited to
description of filling, dredging, modification for storm water detention or
discharge, clearing, grading, restoring, enhancing, grazing, or other physical
activities that change the existing vegetation, hydrology, soils, or habitat.
               (H)   When alteration to a critical area or its buffer is
proposed that would result in an adverse impact that cannot be fully mitigated,
provide an explanation why the impact is unavoidable and how it meets the
criteria for a defined exception.
               (I)   Description of potential environmental impact of the
proposed project to the critical area(s), demonstration of mitigation
sequencing as described in this title, and description of all proposed
mitigation measures.
               (J)   Habitat and native vegetation conservation strategy that
addresses methods to protect and enhance on-site habitat and critical area
functions.
               (K)   Mitigation measures proposed to avoid or lessen the
project impacts during construction and permanently.
               (L)   When alteration to the critical area or its buffer is
proposed, include a mitigation plan as specified by this title.
               (M)   Discussion of ongoing management practices to protect
habitat after the project site has been developed; including proposed
monitoring and maintenance programs.
               (N)   Description of local, state, and federal regulations and
permit requirements.
   H.   General Mitigation Requirements. The following section provides general
mitigation requirements applicable to alteration of critical areas. Additional
mitigation requirements are found in this title under the specific section for
each type of critical area.
      1.   Restoration/rehabilitation is required when a critical area or its
buffer has been altered on the site in violation of City regulations prior to
development approval or during construction. At a minimum, all impacted areas
shall be restored to their previous condition pursuant to an approved
mitigation plan.
      2.   Restoration/rehabilitation is required when the critical area or it
buffer will be temporarily altered during the construction of an approved
development proposal. At a minimum, all impacted areas shall be restored to
their previous condition pursuant to an approved mitigation plan.
      3.   Compensation. The goal of compensation is no net loss of critical
area and/or buffer function on the development site. Compensation includes
replacement or enhancement of the critical area or its buffer depending on the
scope of the approved alteration and what is needed to maintain or improve the
critical area and/or buffer functions. Compensation for approved critical area
or buffer alterations shall meet the following minimum performance standards
and shall occur pursuant to an approved mitigation plan:
         a.   The buffer for a created, restored, or enhanced critical area as
compensation for approved alterations shall be the same as the buffer required
for the category of the created, restored, or enhanced critical area (i.e.,
compensation for buffer impacts, other than buffer averaging, shall occur at a
minimum ratio of 1:1). For purposes of restoration, creation, or enhancement,
buffers shall be fully vegetated with a relatively intact native plant
community.
         b.   All critical area impacts shall be compensated for through
restoration or creation of replacement areas that are in-kind and of a similar
or better critical area category, preferably either on-site or within the same
drainage basin. Mitigation shall be timed prior to or concurrent with the
approved alteration and shall have a high probability of success.
         c.   The Director may consider and approve off-site compensation where
the applicant demonstrates that greater biological and hydrological functions
and values will be achieved off-site compared to on-site. The compensation may
include restoration, creation, or enhancement of critical areas. Compensatory
mitigation ratios specified for each critical area shall be the minimum applied
to off-site compensation.
         d.   Increased Compensatory Mitigation Ratios. The Director may
increase mitigation ratios specified under the compensation section of this
title for each critical area, under any one of the following circumstances:
            (1)   Uncertainty exists as to the probable success of the proposed
restoration or creation due to an unproven methodology;
            (2)   A significant period will elapse between impact and
replication of wetland functions;
            (3)   Proposed mitigation will result in a lower category critical
area classification or reduced functions relative to the critical area being
impacted; or
            (4)   The impact was unauthorized.
         e.   Decreased Compensatory Mitigation Ratios. The Director may
decrease mitigation ratios specified under the compensation section of this
title for each critical area, except for the compensatory mitigation ratios in
Section
13-4-7(F)(4) of this title, when all the following criteria are met:
            (1)   A minimum mitigation ratio of 1:1 will be maintained;
            (2)   Documentation by a qualified specialist demonstrates the
proposed mitigation actions have a high rate of success;
            (3)   Documentation by a qualified specialist demonstrates the
proposed mitigation actions will provide functions and values that are
substantially greater than the critical area being impacted; and
            (4)   The proposed mitigation actions are conducted in advance of
the impact.
         f.   Critical Area Enhancement as Mitigation.
            (1)   Impacts to critical areas may be mitigated by enhancement of
existing substantially degraded critical areas only after a 1:1 minimum acreage
compensatory mitigation ratio has been satisfied. Applicants proposing to
enhance critical areas must produce a critical areas report that identifies how
enhancement will increase functions and values of degraded critical areas and
how this increase will adequately mitigate for loss of critical area function
at the impact site.
            (2)   At a minimum, enhancement acreage shall be double the acreage
required for creation and restoration specified under the compensation section
of this title for each critical area. The ratios shall be greater than the
minimum required acreage when the enhancement proposal would result in only
nominal or modest gain in the performance of critical area functions currently
provided in the critical area as determined by the Director.
         g.   Mitigation Timing. Mitigation shall be completed prior to or
immediately following disturbances, and prior to use or occupancy of the
activity or development, or when seasonally appropriate. Construction of
mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing fisheries,
wildlife, and water quality.
         h.   The buffer for a created, restored, or enhanced critical area as
compensation for approved alterations shall be the same as the buffer required
for the category of the created, restored, or enhanced critical area. For
purposes of restoration, creation, or enhancement, buffers shall be fully
vegetated and shall not include lawns, walkways, driveways and other mowed or
paved areas.
         i.   Best Available Science. Any approval of mitigation to compensate
for impacts to a critical area or its buffer shall be supported by the best
available science.
   I.   Mitigation Plans:
      1.   Mitigation or alterations to critical areas shall achieve equivalent
or greater biological functions, and where relevant shall include mitigation
for adverse impacts upstream and downstream of the development proposal site.
In order to minimize isolating effects of development on habitat areas,
mitigation sites for wetlands, streams, and fish and wildlife habitat
conservation critical areas shall be located to achieve contiguous habitat
corridors in accordance with a mitigation plan that is part of an approved
critical areas report. Mitigation of aquatic habitat shall be located within
the same aquatic ecosystem as the area disturbed. Mitigation shall address each
function affected by the alteration to achieve no net loss of function or
improvement of function on a per-function basis.
      2.   The scope and content of a mitigation plan shall be decided on a
case-by-case basis. During the review of required critical areas studies/
reports, the City shall determine which of the components listed in section c.,
immediately below, shall be required as part of the mitigation plan. Key
factors in this determination shall be the size and nature of the development
proposal, the size and nature of the impacted critical areas, and the degree of
cumulative impacts on the critical area from other development proposals.
Cumulative impacts shall be determined based on the combined effects of past
development, the current development proposal, and any reasonably foreseeable
development likely to impact the affected critical area.
      3.   At a minimum, the following components shall be included in a
complete mitigation plan:
         a.   Baseline Information. Provide existing conditions information for
both the impacted critical areas and the proposed mitigation site as described
in the sections of this title for each critical area.”
         b.   Environmental Goals and Objectives. Include a written report
identifying environmental goals and objectives of the compensation proposed,
including:
            (1)   A description of the anticipated impacts to the critical
areas, the mitigating actions proposed, and the purposes of the compensation
measures, including the site selection criteria, identification of compensation
goals, identification of resource functions, and dates for beginning and
completing site compensation construction activities. The goals and objectives
shall be related to the functions and values of the impacted critical area.
            (2)   A review of the best available science supporting the
proposed mitigation.
         c.   Performance Standards. The mitigation plan shall include
measurable criteria for evaluating whether or not goals and objectives of the
mitigation project have been successfully attained and whether or not
requirements of this chapter have been met. They may include water quality
standards, species richness and diversity targets, habitat diversity indices,
or other ecological, geological, or hydrological criteria.
         d.   Detailed Construction Plan. These are the written specifications
and descriptions of mitigation technique. This plan should include the proposed
construction sequencing, grading and excavation details, erosion and
sedimentation control features, a native planting plan, detailed site diagrams,
and any other drawings appropriate to show construction techniques or
anticipated final outcome.
         e.   Monitoring and/or Evaluation Program. The mitigation plan shall
include a program for monitoring construction of the compensation project, and
for assessing a completed project, as detailed in this section.
         f.   Contingency Plan. This section shall identify potential courses
of action and any corrective measures to be taken when monitoring or evaluation
indicates projected performance standards have not been met.
   J.   Monitoring:
      1.   The City shall require long-term monitoring of mitigation. Such
monitoring shall be an element of the required mitigation plan and shall
document and track impacts of development on the functions and values of
critical areas, and the success or failure of mitigation requirements.
Monitoring may include, but is not limited to:
         a.   Establishing vegetation transects or plots to track changes in
plant species composition over time.
         b.   Using aerial or other photography to evaluate vegetation
community response.
         c.   Sampling surface and/or ground waters to determine pollutant
loading.
         d.   Measuring base flow rates and stormwater runoff to model and
evaluate water quantity predictions.
         e.   Measuring sedimentation rates.
         f.   Sampling fish and wildlife populations to determine habitat
utilization, species abundance, and diversity.
         g.   Sampling water temperatures of wetlands and streams.
      2.   The property owner shall submit monitoring data and reports to the
City on an annual basis or other schedule as required by the Director and
specified in an approved mitigation plan. Monitoring shall continue for a
minimum period of five (5) years, or until mitigation performance standards
have been met. In the case of forested systems, monitoring may be expected to
be greater than 5 years, and may be for 10 years or longer.
   3.   Performance Bond. Prior to issuance of any permit or approval that
authorizes site disturbance under this title, the Director shall require
performance security as specified in this title.
   K.   Adaptive Management. When monitoring reveals a significant deviation
from predicted results or a failure of mitigation measures, the applicant shall
be responsible for appropriate corrective action. Contingency plans should
address reasonably foreseeable failure of mitigation measures. Contingency
measures developed as part of the original mitigation plan shall apply but may
be modified to address a specific deviation or failure. Contingency measures
shall be subject to monitoring requirements to the same extent as the original
mitigation measures.
   L.   Habitat Management Plans:
      1.   A Habitat Management Plan shall be required by the Director when
review of a development proposal determines the proposed activity will have an
adverse impact on a fish and wildlife habitat conservation critical area.
      2.   A Habitat Management Plan, prepared by a qualified biologist in
consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, shall address
all of the following mitigation measures:
         a.   Reduction or limitation of development activities within critical
areas and buffers.
         b.   Use of low impact development techniques or clustering of
development on the subject property to locate structures in a manner that
preserves and minimizes adverse impacts to habitat.
         c.   Seasonal restrictions on construction activities.
         d.   Preservation and retention of habitat and vegetation on the
subject property in contiguous blocks or with connection to other habitats that
have a primary association with a listed species.
         e.   Establishment of expanded buffers around the critical area.
         f.   Limitation of access to the critical area and buffer.
         g.   Creation or restoration of habitat area for listed species. (Ord.
985, 10-5-2020)
13-3-13: SAVINGS AND SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or portion thereof contained in this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable, said provisions or portion thereof
shall be deemed severed and the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected
and shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
CHAPTER 4
WETLANDS
SECTION:
13-4-1: Purpose
13-4-2: Designation
13-4-3: Identification
13-4-4: Wetland Buffers
13-4-5: Permitted Alterations In Wetlands
13-4-6: Critical Areas Report/Study
13-4-7: Wetland Mitigation Requirements
13-4-8: Maps And References
13-4-9: Wetland Mitigation Banking
13-4-10: Wetland Monitoring Program And Adaptive Management
13-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and procedures protective
of wetlands, which serve a number of important beneficial functions, including
flood attenuation, stormwater retention, erosion protection, fish and wildlife
habitat, aquifer recharge, water quality protection, and recreation. (Ord. 985,
10-5-2020)
13-4-2: DESIGNATION:
Determination of wetland ratings will be based on the entire extent of
wetlands, unrelated to property lines or ownership patterns. For the purpose of
categorization, wetlands shall be designated according to the Washington State
Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (Washington State Department of
Ecology, 2014 Update, Publication No. 14-06-029, or as revised by Ecology):
Wetlands shall be designated as follows:
   A.   Category I - those wetlands that meet one or more of the following
criteria:
      1.   Wetlands that score 23 or more points (out of 27) in the most
current edition of the Washington State Wetland Ratings System for Western
Washington;
      2.   Relatively undisturbed estuarine wetlands larger than 1 acre;
      3.   Wetlands identified by scientists of the Washington Natural Heritage
Program/DNR as wetlands of high conservation value;
      4.   Natural bogs;
      5.   Mature and old growth forested wetlands larger than 1 acre;
      6.   Interdunal wetlands that score 8 or 9 habitat points and are larger
than 1 acre in size; or
      7.   Wetlands in coastal lagoons.
   B.   Category II - those wetlands that meet any one or more of the following
criteria:
      1.   Wetlands that score between 20 and 22 points in the most current
edition of the Washington State Wetland Ratings System for Western Washington;
      2.   Estuarine wetlands smaller than 1 acre, or disturbed estuarine
wetlands larger than 1 acre in size;
      3.   An interdunal wetland larger than 1 acre, or in a mosaic of
wetlands.
   C.   Category III -those wetlands that meet any one or more of the following
criteria:
      1.   Wetlands that score between 16 and 19 points in the most current
edition of the Washington State Wetland Ratings System for Western Washington;
or
      2.   Interdunal wetlands between 0.1 and 1 acre in size, or in a mosaic
of wetlands that is between 0.1 and 1 ac in size.
   D.   Category IV -those wetlands that score less than 16 points in the most
current edition of the Washington State Wetland Ratings System for Western
Washington. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-4-3: IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   Required wetland buffer widths shall reflect the natural functions and
values of the wetland, the sensitivity of the area and resource, and the risks
associated with development. In addition, in those circumstances permitted by
these regulations, the type and intensity of human activity and site design
proposed to be conducted on or near the wetland shall be reflected in the
required buffer width. Standard buffer widths presume the existence of a
relatively intact native vegetation community in the buffer zone adequate to
protect wetland functions and values at the time of the proposed activity. If
vegetation is inadequate, the buffer width shall be increased or the buffer
planted with appropriate vegetation to maintain the standard width to meet
needed buffer functions.
   B.   Small Wetlands Exempt from Buffer Requirements.
      1.   Wetlands are exempt from buffer requirements if they are less than
1,000 square feet in area, and it has been shown by the applicant that they:
         a.   are not associated with a riparian corridor;
         b.   are not part of a wetland mosaic; and
         c.   do not contain habitat identified as essential for local
populations of priority species identified by Washington Department of Fish and
Wildlife.
      2.   The requirement to avoid impacts pursuant to mitigation sequencing,
may be dropped for Category 3 and 4 wetlands between 1,000 and 4,000 square
feet that meet all of the following criteria:
         a.   Wetland is not associated with a riparian corridor;
         b.   Wetland is not part of a wetland mosaic;
         c.   Wetland does not score 5 points or greater for habitat in the
2014 Western Washington Rating System; and
         d.   Wetland does not contain habitat identified as essential for
local populations of priority species identified by Washington Department of
Fish and Wildlife.
      3.   Impacts allowed under this provision to these wetlands will be fully
mitigated as required in mitigation Section
13-4-7.
   C.   The standard wetland buffer width shall apply for wetlands not found
exempt under Section
13-4-4(B), except in cases where, pursuant to the buffer width reduction
provisions in Section 13-3-12-(C)(4) of this title, the Director determines the
standard wetland buffer width may be reduced up to a maximum of twenty five
percent (25%) for high intensity land uses only, provided the applicant meets
all other provisions of this chapter and can demonstrate through a wetlands
report based on best available science that a smaller area is adequate to
protect wetland functions, and the proposal includes all applicable following
measures to minimize impacts:
      1.   Lights are directed away from the wetland;
      2.   Noise-generating activities are directed away from the wetland;
      3.   Infiltrate or treat, detain, and disperse runoff into the wetland
from impervious surfaces;
      4.   Route all new untreated runoff away from the wetland while ensuring
wetland is not dewatered;
      5.   Covenants limiting the use of pesticides within 150 feet of the
wetland;
      6.   Utilize integrated pest management
      7.   Utilize privacy fencing or landscaping to delineate buffer edge and
to discourage disturbance of wildlife by humans and pets;
      8.   Prevent flow from lawns from directly entering buffer;
      9.   Use low intensity development (LID)techniques;
      10.   Use privacy or native vegetative fencing to delineate buffer edge;
      11.   Protect wetland and its buffer with a conservation easement;
      12.   Use best management practices to control dust;
      13.   Maintain connections to offsite areas that are undisturbed;
      14.   Restore corridors or connections to offsite habitats by replanting;
      15.   Other measures further defined by DOE guidance documents.
   D.   Standard buffer widths shall be based upon wetland category, wetland
functions or special characteristics, and/or the intensity of proposed adjacent
land use and the level of wetland impact likely to result from that land use
intensity. Required standard wetland buffers shall be as shown below.
TABLE 13-4.1
STANDARD WETLAND BUFFERS
                   Standard Buffer Widths (based
DOE Manual Wetland on Likely Level of Impact     Other Measures Recommended for
Characteristics(1) from Proposed Adjacent Land   Protection
                   Use)
                                                                      Standard
                                                                      Buffer
                                                                      Widths
                                                                      (based on Other
                                                                      Likely    Measures
DOE Manual Wetland Characteristics(1)                                 Level of  Recommended
                                                                      Impact    for
                                                                      from      Protection
                                                                      Proposed
                                                                      Adjacent
                                                                      Land Use)
Category I Wetlands
                                                                                No
                                                                                additional
                                                                                surface
                                                                                water
                                                                                discharges
                                                                                to wetland
                                                                      Low-125'  or its
   Wetlands of High Conservation Value                             Moderate- tributaries
                                                                      190'      No septic
                                                                      High-250' systems
                                                                                within 300
                                                                                feet
                                                                                Restore
                                                                                degraded
                                                                                parts of
                                                                                buffer
                                                                                No
                                                                                additional
                                                                                surface
                                                                                water
                                                                      Low-125'  discharges
   Bogs                                                            Moderate- to wetland
                                                                      190'      or its
                                                                      High-250' tributaries
                                                                                Restore
                                                                                degraded
                                                                                parts of
                                                                                buffer
                                                                                If forested
                                                                                wetland
                                                                      Buffer    score high
                                                                      size to   for habitat,
                                                                      be based  need to
                                                                      on score  maintain
   Forested                                                        for       connectivity
                                                                      habitat   to other
                                                                      functions natural
                                                                      or water  areas;
                                                                      quality   restore
                                                                      functions degraded
                                                                                parts of the
                                                                                buffer
                                                                      Low-100'
   Estuarine                                                       Moderate- Reserved
                                                                      150'
                                                                      High-200'
                                                                                Maintain
                                                                                connections
                                                                      Low-150'  to other
                                                                      Moderate- habitat
   Habitat function level high                                     225'      areas
                                                                      High-300' Restore
                                                                                degraded
                                                                                parts of
                                                                                buffer
                                                                      Low-75'
   Habitat function level moderate                                 Moderate- Reserved
                                                                      110'
                                                                      High-150'
                                                                                No
                                                                      Low-50'   additional
   Water quality improvement level high and habitat function level Moderate- surface
low                                                                   75'       discharges
                                                                      High-100' of untreated
                                                                                runoff
                                                                      Low-50'
   Not meeting any of the above characteristics                    Moderate- Reserved
                                                                      75'
                                                                      High-100'
Category II Wetlands
                                                                      Low-150'  Maintain
                                                                      Moderate- connections
   Habitat function level high                                     225'      to other
                                                                      High-300' habitat
                                                                                areas
                                                                      Low-75'
   Habitat function level moderate                                 Moderate- Reserved
                                                                      110'
                                                                      High-150'
                                                                                No
                                                                      Low-50'   additional
   Water quality improvement level high and habitat function level Moderate- surface
low                                                                   75'       discharges
                                                                      High-100' of untreated
                                                                                runoff
                                                                      Low-75'
   Estuarine                                                       Moderate- Reserved
                                                                      110'
                                                                      High-150'
                                                                                Enhancement
                                                                      Low-50'   of
                                                                      Moderate- interdunal
   Interdunal wetlands > 1 acre and that score 6 or 7 habitat point75'       wetlands as
                                                                      High-100' compensatory
                                                                                mitigation
                                                                                not allowed
                                                                                Enhancement
                                                                      Low-40'   of
                                                                      Moderate- interdunal
   Interdunal wetlands > 1 acre and that score 5 or less           60'       wetlands as
                                                                      High-80'  compensatory
                                                                                mitigation
                                                                                not allowed
                                                                      Low-50'
   Not meeting any of the above characteristics                    Moderate- Reserved
                                                                      75'
                                                                      High-100'
Category III Wetlands
                                                                      Low-75'
   Habitat function level moderate                                 Moderate- Reserved
                                                                      110'
                                                                      High-150'
                                                                                Enhancement
                                                                      Low-40'   of
                                                                      Moderate- interdunal
   Interdunal wetlands (0.1 acre- 1 acre)                          60'       wetlands as
                                                                      High-80'  compensatory
                                                                                mitigation
                                                                                not allowed
                                                                      Low-40'
   Not meeting any of the above characteristics                    Moderate- Reserved
                                                                      60'
                                                                      High-80'
Category IV Wetlands
                                                                      Low-25'
   Score for all three basic wetland functions is less than 16 poinModerate- Reserved
   Any interdunal wetland <0.1 acre                                40'
                                                                      High-50'
 
Notes:
(1)   Habitat and water quality function levels are based on scores from the
Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington.
Sources: Wetlands in Washington State, Volume 2, Protecting and Managing
Wetlands, Modified Appendix 8-C for use with the 2014 Wetland Rating System
(Guidance on Buffers and Ratios-Western Washington, April 2005 (Washington
state Department of Ecology); City of Long Beach Dune Management Report, March
2000.
See also provisions of this code relating to increased and decreased buffer
widths and buffer averaging.
Land use intensity (i.e., low, moderate, high) shall be determined using the
table set forth below.
TABLE 13-4.2
LAND USE AND LIKELY LEVEL OF IMPACTS
Likely Level of Impact from Proposed Adjacent Proposed Adjacent Land Use Types
Land Use
Likely
Level of
Impact
from     Proposed Adjacent Land Use Types
Proposed
Adjacent
Land Use
         • Commercial, including retail sales
         • Industrial
High     • Institutional
         • Residential (more than one (1) d.u. per acre)
         • High intensity recreation (e.g., golf courses)
         • Hobby Farms
         • Residential (one (1) d.u. per acre or less)
Moderate • Moderate intensity open space (parks)
         • Paved trails
         • Paved driveways and gravel driveways serving three (3) or more residences
         • Timber management
         • Low intensity open space (e.g., passive recreation, natural resources
         preservation)
Low      • Unpaved trails
         • Gravel driveways serving two (2) or fewer residences
         • Utility corridor without a maintenance road and little or no vegetation
         management
 
   D.   Any wetland created as compensation for approved wetland alteration
shall have the standard buffer required for the new classification of the
created wetland. Wetlands to be created shall be located such that the new
associated wetland buffer does not cross onto adjacent property, unless the
same property owner owns the adjacent property or has obtained written
permission from the adjacent property owner to do so.
   E.   Land-ward Residential Addition. For proposed development consisting of
an expansion of an existing single family residential structure within a
wetland buffer, for which the proposed expansion is on the land-ward side of
the structure furthest from the wetland, no mitigation shall be required for
such expansion, so long as the width of the expanded structure parallel to the
wetland boundary is not increased. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-4-5: PERMITTED ALTERATIONS IN WETLANDS:
Activities and uses shall be prohibited from wetlands and wetland buffers,
except as provided in this section.
   A.   Permitted activities; requirements. The following activities may be
permitted in a wetland or wetland buffer only if the applicant can demonstrate
the activity will not degrade functions and values of the wetland and other
critical areas. The Director may require preparation of a critical areas report
to confirm compliance with requirements of this title. Mitigation shall be
required pursuant to provisions of this title.
      1.   Enhancement or preservation activities that improve the function of
the existing wetland.
      2.   Modifications to existing structures where no further wetland
alteration or increase in structure footprint will occur.
      3.   Trails. Public and private trails may be allowed within all wetland
buffers where it can be demonstrated in a critical areas report that the
wetland and wetland buffer functions and values will not be degraded by trail
construction or use. Trail planning, construction, and maintenance shall adhere
to all of the following criteria:
         a.   Trail alignment shall follow a path beyond a distance from the
wetland edge equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of the buffer width, except as
needed to access viewing platforms or view points. Trails may be placed within
existing rights-of-way or on existing levees or railroad grades within these
limits;
         b.   Trails and associated viewing platforms shall be constructed of
pervious or permeable materials, unless necessary for conformance to the
Americans with Disabilities Act. The trail surface shall meet all other
requirements, including water quality standards set forth in the Washington
State Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western
Washington, August 2001 or as revised;
         c.   Trail alignment shall avoid trees in excess of eight inches in
diameter at a height of four and a half feet (4.5') above the ground on the
upslope side of the tree;
         d.   Trail construction and maintenance shall follow the U.S. Forest
Service Trails Management Handbook (FSH 2309.18, June 1987) and Standard
Specifications for Construction of Trails (EM-7720-102, June 1984 or as
revised);
         Access trails to viewing platforms within the wetland may be provided.
Trail access and platforms shall be aligned and constructed to minimize
disturbance to valuable functions of the wetland or its buffer and still
provide enjoyment of the resource.;
         e.   Buffer widths shall be increased, where possible, equal to the
width of the trail corridor, including disturbed areas; and
         f.   Equestrian trails shall be located or measures provided to assure
that runoff from the trail does not directly discharge to the wetland.
      4.   Stormwater Management Facilities. Stormwater management facilities
are not allowed in Category I and II wetlands and their buffers. Any category
of wetland may receive clean runoff from sources such as roof drains and
footing drains when such runoff is demonstrated as beneficial to wetland
functions. Category III and IV wetland buffers may be used for detention/
retention areas where the applicant can demonstrate no practicable alternative
and that such use is beneficial to wetland functions. Enhanced treatment is
required prior to discharge to such wetlands, and a stormwater facility
maintenance plan shall be submitted.
      5.   Public Roads and Utilities. Footprint expansion of public roads and
utilities may occur to maintain locally established levels of service, and to
provide for and protect public safety when no lesser impacting option is
feasible and the width of the corridor is minimized to the maximum extent
practicable. Public and private utility corridors may be allowed within wetland
buffers for all categories of wetlands when no lesser impacting alternative
alignment is feasible, and wetland and wetland buffer functions and values will
not be degraded. Utilities, whenever practicable, shall be constructed in
existing, improved roads, drivable surface or shoulder, subject to compliance
with road maintenance BMP’s, or within an existing utility corridor. Otherwise,
corridor alignment, construction, restoration and maintenance shall adhere to
all of the following criteria:
         a.   Corridor alignment shall follow a path beyond a distance from the
wetland edge equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of the buffer width, except
when crossing a Category IV wetland and its buffer;
         b.   Corridor construction and maintenance shall maintain and protect
the hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the wetland and the buffer;
         c.   Corridors shall be fully revegetated with appropriate native
vegetation upon completion of construction; and
         d.   Utilities requiring maintenance roads shall be prohibited in
wetland buffers unless the following criteria are met:
            (1)   There are no lesser impacting alternatives;
            (2)   Any required maintenance roads shall be no greater than
fifteen feet (15') wide.
            (3)   Roads shall closely approximate the location of the utility
to minimize disturbances; and
            (4)   The maintenance road shall be constructed of pervious
materials and designed to maintain and protect the hydrologic functions of the
wetland and its buffer. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-4-6: CRITICAL AREAS REPORT/STUDY:
In addition to the general requirements for Critical Areas Reports provided
under Section
13-3-12(G) of this title, wetland critical areas reports shall include the
following:
   A.   On the site map:
      1.   The edge of the wetland (located within 300 feet of the project
site) as flagged and surveyed in the field according to the approved Corps of
Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual and the Regional Supplement to the Corps
of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual: Western Mountains, Valleys, and Coast
Region (Version 2.0) or as revised. as required by RCW 36.70A.157;
      2.   The location and extent of any proposed wetland area(s) to be
created through mitigation measures; and
      3.   The location and extent of any proposed wetland alteration or fill.
   B.   In the report:
      1.   Description of the wetland by classification per the Washington
State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (Washington State Department
of Ecology, 2014 Update, Publication No. 14-06-029, or as revised by Ecology;
      2.   General condition of wetland;
      3.   Description of vegetation species and community types present in the
wetland and surrounding buffer;
      4.   Description of soil types within the wetland and the surrounding
buffer using the USDA Soil Conservation Service soil classification system;
      5.   Description of hydrologic regime and findings;
      6.   Description of any observed wildlife present in the wetland or
associated buffer. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-4-7: WETLAND MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS:
No net loss of wetland functions and values shall occur as a result of any
project. If a wetland alteration is allowed, associated impacts shall be
mitigated. In addition to the general mitigation requirements described in
Section
13-3-12(H) of this title, the following specific wetland mitigation
requirements shall apply.
   A.   Mitigation shall achieve equivalent or greater biological wetland
functions. Mitigation plans shall be consistent with the state Department of
Ecology Wetland Mitigation in Washington State, Part 1: Agency Policies and
Guidance (Version 1, Publication #06-06-011a, March 2006) and Wetland
Mitigation in Washington State, Part 2: Developing Mitigation Plans (Version 1,
Publication #06-06-011b, March 2006, or as may be amended).
   B.   Preference of mitigation actions. Mitigation actions that require
compensation shall occur in the following order of preference:
      1.   Restoring wetlands on upland sites that were formerly wetlands.
      2.   Creating wetlands on disturbed upland sites such as those with
vegetation cover consisting primarily of non-native introduced species. This
should only be attempted when there is a consistent source of hydrology and it
can be shown that the surface and subsurface hydrologic regime is conducive for
the wetland community that is designed.
      3.   Enhancing significantly degraded wetlands in combination with
restoration or creation. Such enhancement should be part of a mitigation
package that includes replacing the impacted area while meeting applicable
ratio requirements.
      4.   Preservation of high quality wetlands that are under demonstrable
threat of destruction or substantive degradation. Such preservation should be
part of a mitigation package that includes replacing the impacted area while
meeting applicable ratio requirements.
   C.   Type and location of mitigation. Unless it is demonstrated that a
higher level of ecological function would result from an alternative approach,
compensatory mitigation for ecological functions shall be either in-kind and
on-site, or in-kind and within the same drainage sub-basin, and of similar or
better wetland category. Mitigation actions shall be conducted within the same
drainage sub-basin and on the site of the alteration except when all of the
following apply:
      1.   There are no reasonable on-site or in-subdrainage basin
opportunities, or on-site and in-subdrainage basin opportunities do not have a
high likelihood of success, after a determination of the natural capacity of
the site to mitigate for the impacts. Consideration should include: anticipated
compensatory wetland mitigation ratios, buffer conditions and proposed widths,
hydrogeomorphic classes of on-site wetlands when restored, proposed flood
storage capacity, and potential to mitigate riparian fish and wildlife habitat
impacts;
      2.   Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or
improved wetland functions than the impacted wetland; and
      3.   Off-site locations shall be in the same sub-drainage unless credits
from a state certified wetland mitigation bank are used as mitigation and the
use of credits is consistent with the terms of the bank’s certification.
   D.   Mitigation ratios. The following ratios shall apply to wetland
restoration and creation mitigation. These ratios do not apply to the use of
credits from a state certified wetland mitigation bank. When credits from a
certified bank are used, compensatory mitigation ratios should be consistent
with the requirements of the bank’s certification. The first number specifies
the acreage of compensatory mitigation wetlands and the second specifies the
acreage of wetlands altered. All mitigation land must have equal or greater
wetland functions and values than the impacted land.
 
Category and Type of Creation or Re-establishment Rehabilitation Enhancement
Wetland
Category I:
Bog, Natural         Not considered possible      Case by case   Case by case
Heritage site
Category I:
Mature               6:1                          12:1           24:1
Forested
Category I:
Based on             4:1                          8:1            16:1
functions
Category II          3:1                          6:1            12:1
Category III         2:1                          4:1            8:1
Category IV          1.5:1                        3:1            6:1
 
   E.   Wetland enhancement as mitigation. Impacts to wetland functions may be
mitigated by enhancement of existing significantly degraded wetlands, but must
be used in conjunction with restoration and/or creation; except that, due to
their dynamic nature, enhancement of interdunal wetlands is not an appropriate
ecological mitigation option. Applicants proposing to enhance wetlands must
prepare a critical areas report that identifies how enhancement will increase
functions of the degraded wetland and how this increase will adequately
mitigate for the loss of wetland area and function at the impact site. An
enhancement proposal must also show whether existing wetland functions will be
reduced by the enhancement actions.
   F.   Wetland preservation as mitigation. Impacts to wetland functions may be
mitigated by preservation of existing high quality, at-risk, off-site wetlands,
but should be done in combination with restoration, creation, or enhancement
mitigation measures. Applicants proposing to include wetland preservation in a
mitigation plan must prepare a critical areas report that identifies how
preservation will benefit the functions of the wetland to be preserved and how
this action (either solely or in part) will adequately mitigate for the loss of
wetland area and function at the impact site. A preservation proposal must also
meet the all of following criteria for consideration as an acceptable component
of a compensatory mitigation plan:
      1.   The preservation site is determined to be under demonstrable threat
of destruction or substantive degradation.
      2.   The site proposed for preservation is a high quality Category I or
II wetland within the same watershed or sub-basin.
      3.   The preservation site includes buffer areas adequate to protect the
habitat and its functions from encroachment and degradation.
      4.   Mitigation ratios for preservation sites shall be 10:1 if used in
combination with other compensation measures, or 20:1 if used alone.
   G.   Monitoring of mitigation. Monitoring of approved compensatory
mitigation actions shall be required as part of an approved mitigation plan as
set forth in Section
13-3-12(I), (J), and (K) of this title. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-4-8: MAPS AND REFERENCES:
The following references may provide a general indication of wetland locations.
While supplemental, they cannot be used in place of an on-site field
determination and delineation of wetlands.
   A.   National Wetland Inventory. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service.
   B.   Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly the Soil Conservation
Service), soils map for Pacific County, hydric soils designations.
   C.   Interdunal Wetlands Inventory, Dune Management Report, City of Long
Beach. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-4-9: WETLAND MITIGATION BANKING:
   A.   Impacts that can be mitigated via bank. Loss of Category I, Category
II, Category III or Category IV wetland buffer, and loss of Category II,
Category III, or Category IV wetland may be mitigated via purchasing of rights
in an approved wetland mitigation bank. Impacts to Category I wetlands from
private development or public infrastructure projects may only be compensated
for by purchasing rights in an approved wetland mitigation bank. Development
proposals for which wetland mitigation banking is proposed as mitigation must
first demonstrate compliance with the preferred wetland mitigation sequence
described in Section
13-3-12(B) of this title.
   B.   Required characteristics of bank. Credits from a wetland mitigation
bank may be approved for use as compensation for impacts to wetlands when all
of the following criteria are met:
      1.   The bank is certified under Chapter 173-700 WAC, as may be amended;
      2.   The Director determines the wetland mitigation bank provides
appropriate compensation for authorized impacts; and
      3.   The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and
conditions of the bank’s certification.
   C.   Compensatory mitigation ratios for projects using bank credits shall be
consistent with compensatory mitigation ratios specified in the bank’s
certification.
   D.   Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to
compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the bank’s
certification. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-4-10: WETLAND MONITORING PROGRAM AND ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT:
The City shall conduct a wetland monitoring program applicable to all wetlands
and wetland mosaics located within the City that are one thousand square feet
(1,000 SF) or greater in area to which the City or its designee can acquire
legal site access. The City shall pursue state and/or federal funding for the
monitoring program in coordination with applicable local, state and federal
agencies.
   A.   Purpose. The primary purpose of the wetland monitoring program is to
maintain a science-based understanding of the City’s wetland resources. This
information will serve as a source of best available science considered when
the City makes decisions regarding wetlands regulations and policies in
accordance with RCW 36.70A.172 and WAC 365-195-900 through WAC 365-195-925, and
when considering adaptive management options.
   B.   Program Elements. The City shall gather baseline data regarding the
presence, type, and condition of wetlands, and shall evaluate wetland condition
data over time. The City shall assess the values and functions of wetlands and
mosaics including and not limited to water quality, flood and storm water
storage, conveyance and attenuation, groundwater recharge and discharge, and
fish and wildlife habitat conditions; assess baseline wetland conditions;
assess changes to wetland and mosaic conditions over time; evaluate
effectiveness of City regulations; and enact adaptive management measures or
actions (such as revisions to City regulations and requirements) as the wetland
monitoring program may demonstrate are advisable. Basic elements of the wetland
monitoring program are as follows, subject to modification over time:
      1.   Collect Baseline Data:
         a.   Delineate and designate the category of identified wetlands and
mosaics and their buffer widths;
         b.   Survey and document baseline water quality conditions;
         c.   Survey and document baseline vegetation of wetlands and buffers;
         d.   Survey and document baseline wildlife presence and wetland use as
habitat;
         e.   Survey and document wetland and buffer functions; and
         f.   Survey and document baseline surface water flow, groundwater
recharge /discharge and flood attenuation conditions, as applicable.
      2.   Collect Periodic Data:
         a.   After baseline data are collected, the City shall monitor
identified wetlands and mosaics on a minimum five (5) year basis. This will
allow evaluation of wetland functions and values over time.
         b.   The City shall document data, results, and trends, and shall make
any recommendations for adaptive management in a wetlands evaluation report, to
be made publicly available, upon conclusion of each five (5) year wetland
evaluation period interval as identified in 2.a., above.
      3.   Assess Wetland Conditions; City Response:
         a.   Should data indicate the condition of a wetland or mosaic is
satisfactory and that adequate wetland functions and values consistent with the
identified wetland category are being maintained, no additional action is
required until the next monitoring and evaluation period.
         b.   Should data indicate the condition of a wetland or mosaic is
threatened, or that wetland condition is declining over time, the City shall
take the following steps:
            (1)   Compliance Assessment. The City will first determine whether
there is compliance with relevant critical areas regulations.
               (A)   If the City determines compliance with critical areas
regulations does not exist, the City shall undertake educational efforts to
gain compliance.
               (B)   If education fails to achieve compliance, the City shall
undertake regulatory code enforcement to gain compliance.
            (2)   Source Identification. If the City determines compliance with
critical areas regulations does exist, the City shall strive to identify the
source of the threat and take appropriate action to reverse or mitigate its
effects.
            (3)   Adaptive Management. If the City determines compliance with
critical areas regulations does exist, and there is no identifiable source of a
threat to a degraded wetland, the City shall assess its critical areas
regulations and practices, and shall modify them as necessary to achieve
desired wetland functions and values consistent with the applicable wetland
category. The City shall consider best available science when adaptively
modifying its regulations and practices. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
CHAPTER 5
FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS
SECTION:
13-5-1: Purpose
13-5-2: Designation
13-5-3: Fish And Wildlife Habitat Conservation Area Water Type Classification
13-5-4: Buffers
13-5-5: General Performance Standards
13-5-6: Special Provisions; Anadromous Fish
13-5-7: Special Provisions; Wildlife
13-5-8: Critical Areas Report
13-5-9: Fish And Wildlife Habitat Conservation Area Mitigation
13-5-10: Maps And References
13-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and procedures protective
of fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas (HCAs) and that will preserve
and protect those areas that have a primary association with anadromous fish,
threatened, endangered and sensitive species, as well as species of local
importance. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-5-2: DESIGNATION:
   A.   For purposes of these regulations, fish and wildlife HCAs are those
habitat areas that meet any one or more of the following criteria:
      1.   Documented presence of species listed by the federal government or
the State of Washington as endangered, threatened, or sensitive.
      2.   Commercial and recreational shellfish areas.
      3.   Kelp and eelgrass beds.
      4.   Herring and smelt spawning areas.
      5.   Naturally occurring ponds under 20 acres with submerged aquatic beds
that provide fish or wildlife habitat.
      6.   Waters of the State as defined by WAC 222-16-030.
      7.   Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a
government or tribe.
      8.   Areas with which anadromous fish species have a primary association.
      9.   State Natural Area Preserves, Natural Resource Conservation Areas,
and other aquatic resource areas.
      10.   State Priority Habitats and Areas Associated with State Priority
Species as defined in WAC 365-190-080, as may be amended.
      11.   Areas of Rare Plant Species and High Quality Ecosystems as
identified by the Washington State Department of Natural resources through the
Natural Heritage Program in RCW 79.70, as may be amended.
   B.   All areas within the City meeting one or more of the above criteria,
regardless of any formal identification, are designated critical areas and are
subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-5-3: FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREA WATER TYPE CLASSIFICATION:
Water types shall be classified according to WAC 222-16-030. Type S streams
include shorelines of the state and have flows averaging twenty (20) or more
cubic feet per second; Type F streams are those that are not Type S but still
provide fish habitat; and Type N streams do not have fish habitat and are
either perennial (Np) or seasonal (Ns). All streams and those areas where
surface waters flow sufficiently to produce a defined channel or bed as
indicated by hydraulically sorted sediments or the removal of vegetative litter
or loosely rooted vegetation by the action of moving water. Ns waters must be
physically connected by an above-ground channel system to Type S, F, or Np
waters. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-5-4: BUFFERS:
   A.   Riparian Habitat. The following buffers are the minimum requirements
for streams. All buffers shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark
(OHWM).
      1.   Types S streams shall have a one-hundred-fifty-foot (150') buffer on
each side of the channel.
      2.   Types F streams greater than five feet (> 5') wide shall have a one-
hundred-fifty-foot (150') buffer on each side of the channel. Type F streams
less than five feet (< 5') wide shall have a 100 foot (100') buffer on each
side of the channel 1 .
      3.   Type Np streams shall have a fifty foot (50') buffer on each side of
the channel.
      4.   Type Ns streams, within a quarter mile of a stream with salmonids
shall have a twenty-five-foot (25') buffer on each side of the channel.
   B.   Wildlife and Other Habitat. Buffer widths and setbacks for the
protection of listed species outside of streams and stream buffers will be
determined on a site-specific basis through the approval of a Critical Areas
Report.
   C.   Marine Shorelines. Marine shoreline standard buffers will be determined
by the City of Long Beach Shoreline Master Program. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. Bankfull width of the defined channel (WAC 222-16-010).
13-5-5: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The requirements provided in this section supplement those identified in
Section 13-3-12 of this title. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas
(HCAs) may be altered only if the proposed alteration of the habitat or the
mitigation proposed does not degrade functions and values of the habitat. All
new structures and land alterations shall be prohibited from habitat
conservation areas, except in accordance with this title. Additional standards
follow:
   A.   No development shall be allowed within a HCA area or any associated
buffer with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive
species have a primary association.
   B.   Whenever development is proposed adjacent to a fish and wildlife HCA
with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have
a primary association, such areas shall be protected through the application of
protection measures in accordance with a critical areas report prepared by a
qualified professional and approved by the Director.
   C.   The following activities may be permitted within fish and wildlife
HCAs, except as otherwise prohibited in this section, provided they comply with
all provisions of this chapter.
      1.   Road, trail, bridge, and utility construction may be permitted
across an HCA and/or its buffer, provided all of the following are satisfied:
         a.   It is demonstrated to the Director that there exist no
alternative routes that can be reasonably used to achieve the proposed
development;
         b.   The activity will have minimum adverse impacts to the fish and
wildlife HCA;
         c.   The activity will not significantly degrade surface or
groundwater;
         d.   The intrusion into fish and wildlife HCA and its buffers is fully
mitigated.
      2.   Limited park or recreational access to an HCA and/or its buffer may
be permitted, provided all of the following are satisfied:
         a.   The access is part of a public park, public open space, or a
recreational resort development that is dependent on the access for its
location and recreational function;
         b.   The access is limited to the minimum necessary to accomplish the
recreational function;
         c.   The access and the balance of the development is consistent with
other requirements of this chapter;
         d.   The applicant obtains written approval from the City for the
limited access and associated mitigation.
      3.   Low impact uses and activities (as defined in Section
13-4-5 of this title) that are consistent with the function of the buffer and
that do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the buffer
depending on the sensitivity of the habitat involved, provided such activity
shall not result in a decrease of habitat function or value. Examples of uses
and activities that may be permitted on a case-by-case basis include removal of
noxious vegetation, pedestrian trails and viewing platforms.
      4.   Stormwater discharges shall be controlled and treated in accordance
with the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington, DOE Publication
No. 05-10-029 through 05-10-033, or as revised.
   D.   Habitat Study. Applicants of development proposals or alterations in or
adjacent to a fish and wildlife HCA shall prepare and submit to the City as
part of the required critical areas study, a habitat study that identifies
which, if any, listed species are using the fish and wildlife HCA. If one or
more listed species are using the fish and wildlife HCA, the following
additional requirements shall apply:
      1.   The applicant’s critical areas study shall include a habitat
management plan that identifies qualities essential to maintaining the feeding,
breeding, and nesting of listed species using the fish and wildlife HCA and
that identifies measures to minimize the proposal’s impact on these ecological
processes. The applicant shall be guided by the document Management
Recommendations for Washington’s Priority Habitats and Species, issued by the
Washington Department of Wildlife, May 1991, as may be amended, and by any
recovery and management plans prepared by the Washington Department of Wildlife
for the listed species pursuant to WAC 232-12-297(11).
      2.   Conditions shall be imposed as necessary, based on measures
identified in the habitat management plan.
   E.   City approval of land alteration adjacent to the HCA, buffer, or any
setback shall not occur prior to consultation with the state Department of Fish
and Wildlife and the appropriate federal agency, if applicable.
   F.   No plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the region shall
be introduced into a HCA unless authorized by a state or federal permit or
approval.
   G.   Alteration of natural watercourses shall be avoided, if feasible. If
unavoidable, all of the following provisions shall apply to the alteration:
      1.   Watercourse alteration projects shall not result in blockage of side
channels. Known fish barriers into side channels shall be removed as part of an
approved watercourse alteration project.
      2.   Removal of large woody debris and vegetation, including salvage
logging, shall be avoided or minimized unless it is demonstrated that such
materials pose an imminent safety hazard to the public, property or structures,
or when it is part of a larger restoration project. Any removal that is
unavoidable shall be mitigated by replanting with native vegetation and by
augmenting lost large woody debris it can be anchored in such a way to provide
fisheries, riparian or shoreline erosion benefits; and to avoid safety hazards
where recreational boating and swimming are expected.
      3.   The applicant shall maintain the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse to ensure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
Maintenance shall be bonded for a period of five (5) years and be in accordance
with an approved maintenance program.
   H.   The Director shall condition approval of activities allowed within a
fish and wildlife HCA or its buffer as necessary, pursuant to the approved
critical areas report and habitat management plan to minimize or mitigate any
potential adverse impacts. Depending on circumstances, and on a case-by-case
basis, conditions may include one or more of the following:
      1.   Establishment of buffer zones outside of the required stream and
wetland buffers as may be necessary to retain adequate natural habitat for
listed species;
      2.   Preservation of critically important vegetation and/or habitat
features (e.g. snags);
      3.   Limitation of access to the HCA, including fencing to deter
unauthorized access, but fencing shall not create a barrier to habitat
function;
      4.   Seasonal restrictions of construction activities;
      5.   Establishment of a duration and timetable for periodic review of
mitigation activities;
      6.   Requirement of a performance bond to ensure successful completion.
(Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-5-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS; ANADROMOUS FISH:
   A.   Activities, uses, and alterations proposed to be located in water
bodies used by anadromous fish or in areas that affect such water bodies shall
give special consideration to preservation and enhancement of anadromous fish
habitat. Such special consideration shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      1.   Activities shall be timed to occur only during the allowable work
window as designated by the state Department of Fish and Wildlife;
      2.   An alternative alignment or location for the activity is not
feasible;
      3.   The activity is designed to minimize degradation of functions or
values of fish habitat or other critical areas; and
      4.   Any impact to functions or values of the HCA shall be mitigated in
accordance with an approved critical areas report.
   B.   Structures that prevent migration of salmonids shall not be allowed in
those portions of water bodies currently or historically used by anadromous
fish. Fish bypass facilities shall be provided that allow upstream migration of
adult fish while preventing juveniles migrating downstream from being trapped
or harmed.
   C.   Fills, when authorized, shall minimize adverse impacts to anadromous
fish and their habitat, shall mitigate any unavoidable impacts, and shall only
be allowed for water-dependent uses. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-5-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS; WILDLIFE:
Bald eagle habitat shall be protected pursuant to the Washington State Bald
Eagle Protection Rules (WAC 232-12-292). (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-5-8: CRITICAL AREAS REPORT:
   A.   A critical areas report for fish and wildlife HCAs shall be prepared by
a qualified biologist with experience analyzing aquatic and/or wildlife habitat
and who has experience preparing reports for the relevant type of critical
area.
   B.   In addition to requirements of Section
13-3-12 of this title, critical areas reports for wildlife habitat areas shall
include the following information:
      1.   An assessment of habitats including site- and proposal-related
information;
      2.   Identification of any species of local importance; priority species;
or endangered, threatened, sensitive, or candidate species that have a primary
association with habitat on or adjacent to the project area, and assessment of
potential project impacts to the use of the site by the species; and
      3.   A discussion of any federal, state, or local species management
recommendations, including the state Department of Fish and Wildlife habitat
management recommendations, that have been developed for species or habitat
located on or adjacent to the project area.
   C.   A critical areas report for streams shall include all of the following
information:
      1.   On the site map:
         a.   The location of the ordinary high water mark;
         b.   The toe of any slope twenty-five percent (25%) or greater within
twenty-five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark; and
         c.   The location of any proposed or existing stream crossing.
      2.   In the report:
         a.   Characterization of riparian (streamside) vegetation species,
composition, and habitat function;
         b.   Description of the soil types adjacent to and underlying the
stream, using the Soil Conservation Service soil classification system;
         c.   Determination of the presence or absence of fish, and reference
sources; and
         d.   When stream alteration is proposed, include stream width and
flow, stability of the channel including erosion or aggradation potential, type
of substratum, discussions of infiltration capacity and biofiltration as
compared to the stream prior to alteration, presence of hydrologically linked
wetlands, analysis of fish and wildlife habitat, and proposed floodplain
limits. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-5-9: FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREA MITIGATION:
   A.   No net loss of fish or wildlife habitat functions or values shall occur
as a result of a proposed project.
   B.   Mitigation shall be required for loss of area or functional value of
wildlife habitat regulated under this section. The mitigation requirements for
alterations to HCAs, as allowed in this title, shall be determined on a case-
by-case basis by the Director, based on the preparation of an applicable
critical areas report in compliance with requirements of this chapter.
   C.   When mitigation is required by this section, it shall address
restoration, rehabilitation, and alternatives in accordance with the following
requirements:
      1.   Restoration is required when a wildlife habitat regulated under this
section has been altered prior to project approval unless the alteration was
not prohibited by law; or when wildlife habitats are temporarily affected by
construction or any other temporary phase of a project.
      2.   Mitigation is required when a wildlife habitat regulated under this
section is permanently altered as a result of project approval or activity.
      3.   On-site mitigation is preferred.
      4.   Off-site mitigation will be allowed only in those situations where
on-site mitigation is not practicable. When off-site mitigation is allowed, it
should occur within the same subbasin as the impact it mitigates.
      5.   Mitigation shall be completed prior to granting of temporary or
final occupancy, or completion or final approval of any development activity
for which mitigation measures have been required.
   D.   This section constitutes general rules that may be modified upon
recommendation of a qualified critical area professional as to the scope and
nature of the mitigation which is needed to protect the habitat system,
functions, and values at issue for the project. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-5-10: MAPS AND REFERENCES:
   A.   Washington DNR base maps for stream types and topography provide an
indication of the location of fisheries resources. Field conditions shall be
used to determine existence and extent of any classified stream area. Wildlife
critical areas shall be field located based on applicable criteria by a
qualified critical areas professional.
   B.   Applicants shall consult Department of Fish and Wildlife maps of
sensitive, threatened, and endangered species and habitat. (Ord. 985, 10-5-
2020)
CHAPTER 6
FREQUENTLY FLOODED AREAS
SECTION:
13-6-1: Purpose
13-6-2: Identification
13-6-3: Performance Standards
13-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section is establish standards and procedures intended to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas.
(Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-6-2: IDENTIFICATION:
For the purpose of this title, frequently flooded areas within the City of Long
Beach shall be classified using the following criteria:
   A.   Those areas of special flood hazards identified by the Federal
Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The
Flood Insurance Study for the City of Long Beach” dated February 1979, or as
subsequently revised, with an accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and
any revisions thereto. In case of conflict between FIRM flood hazard maps and a
comprehensive flood hazard management plan designation, the more restrictive
designation shall apply.
   B.   Those areas identified by the City of Long Beach based on review of
base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state, county or
other valid sources when base flood elevation data has not been provided. (Ord.
985, 10-5-2020)
13-6-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   The following standards apply to development proposals and alterations
on sites within flood hazard areas:
      1.   Comprehensive Flood Hazard Management Plan. The City of Long Beach
Comprehensive Flood Hazard Management Plan (FHMP) was completed by the City in
1995. The FHMP sets forth recommendations for land development within the flood
areas in Long Beach and procedures for obtaining development permits or
approvals within flood areas.
      2.   Flood Damage Prevention. Chapter 2 (Flood Damage Prevention) of
Title 10 (Building Regulations) of the Long Beach City Code establishes
specific standards for construction of new structures or improvements to
existing structures located in areas subject to designated flood hazards.
      3.   Dune Alterations Prohibited. Shoreline dune systems and ridges
provide important natural protection from coastal flood hazards. Section
10-4-12(F) of the Long Beach City Code prohibits the alteration of sand dunes
within flood zones V1-30, VE and V on the City’s Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) that would increase potential flood damage.
   B.   Applicants proposing development within flood hazard areas must comply
with all requirements of the most recent edition of the FHMP. All development
within designated frequently flooded areas shall comply with requirements of
Title 10 (Building Regulations) the Long Beach City Code, as may be amended,
and/or the City of Long Beach Shoreline Master Program, as may be amended.
(Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
CHAPTER 7
CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS
SECTION:
13-7-1: Purpose
13-7-2: Identification
13-7-3: Performance Standards
13-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and procedures protective
of aquifers susceptible to contamination due to physical (hydrogeologic)
factors. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-7-2: IDENTIFICATION:
Any land within the City of Long Beach that contains the following soil types
as listed in the Soil Survey of Grays Harbor County Area, Pacific County, and
Wahkiakum County, Washington, 1986, Soil Conservation Service, USDA, is
designated as a critical aquifer recharge area.
Soil types (Map Unit Descriptions)
8   Beaches
35  Dune land
92  Netarts fine sand, 3-12 percent slopes
108 Orcas peat
132 Seastrand Mucky peat
133 Seastrand variant muck
147 Udorthents, level
153 Westport fine sand, 3-10 percent slopes
162 Yaquina loamy fine sand
(Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-7-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   New Development Prohibitions. The following types of new development
shall not be permitted within designated critical aquifer recharge areas:
      1.   Solid or hazardous waste landfills;
      2.   Ground application of septage;
      3.   Underground storage of heating oil in excess of 1,100 gallons for
consumptive use on the parcel where stored;
      4.   Creosote manufacturing or treatment;
      5.   Chemical manufacture or reprocessing of any extremely hazardous
waste as defined by RCW 70.105.010(6) and listed in Chapter 173-303 WAC.
      6.   Mining of any type below the water table;
      7.   Processing, storage, and disposal of radioactive substances;
      8.   Hydrocarbon extraction; and
      9.   On-site septic systems on lots smaller than one acre without a
treatment system design that results in effluent nitrate-nitrogen
concentrations below ten (10) milligrams per liter.
   B.   Development Standards. The following standards apply to development
within a critical aquifer recharge area:
      1.   New subdivisions (a subdivision of five [5] or more lots) shall
require a storm water collection, treatment, and disposal system designed by a
Professional Engineer and approved by the City.
      2.   Sewage Disposal. All residential, commercial, or industrial
development proposals located in or adjacent to a critical aquifer recharge
area shall be connected to the City’s sewer system pursuant to requirements of
Section
11-5-3(c) of Title 11, Unified Development.
      3.   A person seeking the following types of new construction activities
is responsible for preparing a critical aquifer recharge area report:
         a.   Industrial and commercial agricultural facilities applying
fertilizers or pesticides in excess of agronomic rates;
         b.   Golf courses or other recreational or institutional facilities
that involve extensive turf cultivation or maintenance;
         c.   Above-ground storage tanks, with the exception of water tanks;
         d.   Industrial or commercial facilities that, when completed, will
use, store, or handle dangerous wastes in quantities in excess of five (5)
gallons or twenty-five (25) pounds or more of any one substance, or in
aggregate quantities of twenty (20) gallons or one hundred (100) pounds or more
of all dangerous wastes; and
         e.   Commercial underground storage tanks in excess of 1,100 gallons.
   C.   The Critical Aquifer Recharge Report shall include the following
information:
      1.   A detailed description of the proposed project including all
physical components, processes, and activities that have potential to
contaminate groundwater; and
      2.   A hydrogeologic evaluation that includes, at a minimum, a
description and/or evaluation of the following:
         a.   Site location, topography, drainage, and surface water bodies;
         b.   Soils and geologic units underlying the site;
         c.   Ground water characteristics of the area, including flow
direction, gradient, and existing groundwater quality;
         d.   The location and characteristics of wells and springs within
three hundred feet (300') of the perimeter of the property;
         e.   An evaluation of existing on-site groundwater recharge; and
         f.   An evaluation of the potential impact of the proposal on
groundwater quality, both short and long term, based on an assessment of the
cumulative impacts of the proposal in combination with existing and potential
future land use activities.
   D.   Qualifications of Report Preparers. Critical aquifer recharge area
reports prepared pursuant to this section shall be prepared by a Professional
Engineer registered by the State of Washington and trained and qualified to
analyze geologic, hydrologic, and ground water flow systems, or by a geologist
or hydrogeologist who has received a degree from an accredited four-year
college or university and who has relevant training and experience in analyzing
geologic, hydrologic, and ground water systems. Such qualifications shall be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
CHAPTER 8
GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS
SECTION:
13-8-1: Purpose
13-8-2: Designation
13-8-3: Identification Of Geologically Hazardous Areas
13-8-4: Prohibited Development And Activities
13-8-5: Performance Standards; Erosion Hazard Areas
13-8-6: Buffers; Erosion Hazard Areas
13-8-7: Design Standards; Erosion Hazard Areas
13-8-8: Design Standards; Seismic And Tsunami Hazard Areas
13-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and procedures intended
to minimize hazards to the public from development activities on or adjacent to
areas of geological hazard. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-8-2: DESIGNATION:
Areas susceptible to one or more of the following types of hazards shall be
designated as geologically hazardous areas:
   A.   Erosion hazard, including shoreline erosion or retreat;
   B.   Seismic hazard; or
   C.   Tsunami hazard. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-8-3: IDENTIFICATION OF GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS:
   A.   Erosion, Seismic or Tsunami Hazard Areas.
      1.   Erosion Hazard Areas. Erosion hazard areas are at least those areas
identified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) as having “severe” or “very severe” rill and inter-
rill erosion hazard. Erosion hazard areas are also those areas impacted by
shoreline erosion. Shoreline erosion hazard areas also include shorelines that,
while not currently eroding, may be subject to future shoreline retreat based
on best available science. Potential shoreline erosion hazard areas are those
areas identified by the State Department of Ecology’s Coastal Monitoring and
Analysis Program, based on shoreline and beach profile monitoring trends, that
are likely to erode within the next twenty years. Shoreline erosion hazard
areas are defined and designated on the City’s critical area maps based on
predicted erosion rates from 1995-2020. See Long Beach 2020 Shoreline Change
Prediction paper and accompanying maps (Kaminsky, et. al.) ,
      2.    Seismic Hazard Areas. Seismic hazard areas are subject to severe
risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure,
settlement, soil liquefaction, lateral spreading, or surface failure. The
strength of ground shaking is primarily a function of the following:
         a.   The magnitude of an earthquake;
         b.   The distance from the source (epicenter) of an earthquake;
         c.   The type and thickness of geologic materials at the surface; and
         d.   The type of subsurface geological structure.
      3.   Tsunami Hazard Areas. Tsunami hazard areas are coastal shoreline
areas susceptible to flooding and inundation as the result of excessive wave
action resulting from seismic or other geologic events.
   B.   Mapping of Geologically Hazardous Areas. The approximate location and
extent of geologically hazardous areas are shown on the adopted critical area
maps. These maps and studies are to be used as a guide for the City of Long
Beach, project applicants, and/or property owners, and may be continuously
updated as new critical areas are identified. The adopted critical area maps
include:
      1.   U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) landslide hazard, seismic hazard, and
tsunami hazard maps;
      2.   Tsunami hazard map of the southern Washington coast-Modeled tsunami
inundation from a Cascadia subduction zone earthquake, by T.J. Walsh, C.G.
Caruthers, et. al. (2000);
      3.   Tsunamis on the Pacific Coast of Washington State and adjacent
areas-A selected annotated bibliography and directory, compiled by C.J. Manson
and Lee Walkling.
      4.   Washington Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) seismic hazard
maps of Western Washington, as they are available;
      5.   WDNR slope stability maps, as they are available;
      6.   Washington Department of Ecology (DOE), shoreline erosion studies
and maps from the Coastal Monitoring and Analysis Program, including predicted
shoreline erosion rates and trends for the City of Long Beach from the
Southwest Washington Coastal Erosion Study, as they are available;
      7.   Long Beach 2020 Shoreline Change Prediction, George Kaminsky, et.
al., Coastal Monitoring & Analysis Program, Washington State Department of
Ecology;
      8.   Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) flood insurance
maps; and
      9.   Local geologic hazard maps, as adopted.
   C.   This chapter does not imply that land outside mapped geologically
hazardous areas or uses permitted within such areas will be without risk. This
chapter shall not create any liability on the part of the City of Long Beach or
any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 985,
10-5-2020)
13-8-4: PROHIBITED DEVELOPMENT AND ACTIVITIES:
The following development and activities are prohibited in geologically
hazardous critical areas:
   A.   On-site sewage disposal systems, including drain fields, shall be
prohibited within erosion hazard areas and associated buffers.
   B.   Pipelines containing hazardous substances (i.e. petroleum) are
prohibited in erosion hazard areas.
   C.   New or replacement compressed liquid gas tanks of a capacity of 25
gallons or more shall be prohibited in geologically hazardous areas unless
securely affixed to a slab or other adequate means of anchoring. (Ord. 985, 10-
5-2020)
13-8-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; EROSION HAZARD AREAS:
   A.   All proposed projects shall be evaluated to determine whether they
would be located in an erosion hazard area, the project’s potential impact on
the erosion hazard area, and the potential impact of the hazard area on the
proposed project. The Director may require the preparation of a critical areas
report to determine the project’s ability to meet performance standards.
   B.   Alteration of erosion hazard areas or associated buffers may only occur
for activities that:
      1.   Will not increase the threat of shoreline erosion to adjacent
properties beyond pre-development conditions;
      2.   Will not adversely impact other critical areas;
      3.   Are designed hazards to the project are eliminated or mitigated to a
level equal to or less than pre-development conditions;
      4.   Will not allow new development or creation of new lots that would
cause predictable risk from shoreline retreat to people or improvements during
the life of the development;
      5.   Are not likely to require structural shoreline stabilization under
reasonably foreseeable conditions over the expected life of the development,
except where stabilization is necessary to protect allowed uses where no
alternative locations are available and no net loss of ecological functions
will result; and
      6.   Are certified as safe as designed and under anticipated conditions
by a qualified geotechnical engineer or geologist, licensed in the state of
Washington.
   C.   Vegetation shall be retained unless it can be shown that removal will
not increase geologic hazards, and a vegetation management plan is submitted
with the request.
   D.   Access roads, trails, and utilities may be permitted within the erosion
hazard area and associated buffers if the City determines that no other
feasible alternative exists, provided such facilities are designed and
constructed in a manner that, in shoreline areas, maintains minimum dune
heights and widths necessary to mitigate flooding to pre-development levels and
avoids the need for major repair or reconstruction beyond that which would be
required in non-hazard areas. If such facilities are granted, exceptions or
deviations from technical standards for width or other dimensions, and specific
construction standards to minimize impacts may be required.
   E.   Utility lines and pipes shall be permitted in erosion hazard areas only
when the applicant demonstrates that no other practicable alternative is
available. Stormwater conveyance shall be allowed only through a high-density
polyethylene pipe with fuse-welded joints, or similar product that is
functionally equal or superior.
   F.   Point discharges from surface water facilities and roof drains onto or
upstream from an erosion hazard area shall be prohibited except that conveyance
is allowed via continuous storm pipe downslope to a point where there are no
erosion hazard areas downstream from the discharge.
   G.   The division of land in erosion hazard areas and associated buffers is
subject to provisions established for all critical areas in Section
13-3-12 of this title as well as the provisions of this section.
   H.   Any dune alteration or grading done in a shoreline erosion hazard area
must maintain a minimum dune height and width sufficient to achieve a minimum
height of four feet above base flood elevation established in the City’s FIRM,
where applicable. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-8-6: BUFFERS; EROSION HAZARD AREAS:
Activities on sites containing erosion hazards shall meet the following
requirements:
   A.   Buffers required. A buffer shall be established for all edges of
erosion hazard areas. The purpose of the buffer is to eliminate or minimize the
risk of property damage, death, or injury resulting from erosion caused in
whole or part by a development, based upon review of and concurrence with a
critical areas report prepared by a qualified professional.
   B.   Minimum buffers. The minimum buffer shall be the greater of: either 100
feet (100') landward from the landward edge of the erosion hazard area; or in
the case of shorelines, the controlling 1980 or 1968 shoreline setback line
that applies to the subject site, as indicated in the City’s adopted shoreline
master program. The shoreline erosion hazard area buffer is determined based on
predicted average shoreline erosion rates for adjacent or nearby shoreline
segments from the Washington Department of Ecology’s Coastal Monitoring and
Analysis Program.
   C.   Buffer reduction. Buffer reductions are not allowed for erosion hazard
areas, unless the Director finds sufficient evidence, based on best available
science, to support such a buffer reduction, consistent with the requirements
of this chapter.
   D.   Increased buffer. The buffer may be increased when the Director
determines a larger buffer is necessary to prevent risk of damage to proposed
and existing development.
   E.   Alterations. Alterations of an erosion hazard area and/or buffer may
only occur for activities for which a geotechnical analysis is submitted and
certifies that:
      1.   The development will not increase surface water discharge or
sedimentation to adjacent properties beyond the pre-development condition;
      2.   The development will not decrease slope stability on adjacent
properties; and
      3.   Such alteration will not adversely impact other critical areas.
(Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-8-7: DESIGN STANDARDS; EROSION HAZARD AREAS:
Development within an erosion hazard area or buffer shall be designed to meet
standards described in this section unless it can be demonstrated that an
alternative design that deviates from one or more of these standards provides
greater long-term geological stability while meeting all other provisions of
this title. The City shall not approve designs that require regular periodic
maintenance to preserve long-term slope stability.
   A.   Structures and improvements shall be clustered to avoid geologically
hazardous areas and other critical areas.
   B.   Structures and improvements shall minimize alteration to natural
contours and foundations shall be tiered where possible to conform to existing
topography.
   C.   Structures and improvements shall be located to preserve the most
critical portion of the site and its natural landforms and vegetation.
   D.   The proposed development shall not result in greater risk or a need for
increased buffers on neighboring properties.
   E.   Development shall be designed to minimize impervious lot coverage.
   F.   Stormwater retention and detention systems, including percolation
systems utilizing buried pipe, may be used if a geotechnical assessment
indicates such a system shall not affect slope stability, and the system is
designed by a licensed civil engineer. The licensed civil engineer shall also
certify that the system is installed as designed.
   G.   Shoreline protection measures located within shoreline erosion hazard
areas shall use non-structural bio-engineering erosion control techniques as
identified by the Washington Department of Ecology and Department of Fish and
Wildlife guidance unless the applicant provides a geotechnical analysis
demonstrating that bioengineering approaches will not adequately protect the
property, provided that all of the following shall apply:
      1.   The shoreline protection measures shall not increase erosion on
adjacent properties and shall not eliminate or reduce sediment supply from any
upland sources.
      2.   The shoreline protection measures will not adversely affect adjacent
critical areas and/or mitigation will be provided to compensate for adverse
impacts where avoidance is not feasible.
      3.   The property contains a legally established permanent structure(s)
that is in danger from shoreline erosion caused by tidal action, waves or
longshore sediment transport processes. Structural shoreline protection
measures, such as bulkheads or seawalls, shall not be used to address natural
shoreline erosion when preservation of existing structures is not a concern.
      4.   Erosion is not being caused by upland conditions, such as removal of
vegetation or human alteration of existing drainage.
      5.   Placing or relocating the development further from the shoreline,
planting vegetation, or installing on-site drainage improvements, are not
feasible or are not sufficient. (Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
13-8-8: DESIGN STANDARDS; SEISMIC AND TSUNAMI HAZARD AREAS:
All development within areas that meet the classification criteria for seismic
or tsunami hazard areas shall comply with the International Building Code
requirements for Seismic Risk Zone 3, as adopted by the City of Long Beach.
(Ord. 985, 10-5-2020)
TITLE 14
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
14-1-1: Title
14-1-2: Application
14-1-3: Purpose And Authority
14-1-4: Conflicts
14-1-5: Meaning Of Terms
14-1-6: Severability
14-1-7: Not Exclusive
14-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES ORDINANCE OF THE CITY
OF LONG BEACH, referred to hereinafter as "this title". (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-1-2: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the enforcement of title 5, chapter
2, "Public Nuisances"; titles 10, "Building Regulations"; 11, "Unified
Development"; 12, "Zoning Regulations"; and 13, "Critical Areas Regulations",
of this code unless specifically addressed elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 887a,
2-4-2013)
14-1-3: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The purpose of this title is to establish an effective and efficient system to
enforce regulations of the city of Long Beach; to provide an opportunity to
correct alleged violations of such regulations; to establish monetary penalties
for violations as authorized by Revised Code Of Washington 35A.11.020; to
provide for an appeal process on an alleged violation; and to establish a
standard procedure to be used by the city to abate unsafe or unlawful
conditions. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-1-4: CONFLICTS:
In the event of a conflict between this title and any other provision of this
code or city ordinances providing for a civil penalty, this title shall
control. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-1-5: MEANING OF TERMS:
For the purposes of this code, whenever the terms "civil infraction" and "civil
penalty" are used in any code, ordinance, or regulation of the city, those
terms shall be deemed to have the same meanings as the terms "civil violation"
and "monetary penalty", respectively, as used herein. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-1-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any one or more sections, subsections, or sentences of this title are held
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portion of this title and the same shall remain in full force
and effect. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-1-7: NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this title are not exclusive, and may be used in addition to
other enforcement provisions authorized by this code, except as precluded by
law. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-2-1: Terms Defined
14-2-1: TERMS DEFINED:
Any term not herein defined shall have its customary or commonly accepted
meaning.
ABATE: To remedy a condition which constitutes a civil violation or an unsafe
condition by such means, in such a manner, and to such an extent as the city
official determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety,
and welfare of the community.
ACT: Do or perform something; anything done, being done, or to be done;
performance; deed.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLAINT: A document filed with the Pacific County auditor,
stating that a property has been determined to be in violation of a relevant
title of this code.
CIVIL INFRACTION: A noncriminal violation for which a monetary penalty ("civil
penalty") may be imposed as specified in this title. Each day or portion of a
day during which a violation occurs is a separate violation. Also termed "civil
violation".
CIVIL PENALTY: A financial penalty or fine imposed as restitution for violation
(s) of a relevant city code. Also termed "monetary penalty".
CIVIL VIOLATION: A noncriminal violation for which a monetary penalty ("civil
penalty") may be imposed as specified in this title. Each day or portion of a
day during which a violation occurs is a separate violation. Also termed "civil
infraction".
DEVELOPMENT: The erection, alteration, enlargement, construction, relocation,
demolition, maintenance, or use of any structure; or the division, alteration,
or use of land above, at, or below ground or water level; or any change in the
use of land, a building, or a structure that requires a permit; and all acts
authorized by a city permit or regulation.
EMERGENCY: A situation where a city official determines that immediate action
is required to prevent or eliminate threat to the health, safety, or welfare of
persons or property or to the environment. Also termed "unsafe condition".
MONETARY PENALTY: A financial penalty or fine imposed as restitution for
violation(s) of a relevant city code. Also termed "civil penalty".
OMISSION: The failure to act.
OWNER: Any person, including any natural person or entity having legal interest
in real estate as indicated in the records of the Pacific County tax assessor,
or who establishes his or her ownership interest therein.
PERSON: Any individual or any entity, whether public or private.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE: Any person required by the applicable regulation to comply
therewith, normally the owner(s) of the property where a civil violation may
occur, is occurring, or did occur. Also termed "responsible party".
PUBLIC OFFICIAL: For purposes of this chapter, the mayor or any designated
alternate empowered by ordinance or by the mayor to enforce a city of Long
Beach ordinance or regulation, including, but not limited to, the city
administrator, fire chief, fire marshal, building official, community
development director, or their respective designees.
REGULATION: Means and includes the following as now or hereafter amended:
   A.   Title 5, chapter 2, "Public Nuisances"; titles 10, "Building
Regulations"; 11, "Unified Development"; 12, "Zoning Regulations"; and 13,
"Critical Areas Regulations", of this code.
   B.   All standards, regulations, and procedures adopted pursuant to the
above.
   C.   The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the city,
or any concomitant agreement with the city pursuant to any title identified in
subsection A of this definition.
REPEAT OFFENDER: A responsible party that has been issued two (2) or more
notices of violation or notice of violation and abatement or a combination
thereof, as defined in this title within a period of twelve (12) months. Also
refers to a tax parcel where multiple violations occur within twelve (12)
months.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person required by the applicable regulation to comply
therewith, normally the owner(s) of the property where a civil violation may
occur, is occurring, or did occur. Also termed "person responsible".
UNSAFE CONDITION: A situation where a city official determines that immediate
action is required to prevent or eliminate threat to the health, safety, or
welfare of persons or property or to the environment. Also termed "emergency".
VIOLATION: An act or omission contrary to a city of Long Beach regulation.
Also, a condition resulting from such act or omission.
VIOLATION, REPEAT: Except as noted below, a violation of the same regulation in
any location by the same person within two (2) years.
VIOLATION, REPEAT; NUISANCE: A violation of the same regulation found in title
5, chapter 2, "Public Nuisances", of this code, in any location by the same
person within the immediately preceding twelve (12) consecutive month period,
and for which a notice of violation or a notice of violation and abatement or a
combination thereof has previously been issued. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
CHAPTER 3
METHODS OF ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
14-3-1: Enforcement Method 1; Voluntary Compliance
14-3-2: Enforcement Method 2; Notice Of Violation And Abatement
14-3-3: Enforcement Method 3; Notice Of Violation, Civil Penalty, And Abatement
14-3-1: ENFORCEMENT METHOD 1; VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Applicability: When the public official determines that purposes of an
ordinance will be best served through a voluntary compliance agreement between
the city and the person responsible for a violation of a regulation, the city
may enter into such an agreement.
   B.   Requesting Voluntary Compliance: The public official may, but is not
required to, pursue a reasonable attempt to secure voluntary correction by
contacting the person responsible for the violation, explaining the violation,
and requesting correction.
   C.   Voluntary Compliance Agreement: The voluntary compliance agreement is a
contract between the city and the person responsible for the violation. In this
contract the person responsible agrees to abate the violation within a
specified time and according to specified terms. The voluntary compliance
agreement shall include the following:
      1.   Name and address of the person(s) responsible for the violation;
      2.   Street address or description sufficient for identification of the
building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has
occurred or is occurring;
      3.   Description of the violation(s) and a reference to the provision(s)
of this code, ordinance, or regulation that has been violated;
      4.   Description of the necessary corrective action(s) required to abate
the public nuisance or unsafe condition, and the date(s) and time(s) by which
corrective action(s) must be completed;
      5.   Statement that if any term of the voluntary compliance agreement is
not met, the person responsible for the violation agrees the city of Long Beach
may abate the violation and recover its costs and expenses and assess the
person responsible a monetary penalty pursuant to this title; and
      6.   Identification of the department investigating the case, name of the
case manager, and contact information.
   D.   Time Extension: An extension of the time limit for correction or a
modification of the required corrective action(s) may be granted by the public
official if the official determines the person responsible for the violation
has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation
but unforeseen circumstances render correction under the original terms of the
voluntary compliance agreement unattainable.
   E.   Abatement By The City: The city may abate the violation in accordance
with section
14-5-1 of this title if any term of the voluntary compliance agreement is not
met.
   F.   Assessment Of Penalties And Costs: If any term of the voluntary
compliance agreement is not met, the person responsible for the violation shall
be assessed a monetary penalty commencing on the date set for correction to be
completed as stated in the agreement and thereafter in accordance with
subsections 14-3-3D through I of this chapter, plus any actual costs and
expenses of abatement incurred by the city, as set forth in section
14-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-3-2: ENFORCEMENT METHOD 2; NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND ABATEMENT:
   A.   Issuance: When a public official has a reasonable belief that a
violation has occurred or is occurring, the public official may issue a notice
of violation and abatement. This notice shall clearly describe the code
violation(s), required corrective action(s) to abate the violation, schedule of
performance, and alternative actions available to the responsible party and the
city.
   B.   Contents: The notice of violation and abatement shall contain the
following:
      1.   Name and address of the person responsible for the violation;
      2.   Street address or description sufficient for identification of the
building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has
occurred or is occurring;
      3.   Description of the violation(s) and a reference to the provision(s)
of this code, ordinance, or regulation that has been violated;
      4.   Description of the necessary corrective action(s) required to abate
the public nuisance or unsafe condition, which may include corrections,
repairs, demolition, removal, or any other appropriate action;
      5.   Statement that required corrective action(s) must be taken within
thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the notice of violation and
abatement, after which the city may abate the public nuisance in accordance
with the provisions of this title; except that if the public official
determines that a longer time than thirty (30) days is necessary to complete
the required corrective action(s), an alternative reasonable, specific time may
be set by the public official;
      6.   Statement that the responsible party to whom a notice of violation
and abatement is directed may request an appeal proceeding by the Long Beach
hearing examiner by means of a notice of appeal pursuant to section
14-4-1 of this title. Such notice must be in writing and must be received by
the city clerk no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the notice of
violation and abatement has been issued; (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
      7.   Statement that if the responsible party to whom the notice of
violation and abatement is issued fails to submit a notice of appeal within
twenty one (21) calendar days of issuance or fails to voluntarily abate the
nuisance within the time specified in the notice of violation and abatement,
the city may abate the nuisance upon issuance of an abatement order or other
written permission to access the site for purposes of abatement from the
Pacific County superior court; (Ord. 921, 8-3-2015)
      8.   Statement that all actual costs and expenses of abatement incurred
by the city may be assessed against the owner of the abated property named in
the notice of violation and abatement and, further, that failure to pay said
costs may result in a lien against the property; and
      9.   Identification of the department investigating the case, name of the
case manager, and contact information.
   C.   Service: The notice of violation and abatement must be served upon the
person responsible for the violation and, if the owner of the relevant property
is not the person responsible for the violation, then also upon the owner.
Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of
perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and
date of service, the manner by which the service was made, and, if service was
made by posting, the facts showing that due diligence was used in attempting to
serve the person personally or by mail. Service shall occur using one of the
following methods:
      1.   By mailing, via both regular first class mail and certified mail, to
the address of the property owner as indicated in the records of the Pacific
County tax assessor, and to the address of the person responsible at their last
known address; or
      2.   By personal service; or
      3.   If the person to whom it is directed cannot, after due diligence, be
personally served within Pacific County and if an address for mailed service
cannot, after due diligence, be ascertained, then notice shall be served by
posting a copy of the notice of violation and abatement in a prominent location
on the affected premises in a conspicuous manner that is reasonably likely to
be discovered.
   D.   Extension: No extension of the time frame for corrective action
specified in the notice of violation and abatement or a modification of the
required corrective action(s) may be granted, except by order of the public
official. Any extension or modification should be granted only if the person
responsible for the violation has shown due diligence and/or substantial
progress in correcting the violation but unforeseen circumstances render
correction under the original terms of the notice unattainable.
   E.   Abatement By City: The city may abate the violation and collect costs
and expenses in accordance with chapter 5 of this title if required corrective
action is not completed as specified in the notice of violation and abatement.
   F.   Monetary Penalties: If the required corrective action is not completed
by the responsible party as specified in the notice of violation and abatement
and the city does not yet desire to use public resources to abate the property,
the person responsible for the violation shall be assessed a monetary penalty
commencing on the date set for correction to be completed and thereafter in
accordance with subsections 14-3-3D through I of this chapter, plus any actual
costs and expenses of abatement incurred by the city, as set forth in section
14-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-3-3: ENFORCEMENT METHOD 3; NOTICE OF VIOLATION, CIVIL PENALTY, AND
ABATEMENT:
   A.   Imposition Of Monetary Penalties: Any person who violates any of the
provisions of the code references listed in section
14-1-2 of this title, at the discretion of the public official, may be assessed
monetary (civil) penalties before the city initiates the abatement process
referenced in this title. If the public official determines this alternative
process is more likely to result in compliance, the public official may send a
notice of violation, followed by imposition of civil penalties and abatement if
appropriate.
   B.   Contents: The notice of violation shall contain the following:
      1.   Name and address of the person responsible for the violation;
      2.   Street address or description sufficient for identification of the
building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has
occurred or is occurring;
      3.   Description of the violation(s) and a reference to the provision(s)
of this code, ordinance, or regulation that has been violated;
      4.   Description of the necessary corrective action(s) required to abate
the public nuisance or unsafe condition, which may include corrections,
repairs, demolition, removal, or any other appropriate action;
      5.   Statement that required corrective action(s) must be taken within
thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the notice of violation, after which
the city may abate the public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of
this title; except that if the public official determines that a longer time
than thirty (30) days is necessary to complete the required action, an
alternative reasonable, specific time may be set by the public official; (Ord.
887a, 2-4-2013)
      6.   Statement that abatement procedures, as described in this chapter,
may be implemented if civil penalties reach more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) upon issuance of an abatement order or other written permission to
access the site for purposes of abatement from the Pacific County superior
court; (Ord. 921, 8-3-2015)
      7.   Statement that the responsible party to whom a notice of violation
is directed may request an appeal proceeding by the Long Beach hearing examiner
by means of a notice of appeal pursuant to section
14-4-1 of this title. Such notice must be in writing and must be received by
the city clerk no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the notice of
violation has been issued;
      8.   Statement that all actual costs and expenses of abatement incurred
by the city may be assessed against the owner of the abated property named in
the notice of violation and, further, that failure to pay said costs may result
in a lien against the property; and
      9.   Identification of the department investigating the case, name of the
case manager, and contact information.
   C.   Service: The notice of violation must be served pursuant to the
procedures described in subsection 14-3-2C of this chapter.
   D.   Civil Penalty: At the end of the time frame specified in the notice of
violation, the property or building will be reinspected to see if the condition
has been completely abated. If the condition has been completely abated, the
case will be closed. If the condition has not been completely abated, civil
(monetary) penalties will be assessed, as provided in this section, and a
notice of civil penalty will be issued to the responsible party and the
property owner.
   E.   Service: The notice of civil penalty shall be served pursuant to the
procedures described in subsection 14-3-2C of this chapter.
   F.   Contents: The notice of civil penalty shall contain the following:
      1.   Address of the site;
      2.   Specified time frame for correcting the violation or submitting an
acceptable work schedule;
      3.   Statement that civil penalties have been imposed, setting forth the
date such monetary penalties began or will begin, usually the first day of
service;
      4.   Statement that civil penalties will continue to accumulate in the
amounts specified in this chapter until the nuisance or hazard condition is
corrected;
      5.   Abatement procedure(s) that may be implemented by the city if civil
penalties in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) are assessed in trying
to correct the condition; and
      6.   Identification of the department investigating the case, name of the
case manager, and contact information.
   G.   Maximum Monetary Penalty: The maximum monetary (civil) penalty for each
separate violation per day or portion thereof shall be as follows:
      1.   First day of each violation (the first day is the date of service):
One hundred dollars ($100.00);
      2.   Second day of each violation: Two hundred dollars ($200.00);
      3.   Third day of each violation: Three hundred dollars ($300.00);
      4.   Fourth day of each violation: Four hundred dollars ($400.00);
      5.   Each additional day of each violation beyond four (4) days: Five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per day.
   H.   Continuance Of Penalties; Certificate Of Complaint: Civil penalties
will continue to accumulate until the condition is completely abated, and, if
the total assessed penalty exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the public
official may decide to initiate an abatement proceeding, as provided in this
title. At such time that the assessed civil penalty exceeds one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), a certificate of complaint may be filed with the Pacific
County auditor to be attached to the title of the property. A copy of the
certificate of complaint shall be sent to the property owner and, if it is
determined that there are other parties of interest, then to those individuals
as well.
   I.   Separate Violations: Each day that a property is not in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter may constitute a separate violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
CHAPTER 4
APPEAL PROCESS WITH HEARING EXAMINER
SECTION:
14-4-1: Appeal Proceeding By The Hearing Examiner
14-4-1: APPEAL PROCEEDING BY THE HEARING EXAMINER:
   A.   Right To Appeal:
      1.   A person to whom the city has issued a notice of violation and
abatement pursuant to section
14-3-2 of this title or a notice of violation pursuant to section
14-3-3 of this title, or any other person with a legal or equitable interest in
the property that is the subject of such a notice, may request an appeal
proceeding before a hearing examiner by filing a notice of appeal with the city
clerk. Such notice of appeal must be in writing and must be received by the
city clerk no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the said notice is
issued.
      2.   A person to whom a notice of civil penalty has been issued pursuant
to subsection 14-3-2F or subsections 14-3-3D through I of this title, or any
other person with a legal or equitable interest in the property that is the
subject of such a notice, may request an appeal proceeding before a hearing
examiner by filing a request with the city clerk by means of a notice of
appeal. Such notice must be in writing and must be received by the city clerk
no later than ten (10) calendar days after the said civil penalty is issued.
   B.   Contents: Each notice of appeal shall contain the name, address, and
telephone number of the person requesting the appeal and the name, address, and
telephone number of any person who will be present to represent him or her at
the appeal proceeding.
   C.   Basis For Appeal: Each notice of appeal shall set out the basis or
bases for the appeal.
      1.   An appeal regarding a notice of violation and abatement issued
pursuant to section
14-3-2 of this title or a notice of violation pursuant to section
14-3-3 of this title may challenge the legality or validity of the underlying
violation, the required corrective action(s), or the required schedule for
abatement.
      2.   Because the owner or the person responsible for a violation has an
opportunity to appeal the notice of violation and abatement or the notice of
violation pursuant to subsection 14-3-2B6 or 14-3-3B7 of this title,
respectively, before any civil penalties are imposed, a hearing regarding civil
penalties shall not provide another opportunity to challenge the legality or
validity of the underlying violation, the required corrective action(s), or the
required schedule for abatement.
   D.   Notice Of Appeal Proceeding: If a notice of appeal is received by the
city within fourteen (14) calendar days the public official shall mail a notice
of appeal proceeding, giving the time, location, and date of the appeal
proceeding, by regular first class mail to the person(s) to whom the notice of
violation and abatement, notice of violation, or notice of civil penalty was
directed.
   E.   Scheduling Of Proceeding: If an appeal is filed timely and completely,
the hearing examiner will conduct the appeal proceeding required by this
chapter no more than fourteen (14) calendar days after the public official
issues the notice of appeal proceeding, unless the hearing examiner or public
official finds good cause to continue the matter to another date.
   F.   Appeal Proceeding: The public official, as well as the person to whom
the relevant notice was directed, may participate as parties in the proceeding
and may be represented by counsel, and each party may call witnesses. The city
shall have the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that a violation of the code references listed in section
14-1-2 of this title has occurred and that the required corrective action(s)
and schedule for abatement are reasonable, or that the civil penalty was
assessed for noncompliance with this chapter and the regulations of this code.
   G.   Hearing Examiner Determination: The hearing examiner shall determine
whether the city has established by a preponderance of the evidence that a
violation of the code references listed in section
14-1-2 of this title or other regulations of the city has occurred and the
required corrective action or civil penalty is reasonable. The hearing examiner
shall affirm, modify, or vacate the public official's decisions regarding the
alleged violation(s), the required corrective action(s), and/or the civil
penalty with or without written conditions.
   H.   Final Order: Within ten (10) calendar days of the close of the appeal
proceeding, the hearing examiner shall issue a written final order that
contains the following information:
      1.   The decision regarding the alleged violation, including findings of
facts and conclusions based thereon;
      2.   The required corrective action(s), if any;
      3.   The date by which the required corrective action(s) must be
completed;
      4.   The date after which the city may proceed with abatement, as
outlined in chapter 5 of this title, if the required corrective action(s) is
not completed;
      5.   A statement that the civil penalty is affirmed, reduced, or waived,
if applicable;
      6.   A statement of any appeal remedies;
      7.   A notice that if the city proceeds with abatement, a lien for the
actual costs of said abatement may be assessed against the property if the
costs of abatement are not paid in accordance with the provisions of this
title.
   I.   Failure To Appear: If the person to whom the relevant notice was
directed fails to appear or submit something in writing at the scheduled
hearing, the hearing examiner will enter a written final order finding the
violation(s) has occurred or the civil penalty was reasonable and finding that
abatement may proceed.
   J.   Service Of Final Order: The final order shall be served on the person
by one of the methods stated in subsection 14-3-2C of this title.
   K.   Appeal Of Final Order: A final order of the hearing examiner may be
appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction no more than twenty one (21)
calendar days after its issuance. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
CHAPTER 5
ABATEMENT
SECTION:
14-5-1: Abatement Process
14-5-2: Recovery Of Costs And Expenses
14-5-3: Hearing Regarding Cost Of Abatement
14-5-4: Lien Authorized
14-5-1: ABATEMENT PROCESS:
   A.   Access: Upon receiving an abatement order or other written permission
to access the subject property from the Pacific County superior court, the city
may enter upon the subject property or premises and may remove or correct the
condition that is subject to abatement. If the owner of the premises does not
consent to entry, the city may seek such judicial process as it deems necessary
to effect the removal or correction of such condition. (Ord. 921, 8-3-2015)
   B.   Terms Of Abatement: Property or premises are subject to abatement as
provided in this chapter, including where an emergency exists, where the terms
of a voluntary compliance agreement have not been met, where required
corrective action has not been timely completed after a notice of violation and
abatement has been issued, where a notice of violation and a notice of civil
penalty have been issued but the property or premises is still in violation, or
where summary abatement, as described in subsection C of this section, is
necessary.
   C.   Summary Abatement: Whenever any violation of a regulation causes an
emergency where the continued existence of a condition constitutes an immediate
or emergent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the
environment, the city may summarily and without prior notice abate the
condition. Notice of such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be
given to the person responsible for the violation as soon as reasonably
possible after the abatement. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-5-2: RECOVERY OF COSTS AND EXPENSES:
   A.   Actual costs, including incidental expenses, of correcting the
violation shall be billed to the person responsible for the violation or the
property owner. These costs shall become due and payable to the city of Long
Beach no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the invoice. The
term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to, personnel costs,
both direct and indirect; attorney fees; costs incurred in documenting the
violation; demolition, hauling, storage, and disposal expenses; filing fees;
and actual expenses and costs of the city in preparing notices, specifications,
and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and inspecting the work;
the costs of any required printing or mailing; and any and all costs of
collection.
   B.   If the person responsible for the costs of abatement fails to remit
payment in a timely manner, the city may file a lien against the real property
for the cost of any abatement proceedings under this chapter, except that no
lien shall attach to the real property if the owner was found not responsible
in the final order issued by the hearing examiner. A notice of the city's lien
specifying the expenses incurred in abating the nuisance and giving the legal
description of the premises sought to be charged shall be filed with the
Pacific County auditor within ninety (90) days from the date of the abatement.
Such lien may at any time thereafter be collected in the manner provided for
foreclosure of mechanic's liens under the laws of the state of Washington.
   C.   In addition to a lien, the debt shall be collectible in the same manner
as any other civil debt owing to the city, and the city may pursue collection
of the costs of any abatement proceedings under this chapter by any other
lawful means, including, but not limited to, referral to a collection agency.
(Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-5-3: HEARING REGARDING COST OF ABATEMENT:
   A.   Any person sent an invoice for the costs due for abatement of a
nuisance may request a hearing to determine if the costs should be assessed,
reduced, or waived.
   B.   A request for a hearing shall be made in writing and filed with the
city clerk no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the
invoice.
   C.   Each request for hearing shall contain the name, address and telephone
number of the person requesting the hearing and the name, address and telephone
number of any person who will be present to represent him or her.
   D.   Each request for hearing shall set out the basis for the request.
      1.   Because the property owner or other person responsible for the
violation had an opportunity to appeal the notice of violation and abatement,
notice of violation, and/or notice of civil penalty pursuant to section
14-4-1 of this title, before any abatement actions were taken, the hearing
regarding the costs of abatement shall not provide another opportunity to
challenge the legality or validity of the underlying violation, required
corrective action(s), required schedule for abatement, or civil penalty.
   E.   Failure to request a hearing within fourteen (14) calendar days from
the date of the invoice shall be a waiver of the right to contest the validity
of the costs incurred in abatement of the violation.
   F.   If a hearing is requested, the hearing examiner will conduct the
hearing no more than thirty (30) calendar days after the public official issues
the notice of hearing, unless the hearing examiner or public official finds
good cause to continue the matter to another date.
   G.   If a hearing is requested, the public official shall mail a notice
giving the time, location, and date of the hearing, by regular first class
mail, to the person or persons to whom the invoice for the costs of abatement
was directed.
   H.   If a hearing is conducted, the public official, as well as the person
to whom the invoice for abatement costs was directed, may participate as
parties in the hearing, may be represented by counsel, and may call witnesses.
The city shall have the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the abatement costs are reasonable.
   I.   The hearing examiner shall issue a written order and determine whether
the costs of abatement were reasonable and necessary. The hearing examiner may
uphold the amount billed for the costs of abatement, reduce the amount billed,
or waive the costs.
   J.   The order of the hearing examiner is the final administrative decision.
Such decision may be appealed in accordance with subsection 14-4-1K of this
title. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-5-4: LIEN AUTHORIZED:
   A.   Costs Included In Lien: The city shall have a lien for any monetary
penalty imposed, the cost of any abatement proceedings under this chapter, and
all other related costs, including attorney and expert witness fees, against
the real property on which the monetary penalty was imposed or any of the work
of abatement was performed. The lien shall be subordinate to all previously
existing special assessment liens imposed on the same property and shall be
superior to all other liens, except for state and county taxes, with which it
shall be on parity.
   B.   Filing Of Lien: The public official or city administrator shall file
with the county recorder a claim for lien within ninety (90) days from the
later of the following dates: the date the monetary penalty is due, the date
the work is completed, or the date the nuisance is abated.
   C.   Claim Of Lien: The claim of lien must contain sufficient information
regarding the relevant notice as determined by the public official or city
administrator, a description of the property to be charged with the lien and
property owner of record, and the total amount of the lien.
   D.   Amendment Of Lien: Any such claim of lien may be amended from time to
time to reflect changed conditions.
   E.   Lien Period: No such liens shall bind the affected property for a
period longer than five (5) years, without foreclosure or an extension agreed
to by the property owner. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
CHAPTER 6
CRIMINAL PENALTIES
SECTION:
14-6-1: Knowing Violations; Alternative Criminal Penalties
14-6-2: Separate Offense
14-6-1: KNOWING VIOLATIONS; ALTERNATIVE CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
   A.   Knowing Violation: Any person who knowingly violates or fails to comply
with any of the provisions of title 5, chapter 2, title 10, 11, 12, or 13 of
this code, as amended, or any other titles of this code amended or adopted that
make use of the provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a gross
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by up to one year in
jail and up to a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) fine. The city administrator
may request that the city attorney prosecute such violations as an alternative
to the civil penalty procedure outlined in this title.
   B.   Obstruction: Unless otherwise provided herein, it is a gross
misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere with the city or
its agents, or with any person who owns, or holds any interest or estate in any
property, in performing any acts necessary to correct the violation. A person
convicted of a violation of this subsection may be punished up to one year in
jail and a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) fine or both.
   C.   Exception: Except that any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes, or
interferes with the city or its agents, or with the person responsible for the
violation in the performance of duties imposed by title 5, chapter 2 of this
code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
14-6-2: SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each day that a violation of a regulation subject to enforcement under this
title continues and each occurrence of a prohibited activity shall be deemed
and considered a separate offense. (Ord. 887a, 2-4-2013)
 
