AITKIN, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 419, passed 1-5-2026
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310 Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588
www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 387
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF AITKIN, MINNESOTA,
AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS Minnesota Statutes §§415.02 and 415.021 authorize the city to cause its
ordinances to be codified and printed in a book, now therefore:
The City Council of Aitkin, Minnesota ordains:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the city as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified, and compiled in book form, including penalties for the
violations of various provisions thereof, are adopted and shall constitute the
Code of Ordinances of the City of Aitkin. This Code of Ordinances also adopts,
by reference, certain statutes and administrative rules of the State of
Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.
Section 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles:
 
•   GENERAL PROVISI•   BUSINESS REGULATIONS
•   ADMINISTRATION •   GENERAL OFFENSES
•   PUBLIC WORKS   •   LAND USAGE
•   TRAFFIC CODE   •   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
•   GENERAL REGULAT•   PARALLEL REFERENCES
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to subjects treated in the Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in part in
the Code of Ordinances; provided this repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred, or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes; appropriating money; annexing or detaching territory;
establishing franchises; granting special rights to certain persons;
authorizing public improvements; authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money; authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property;
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use; or
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of Ordinances.
All fees established in prior ordinances shall remain in effect unless amended
in this Code of Ordinances, or until an ordinance adopting a fee schedule is
adopted or amended.
Section 4. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a sufficient
publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously published in the
city’s official newspaper. The city administrator shall cause a substantial
quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general distribution to
the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the Code of Ordinances to
the County Law Library or its designated depository. The official copy of this
Code of Ordinances shall be marked and be kept in the office of the City
Administrator.
Section 5. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of the
law of the city and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the courts of the State of Minnesota.
Section 6. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself -less Chapter 113 shall take effect upon publication of this
ordinance in the city’s official newspaper. Passed by the City Council of
Aitkin, Minnesota this 20th day of August 2018.
 
 
X /s/ Gary Tibbitts                X /s/ Kathleen Ryan
Gary Tibbitts                           Kathleen Ryan
Mayor                              City Administrator
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
   
10.98   Supplemental city penalties
 
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Aitkin City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of the city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance:
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Aitkin, Minnesota. The term CITY, when used in this
code, may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. The County of Aitkin.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON.
         (a)   Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.
         (b)   Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall
mean the partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the
officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator for public inspection. The Administrator shall provide a copy for
sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in
existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, the County
Sheriff or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any provision
of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Administrator shall have the authority to administer and enforce
this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals
designated within the code or by the Administrator or City Council shall have
the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any
person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or
continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Administrator and any city official or employee designated by
this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with
the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or resident
of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or otherwise
enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Administrator, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the duty
of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting
the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only
to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Administrator or any other authorized city officer or
employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection
of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all
permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given
to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property,
stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Administrator to object to the termination before it occurs,
subject to appeal of the Administrator’s decision to the City Council at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL CITY PENALTIES.
   (A)   Purpose. Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to
this section are intended to provide the public and the city with an informal,
cost effective and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for
violations of certain city ordinance provisions. The procedures are intended to
be voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with administrative
offenses. At any time prior to the payment of the city penalty as is provided
for thereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in the
procedures, in which event the city may bring criminal charges in accordance
with law. Likewise, the city, at its discretion, may choose not to initiate an
administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in accordance with law.
Likewise, the city, at its discretion, may choose not to initiate an
administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first instance.
   (B)   “Administrative offense” defined. An “administrative offense” is a
violation of a provision of a city ordinance and is subject to the city
penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties referred to in
division (G) below.
   (C)   Notice. Any officer of the city's Police Department or any other
person employed by the city, authorized in writing by the City Council, and
having authority to enforce this section, shall, upon determining that there
has been a violation, notify the violator or, in the case of a vehicular
violation, attach to the vehicle a notice of the violation. Said notice shall
set forth the nature, date and time of the violation, the name of the official
issuing the notice and the amount of the scheduled penalty.
   (D)   Payment. Once such notice is given, the alleged violator shall, within
14 days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the
schedule of penalties for the violation. The penalty may be paid in person or
by mail, the payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation.
   (E)   Failure to pay. In the event a party charged with an administrative
offense fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may
be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable statutes.
If the penalty is paid, no further charge shall be brought by the city for the
same violation.
   (F)   Disposition of penalties. All penalties collected pursuant to this
section shall be paid to the city and deposited into the city's General Fund.
   (G)   Offenses and penalties. Violations which may be charged as
administrative offenses and the penalties for such offenses may be established
by resolution of the City Council from time to time. Copies of such resolution
shall be maintained in the office of the City Administrator.
Prohibited Fines; Petty
Activity   Misdemeanors; City Penalty Code Section(s) Special Provisions
           Misdemeanors
Prohibited Activity                                                           Fines; Petty Misdemeanors; Misdemeanors                                       City Penalty   Code        Special
                                                                                                                                                                           Section(s)  Provisions
Alcohol                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                            Up to $2,000
   Brew Pubs, Breweries, and the like                                                                                                                   for each       110.01—    
                                                                                                                                                            violation or   110.11
                                                                                                                                                            impose
Animals                                                                       First offense: $30                                                                           93.01—     
                                                                                                                                                                           93.07
                                                                             Second offense: $40                                                                          93.01—     
                                                                                                                                                                           93.07
                                                                             Third offense within a year: automatic court appearance                                      93.01—     
                                                                                                                                                                           93.07
Archery                                                                       Fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not                   130.01       
                                                                              more than 90 days, or both
                                                                                                                                                            $50 for the
                                                                                                                                                            first offense;
                                                                                                                                                            $100 for the   90.20—
Burning in city limits                                                        Fine of not more than $100, plus the costs of prosecution                     second offense 90.24        
                                                                                                                                                            committed
                                                                                                                                                            within a one-
                                                                                                                                                            year period
Curfew                                                                                                                                                                                 
   First and second offense:                                               See §                                                                                                    
                                                                              131.99
   Third offense                                                           $25 citation                                                                                              
   Fourth offense                                                          $50 citation                                                                                              
   Fifth offense                                                           $100 citation                                                                                             
   Sixth offense and any subsequent offense                                $200 citation                                                                                             
                                                                              A fine of not to exceed $700 and/or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days;
                                                                              but, if a minimum fine or imprisonment is prescribed by the state’s Highway
Highway Traffic Regulations Act                                               Traffic Act for an offense, the penalty shall apply to a person convicted of                 70.01
                                                                              the same offense under §
                                                                              70.01 of this chapter
Junk vehicles, unclaimed and abandoned property, unlawful storage or disposal Fine of not more than $700 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both $100           95.01—     
of property                                                                                                                                                                95.04
Loitering                                                                     Fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not                   130.03
                                                                              more than 90 days, or both
Motorized vehicles on a city park trail                                       Fine of not more than $700 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or      $100           70.04
                                                                              both, plus the costs of prosecution in either case
                                                                                                                                                            $50 if the
                                                                                                                                                            violation
                                                                              A fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90    involves a     92.01—
Noise control                                                                 days, or both                                                                 motor          92.11        
                                                                                                                                                            vehicle;$100
                                                                                                                                                            for all other
                                                                                                                                                            violations
                                                                                                                                                                           71.15—
Notice to recreation vehicle and snowmobile operators                                                                                                      $50            71.21;       
                                                                                                                                                                           71.35—
                                                                                                                                                                           71.40
                                                                                                                                                                                       If the city
                                                                                                                                                                                       penalty is not
                                                                                                                                                                                       paid within 14
                                                                                                                                                                                       days, the fine
                                                                                                                                                                                       will increase
                                                                                                                                                                                       to $30; if the
                                                                                                                                                                           70.15,      administrative
Parking of vehicles and other objects on the streets of the city                                                                                           $25            70.16       penalty is not
                                                                                                                                                                                       paid within 30
                                                                                                                                                                                       days, a
                                                                                                                                                                                       criminal
                                                                                                                                                                                       citation will
                                                                                                                                                                                       be issued
                                                                                                                                                                                       along with a
                                                                                                                                                                                       $50 fine
Parking of semi-trucks on the streets of the city                                                                                                          $50            70.17        
Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants                                                                                                               $100           112.01—    
                                                                                                                                                                           112.07
                                                                                                                                                            $125 for the
                                                                                                                                                            first offense;
                                                                                                                                                            $250 for the
                                                                              Fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonme nt in the county jail for not   second offense
Property maintenance                                                          more than 90 days, or both                                                    and $500 for   97.01—97.1 
                                                                                                                                                            the third
                                                                                                                                                            offense within
                                                                                                                                                            a 12-month
                                                                                                                                                            period
                                                                                                                                                            $50 for the
                                                                                                                                                            first offense;
                                                                                                                                                            $100 for the   94.01—
Public Nuisances; Health and Sanitation                                                                                                                    second offense 94.07        
                                                                                                                                                            committed
                                                                                                                                                            within a one-
                                                                                                                                                            year period
   Placing of snow upon public streets                                                                                                                  $50            94.20—     
                                                                                                                                                                           94.28
   Removal of snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish from sidewalks; the elimination of                                                                            $50 for the
weeds from public and private property; removal or elimination of public                                                                                    first offense;
health or safety hazards from private property; installation or repair of                                                                                   $100 for the   94.20—
water service lines and sewer service lines; the repair of sidewalks and                                                                                   second offense 94.28        
alleys; the trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and diseased                                                                                  committed
trees; and the collection of the costs of such work or service when done by                                                                                 within a one-
the city as a special assessment                                                                                                                            year period
   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish; weeds and the like                         A fine of not more than $300 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, and                  94.20—     
                                                                              the costs of prosecution in either case may be added                                         94.28
                                                                                                                                                                           71.01,
Recreational vehicles                                                         A fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not                 71.02,       
                                                                              more than 90 days, or both                                                                   71.35—
                                                                                                                                                                           71.40
Sewers                                                                        Fine in the amount not exceeding $500 for each violation                                     53.01-       
                                                                                                                                                                           53.10
                                                                                                                                                            $50 for the
                                                                                                                                                            first offense;
                                                                                                                                                            $100 for the   151.01—
Sidewalk regulations                                                                                                                                       second offense 151.09       
                                                                                                                                                            committed
                                                                                                                                                            within a one-
                                                                                                                                                            year period
Snowmobiles                                                                   A fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not                 71.15—     
                                                                              more than 90 days, or both                                                                   71.21
Solicitation                                                                  Fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not                   130.04       
                                                                              more than 90 days, or both
Tax - Lodging                                                                 The minimum penalty shall be $10, irrespective of the calculation                            32.15—     
                                                                                                                                                                           32.27
Tobacco                                                                                                                                                                                
   Expenses in holding hearing                                                                                                                          $1,000         113.12       
                                                                                                                                                            Administrative
                                                                                                                                                            fine of $75
                                                                                                                                                            for a first
                                                                                                                                                            violation of
                                                                                                                                                            this chapter;
                                                                                                                                                            $200 for a
                                                                                                                                                            second offense
                                                                                                                                                            at the same
                                                                                                                                                            licensed       113.99(B)
   Licensees                                                                                                                                            premises       (1)          
                                                                                                                                                            within a 24-
                                                                                                                                                            month period;
                                                                                                                                                            and $250 for a
                                                                                                                                                            third or
                                                                                                                                                            subsequent
                                                                                                                                                            offense at the
                                                                                                                                                            same location
                                                                                                                                                            within a 24-
                                                                                                                                                            month period
   Other individuals                                                                                                                                    Administrative 113.99(B)    
                                                                                                                                                            fine of $50    (2)
Tree maintenance, removal and planting violations and penalties                                                                                            $100           94.78
Unauthorized Dumpsters and other refuse containers                                                                                                         $100           50.01        
Unreasonable acceleration and driving conduct of motor vehicles               Not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both        $50            70.03
                                                                                                                                                            $50 for first
                                                                                                                                                            offense;
                                                                                                                                                            $100 for the   94.40—
Unwholesome substances or solid waste within the city                                                                                                      second offense 94.43        
                                                                                                                                                            committed
                                                                                                                                                            within one
                                                                                                                                                            year
                                                                                                                                                            Fine not to
                                                                                                                                                            exceed $700 or 94.40—
Unwholesome substances; littering                                                                                                                          imprisonment   94.43        
                                                                                                                                                            for not more
                                                                                                                                                            than 90 days
Water, usage and connections                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                              $500 plus costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or                 52.01—
   General penalty                                                         both                                                                                         52.19,
                                                                                                                                                                           52.99
                                                                                                                                                            Warning for
                                                                                                                                                            the first
                                                                                                                                                            violation, $25
                                                                                                                                                            for the second
                                                                                                                                                            violation, and
   Lawn watering restrictions                                                                                                                            a $50 per day  52.19
                                                                                                                                                            fine for all
                                                                                                                                                            subsequent
                                                                                                                                                            violations in
                                                                                                                                                            that calendar
                                                                                                                                                            year
                                                                                                                                                                           152.001—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.015,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.030—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.040,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.055—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.059,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.070—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.075,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.090—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.105,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.120—
Zoning and subdivisions                                                       Fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both                   152.125,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.140—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.155,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.170—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.181,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.195—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.208,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.220—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.225,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.240—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.251,
                                                                                                                                                                           152.265—
                                                                                                                                                                           152.278 
 
(Ord. 329, passed 11-19-2007; Res. passed 4-8-2008; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025;
Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including state statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including state statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98 of this chapter, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with
any provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct
or abate the violation.
(Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
31.   EMERGENCY PROTECTION FIRE SERVICES
      
32.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
      
33.   FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 30: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
Rules and Procedures
   
30.01   Criminal history background checks
Specific Officials and Terms
   
30.15   Mayor; term of office
   
30.16   Mayor and Council members; compensation
   
30.17   City Administrator
Organizations
   
30.30   Planning Commission
RULES AND PROCEDURES
§ 30.01 CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS.
   (A)   Applicants for city employment.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this division (A) is to
establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state’s
Computerized Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes
of employment background checks for the positions described in division (A)(2)
below.
      (2)   Criminal history employment background investigations. The city’s
Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the city,
to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the
following positions within the city, unless the city’s hiring authority
concludes that a background investigation is not needed: employment positions,
all regular part-time or full-time employees of the city and other positions
that work with children or vulnerable adults.
         (a)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the state’s Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal
history data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority,
including the City Council, the City Administrator or other city staff involved
in the hiring process.
         (b)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in
M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject
an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction
unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and
the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor with a jail
sentence. If the city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city
shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
            1.   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
            2.   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
            3.   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment;
and
            4.   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication.
   (B)   License background checks.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this division (B) is to
establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state’s
Computerized Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes
of licensing background checks.
      (2)   Criminal history license background investigations. The city’s
Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the city,
to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the
following licenses within the city: city licenses; employees of liquor
establishments; peddler’s or solicitor’s permit; liquor licenses; beer
licenses; wine licenses; club licenses; cigarette licenses; adult use permits;
pawn shop permits; and other permits as deemed necessary by the City Council or
the Police Chief.
         (a)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the state’s Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Police Department to the licensing
authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator or other city
staff involved the license approval process.
         (b)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in
M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject
an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction
unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction
is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the
city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city shall notify the
applicant in writing of the following:
            1.   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
            2.   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
            3.   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license;
and
            4.   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication.
(Ord. 360, passed 1-22-2013)
SPECIFIC OFFICIALS AND TERMS
§ 30.15 MAYOR; TERM OF OFFICE.
   Effective 1-1-2001, the term of office for the position of Mayor will be a
four-year term, in accordance with M.S. § 412.022, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 292, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 30.16 MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS; COMPENSATION.
   Mayor and Council member salaries will be as set by the governing body. The
salaries will be paid to the Mayor and Council members on a monthly basis.
(Ord. 320, passed 8-21-2006)
§ 30.17 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Pursuant to M.S. §§ 412.581 and 412.591, as they may be amended from
time to time, and Ordinance No. 150, the offices of Clerk and Treasurer were
combined into the office of Clerk-Treasurer. Said position is the position of
City Administrator with the duties of the Clerk-Treasurer and day to day city
administration.
   (B)   The job duties include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Serves as Chief Administrative Officer of the city; responsible to
the City Council for the proper administration of all policies of the city.
      (2)   Supervises the administration of all departments, offices, and
divisions of the city, except as otherwise provided by law; carries out other
responsibilities placed under the jurisdiction of the City Administrator by
ordinance or by appropriate City Council action.
      (3)   Serves as personnel officer; responsible for implementation of city
personnel policies with the authority to effectively recommend employment,
discipline or removal of city employees for City Council action; represents the
City Council in collective bargaining matters and negotiates with
representatives of employee organizations.
      (4)   Develops and issues all administrative rules, regulations, and
procedures necessary to ensure the proper functioning of all city departments,
as permitted by law and City Council approval.
      (5)   Prepares and submits an annual budget to the City Council; keeps
the City Council advised of the financial condition of the city; makes
recommendations as necessary.
      (6)   Attends and participates in discussions at all meetings of the City
Council and of other official city boards and commissions; coordinates meetings
and represents the City Council as directed with municipal associations.
      (7)   Stays abreast of developments in the fields of public
administration and economic development; recommends new innovations to the City
Council; cooperates with governmental units and municipalities on matters of
mutual interest.
      (8)   Maintains familiarity with alternative and supplemental sources of
revenue, including federal and state aids, loans, grants and other sources of
revenue; submits recommendations to the City Council for actions necessary to
take advantage of such sources.
      (9)   Responsible for recommending annual operating and capital budgets.
      (10)   Attends monthly City Council meetings and provides and presents
monthly department report.
(Ord. 383, passed 10-16-2017)
ORGANIZATIONS
§ 30.30 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment of Commission. A Planning Commission is hereby
established pursuant to M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.364, as they may be amended from
time to time.
   (B)   Composition of Commission. The Planning Commission shall consist of
six members to be appointed by the City Council, who shall hold office for
three years, except that of the first Board. One shall be appointed for one
year, two for two years and two for three years. Hereafter, appointments shall
be made for three-year terms. Members of the City Council may be appointed to
the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Organization, meetings and the like. The Commission shall elect a
Chairperson from among its appointed members for a term of one year, and the
Commission may create and fill such offices as it may determine. The City
Administrator shall act as Secretary for the Planning Commission, but he or she
shall not be a member thereof unless duly appointed by the Council as a member
representative on the Commission. The Commission shall hold at least one
regular meeting each month, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business
and keep a record of its proceedings and on or before January 1 of each year
make and submit to the City Council a report of its work and proceedings during
the preceding year, and to periodically make such reports to the City Council
as it deems proper.
   (D)   Vacancies. Vacancies existing or arising on the Commission shall be
filled by the City Council for the remaining term of the position becoming
vacant.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall have authority to
make recommendations to the City Council for the development and improvement of
the city and to assume all functions as specified by M.S. §§ 462.351 to
462.364, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 149, passed 7-12-1967)
CHAPTER 31: EMERGENCY PROTECTION FIRE SERVICES
Section
   
31.01   Purpose and intent
   
31.02   Definitions
   
31.03   Parties affected
   
31.04   Services to which charges apply
   
31.05   Rates
   
31.06   Billing and collection
   
31.07   Mutual aid agreement
   
31.08   Application of collections to budget
§ 31.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the city to
charge for fire service as authorized by M.S. §§ 366.011, 366.012 and 415.01,
as they may be amended from time to time. The city’s Fire Department is engaged
in providing fire suppression, fire rescue and fire safety services and is
organized as a Municipal Fire Department under the laws of the state.
   (B)   In consideration for services rendered, the city hereby desires to set
the following policy for emergency charges.
(Ord. 312, passed 8-1-2005)
§ 31.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY SERVICE. Any deployment of Fire Department personnel and/or
equipment to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort
to protect equipment, life or property in an area threatened by fire. It also
includes the deployment of Fire Department personnel and/or equipment to
provide fire suppression, rescue, extrication, hazardous material mitigation
and any other services related to fire and rescue as may occasionally occur.
   EMERGENCY SERVICE CHARGE. The charge imposed by the city for receiving
emergency service.
   FIRE PROTECTION CONTRACT. A contract between the city and a town or other
city for the city to provide fire service.
   FIRE SERVICE AREA. The area to which the city’s Fire Department has primary
responsibility for responding to calls.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally
manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not
operated exclusively upon railroad tracks. It includes semi-trailers. It does
not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all terrain vehicles or park
trailers.
   MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and a town or other city
for the city’s Fire Department to provide assistance to the fire department of
a town or other city.
(Ord. 312, passed 8-1-2005)
§ 31.03 PARTIES AFFECTED.
   The following parties are affected:
   (A)   Owners of property within the city who receive emergency service;
   (B)   Anyone who receives emergency service as a result of a motor vehicle
accident, fire or other emergency situation within the Fire Department service
area; and
   (C)   Owners of property in towns or cities to which the city provides
emergency service pursuant to a fire protection contract.
(Ord. 312, passed 8-1-2005)
§ 31.04 SERVICES TO WHICH CHARGES APPLY.
   Charges apply to the following services:
   (A)   Scene and safety control at traffic accidents to include, but is not
limited to, positioning of fire apparatus and personnel so as to protect the
scene from other traffic and deny entry into the scene of unauthorized
personnel, fire suppression, initial assessment of victims, basic life support,
staging other incoming agencies, pulling a hose line for protection against
potential fire, fumes, smoke, fluids or residue;
   (B)   Disentanglement and extrication which includes, but is not limited to,
instances when a person has to be lifted or taken out of an emergency situation
or when forcible entry is necessary to gain proper access to victims. These
services may be required in response to motor vehicle accidents, industrial
accidents, confined space incidents, below grade rescues, high angle rescues
and other emergency situations;
   (C)   Fluid mitigation at motor vehicle accidents or at fixed facilities;
   (D)   Vehicle fires which occur anywhere in the fire service area;
   (E)   Hazard mitigation operations which includes, but is not limited to,
dealing with any hazardous substances via containment or absorption with pads
for carbon-based substances like gas or oil, or removal via pads and sand or
other means permitted by the Environmental Protection Agency. These services
may be required as a result of motor vehicle accidents or incidents occurring
at fixed facilities; and
   (F)   Structure fires or emergency response at a residence within the fire
service area will not require an emergency service charge as this service is
provided by the fire protection contract.
(Ord. 312, passed 8-1-2005)
§ 31.05 RATES.
   Please see the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 312, passed 8-1-2005)
§ 31.06 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Parties requesting and receiving emergency service may be billed
directly by the city. Additionally, if the party receiving emergency service
did not request service, but a fire or other situation exists which, at the
discretion of the Fire Department personnel in charge, requires emergency
service, the party will be charged and billed. All parties will be billed
whether or not the emergency service is covered by insurance. Any billable
amount of the emergency charge not covered by a party’s insurance remains a
debt of the party receiving the emergency service.
   (B)   Parties billed for emergency service will have 30 days to pay. If the
emergency service charge is not paid by that time, it will be considered
delinquent and the city will send a notice of delinquency.
   (C)   If the emergency service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after this
notice of delinquency is sent, the city will use all practical and reasonable
legal means to collect the emergency service charge. The party receiving
emergency service shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by the city
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
   (D)   If the emergency service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the
notice of delinquency is sent, the City Council may also, on or before October
15 of each year, certify the unpaid emergency service charge to the County
Auditor for collection with property taxes. The city must give the property
owner notice of its intent to certify the unpaid emergency service charge by
September 15.
(Ord. 312, passed 8-1-2005)
§ 31.07 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.
   When the city’s Fire Department provides emergency service to another fire
department pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, the billing will be determined
by the mutual aid agreement.
(Ord. 312, passed 8-1-2005)
§ 31.08 APPLICATION OF COLLECTIONS TO BUDGET.
   All collected emergency charges will be city funds and will be used to
offset the expenses of the city’s Fire Department in providing emergency
services.
(Ord. 312, passed 8-1-2005)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Hardship assessment deferrals
   
32.02   Trust or escrow accounts for fire, explosion losses
Lodging Tax
   
32.15   Definitions
   
32.16   Registering to pay tax
   
32.17   Imposition of tax
   
32.18   Exemptions
   
32.19   Collection of tax
   
32.20   Notice of tax
   
32.21   Advertising no tax prohibited
   
32.22   Payment of tax
   
32.23   Tax returns; examinations; failure to file; false returns
   
32.24   Penalties on tax
   
32.25   Refunds
   
32.26   Administration
   
32.27   Use of proceeds
 
   
32.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 HARDSHIP ASSESSMENT DEFERRALS.
   (A)   The City Council may, at its discretion, defer the payment of special
assessments for any homestead property:
      (1)   Owned by a person 65 years of age or older for whom it would be a
hardship to make the payments;
      (2)   Owned by a person who is retired by virtue of a permanent and total
disability for whom it would be a hardship to make the payments; or
      (3)   Owned by a person who is a member of the state’s National Guard or
other military reserves who is ordered into active military service, as defined
in M.S. § 190.05, subd. 5b or 5c, as they may be amended from time to time, as
stated in the person’s military orders, for whom it would be a hardship to make
the payments.
   (B)   (1)   For purposes of this section, the determination of hardship
shall be made by the City Council upon consideration of the following:
         (a)   The total assets and liabilities of the person claiming the
hardship;
         (b)   The total income of the person whether taxable or non-taxable;
         (c)   The value of any assets transferred by the applicant within
three years of the application for deferral of the assessment; and
         (d)   The total expenses of the person.
      (2)   Determination of hardship can also be made on the basis of
exceptional and unusual circumstances not covered by the standards and
guidelines where the determination is made in a non-discriminatory manner and
does not give the applicant an unreasonable preference or advantage over other
applicants.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person is deemed to be retired by
virtue of a permanent and total disability if the person is determined to be
permanently and totally disabled by the Social Security Administration.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, the burden of proving the existence of a
hardship shall be the responsibility of the applicant for the deferral of any
payment of a special assessment.
   (E)   The procedure to obtain a deferred assessment is as follows.
      (1)   A homeowner shall make application for deferred payment of special
assessments on forms prescribed by the City Administrator and the County
Auditor. The application may be made at any time while payments of assessments
are due on the property.
      (2)   The application shall be considered by the City Council at its
first regular meeting following receipt of it and a decision shall be made on
the application at the meeting unless additional information is required by the
City Council. In such event, the City Council shall make its decision at its
first regular meeting following receipt of all information it requires to make
its decision. Written notification of the decision of the City Council shall be
provided to the applicant.
      (3)   The City Council shall consider all evidence of hardship presented
to it and make its decision on any application on the basis of written findings
of fact. The City Council shall not grant any request for a deferral of any
payment of a special assessment unless it determines that the payment of the
special assessment would leave the applicant with insufficient funds to pay
applicant’s reasonable living expenses.
      (4)   If the deferred assessment is granted, the City Administrator shall
record a notice thereof with the County Recorder which shall set forth the
amount of the assessment.
      (5)   The City Council may determine, by ordinance or resolution, the
amount of interest, if any, on the deferred assessment and this rate shall be
recorded by the City Administrator along with and in the same manner as the
amount of the assessment.
   (F)   The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall terminate
and all amounts accumulated, plus applicable interest, shall become due upon
the occurrence of any of the following events:
      (1)   The death of the owner, provided that the spouse (if any) is
otherwise not eligible for the benefits hereunder;
      (2)   The sale, transfer or subdivision of the property or any part
thereof;
      (3)   If the property should for any reason lose its homestead status; or
      (4)   If, for any reason, the City Council shall determine that there
would be no hardship to require immediate or partial payment.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-2-2009)
§ 32.02 TRUST OR ESCROW ACCOUNTS FOR FIRE, EXPLOSION LOSSES.
   (A)   The city may establish a trust or escrow account to hold proceeds from
losses arising from the fire or explosion of insured real property located
within the city. Except as permitted by statute, moneys in this account shall
not be commingled with other city funds. The city may utilize these funds to
secure, repair or demolish damaged or destroyed structures and clear the
property in question, so that the structure and property are in compliance with
local code requirements and applicable city ordinances. Any unused portion of
the retained proceeds shall be returned to the insured.
   (B)   In addition, the regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S. §
65A.50, as it may be amended from time to time, Trust or Escrow Accounts;
Insured Real Property Fire or Explosion Loss Proceeds, are hereby incorporated
herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provision thereof.
(Ord. 355, passed 6-6-2011)
LODGING TAX
§ 32.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LODGING FACILITY. Any hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court or resort
within the city.
   LODGING INCOME. The gross receipts from the furnishing for consideration of
lodging at a hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court or resort, except the
renting or leasing to a person or entity for more than 29 continuous days.
   OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor or who otherwise has control of a
facility providing lodging, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee,
sublessee, licensee or in any other capacity.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.16 REGISTERING TO PAY TAX.
   Each and every lodging facility hereafter commencing business, or engaging
in any activity generating lodging income, shall file with the Administrator
notice of that operation, including the name and address of same, the nature of
the operation, the number or rooms open for use by the public and a schedule of
the rate(s) for the rooms.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.17 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is hereby imposed a 3% tax on the total lodging income of any lodging
facility, received after the effective date of this subchapter.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.18 EXEMPTIONS.
   No tax shall be imposed for lodging paid by any officer or employee of a
foreign government expressly exempt under federal or international law, nor by
person to whom or whose occupancy is beyond the authority of this subchapter to
tax. Further, no tax shall be imposed for lodging paid by a third party or the
employee of a third party pursuant to a long-term contract between a lodging
facility and a third party that was in existence prior to the effective date of
this subchapter. No exemption shall be honored unless it is documented in
writing, under the penalty of perjury.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.19 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   Each operator shall impose and collect the tax at time of receipt of any
income from lodging. All taxes so collected shall be held in trust by the
operator for the benefit of the city.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.20 NOTICE OF TAX.
   Each operator shall state the amount of the tax separately from the amount
charged for lodging for each collection.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.21 ADVERTISING NO TAX PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for an operator to advertise or hold out to the public
or any person, directly or indirectly, that the tax here imposed, or any part
of same will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the lodging charge, or that any portion of same will be refunded.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.22 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   Each operator shall pay the tax collected for each calendar month, to be
paid no later than the twentieth day following the month of, payable to the
city or to such entity as is authorized in writing by the city.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.23 TAX RETURNS; EXAMINATIONS; FAILURE TO FILE; FALSE RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   At the time of each payment, each operator shall submit
therewith a written return, furnished by the city, containing the following
information for each reporting period:
         (a)   The reporting period, with beginning and ending dates;
         (b)   The itemized amount, if any, of lodging income that was not paid
due to dishonored checks, credit card disputes and the like;
         (c)   The total amount of exemptions, if any, with supporting
documentation;
         (d)   The total amount of lodging income actually received;
         (e)   The amount of tax collected; and
         (f)   Any adjustments resulting from the curing or correction of items
previously reported under division (A)(1)(b) above.
      (2)   Operators shall retain their returns for a period of three years
after their due date.
   (B)   The city shall examine each return for accuracy, and may conduct
further examinations and/or investigations deemed appropriate to assure that
accuracy. Any deficient tax, or any over payment, shall be due and payable
within 20 days of determination and notice of same.
   (C)   (1)   If any operator fails to file a required return within the time
prescribed, or shall, willfully or otherwise, file an incorrect, false or
fraudulent return, the operator shall, within five days of the receipt of
written notice thereof, file the required return, or a corrected return, and
shall submit therewith any tax due.
      (2)   If an operator fails to file the required return, or the corrected
return, the city may prepare the return, based upon the knowledge and
information that is available, and forward same to the operator, with a demand
for the tax due. Unless objected to in writing within the five-day period, the
return prepared by the city shall be deemed valid and correct, and the operator
shall have the burden of establishing that it is incorrect in any action or
proceeding for the collection of same.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.24 PENALTIES ON TAX.
   (A)   Failure to pay when due. If any taxes imposed by this subchapter are
not paid within the prescribed time, or any extension thereof, there shall be
added thereto a penalty equal to 10% of any amount remaining so unpaid.
   (B)   Failure to file return.  
      (1)   Should any person fail to timely file a return required by this
subchapter, and it is shown that the failure is not due to willful neglect,
then, upon the filing of the return and the payment of the tax, there shall be
added thereto and paid therewith the sum of:
         (a)   Ten percent, if paid within 30 days of the due date; and
         (b)   An additional 5% for each additional 30 days, or part thereof,
from the due date.
      (2)   See §
10.98 for the minimum penalty amount.
   (C)   False and/or fraudulent returns.
      (1)   If any person willfully files a false or fraudulent return, or
willfully attempts in any manner to defeat, evade or unlawfully minimize any
tax herein imposed, or any penalty thereon, there shall be imposed a penalty
equal to 50% of any amount due, less any amounts actually paid, in addition to
any other penalties imposed herein.
      (2)   All payments due under this section shall be applied first to the
penalties due, the balance to the tax.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.25 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Any person may apply in writing for a refund of any tax paid in excess
of the amount legally due for a given reporting period; provided, no
application shall be valid unless filed within one year of the date the tax was
paid by the operator. The application shall set forth in detail all facts,
accompanied by all relevant documents justifying the refund. If a refund is
due, same shall be submitted to the applicant within 20 days of the date of
that determination.
   (B)   If the application is denied, the applicant shall be so informed in
writing, by certified mail.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.26 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   The Administrator shall administer, implement and enforce the
assessment and collections of taxes and penalties imposed by this subchapter,
and shall prepare and provide forms for returns and other documents necessary
or incidental thereto and furnish them to all lodge facilities.
      (2)   The failure to deliver the forms shall not relieve any person from
the obligations to pay the taxes herein required.
   (B)   (1)   The Administrator may examine the books, papers and records of
any operator in order to verify the necessity of payment, or the accuracy of
any payment required under this subchapter.
      (2)   Every operator of a lodging facility is hereby directed and
required to provide the Administrator with the means, facilities and
opportunity for the examinations.
   (C)   In the event arrangements are made for the administration,
implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter with an
agent, or another entity, notice of that fact to a lodging facility shall
require each facility to comply and cooperate with the agency, or entity, in
all respects and for all purposes.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.27 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   All of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes/or penalties
herein shall be used in accordance M.S. § 469.190, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person or entity who or which shall willfully fail or refuse
to pay any tax or penalty imposed by §§
32.15 through
32.27 of this chapter, after written demand for same, or who shall refuse to
permit the examination of the books, records and papers in its possession, or
under its control, or who willfully makes an incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   If found guilty, any tax and/or penalty due shall be required and
paid as restitution as part of any proceedings.
(Ord. 373, passed 6-1-2015)
CHAPTER 33: FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
33.01   Fee Schedule
§ 33.01 FEE SCHEDULE.
Use Fee Special  Provisions
Use                  Fee                                    Special  Provisions
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
Copies — Black and $0.25 per page (single or double       Letter Size, Legal
White                sided)                                 Size, and Ledger
                                                            (11"x17") Size.
                     $0.50 per page (single or double       Letter Size, Legal
Copies — Color     sided)                                 Size, and Ledger
                                                            (11"x17") Size.
Copies of Meeting    $25                                     
Recordings
Dishonored Check/    $30                                     
Payment Fee
Admin Staff Billing  Staff time billed at the actual cost
Rate                 of the employee(s) completing the       
                     request, including wages and benefits
                     Audio CD            $10
                     Photos CD           $10
Digital Copies       Video Recordings    $10
                     DVD
                     Zip Drive           $20
AIRPORT
                     Aeronautical        $50 per night       
                     Overnight
                     Aeronautical        $125 per month      
                     Storage Rate        $300 per month      
T-Hangar Rent        One-half hangar (SE
                     Corner)-            $70 per month       
                     Aeronautical
                     One-half hangar (SE
                     Corner)- Storage    $150 per month      
                     Rate
Re-Key Fee           $25 per occurrence
Lot Lease Fee        Base Rate up to     $276.44             
                     1200 sq. ft.
                    Over 1200 sq. ft.   $0.1175            In addition to Base
                                                            Rate.
                    Holding Tank Fee    $50                Secondary to Lot
                                                            Lease Fees.
Lease Transfer Fee   50% of Current Lot Lease Fee           Per Lease
                                                            Agreements.
 
Use Fee Special  Provisions
Use                                                                             Fee            Special  Provisions
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES                                                                            
3.2% malt liquor off-sale license                                               $30 per year    
3.2% malt liquor on-sale license                                                $100 per year   
                                                                                               The event shall not last longer than 48 hours. In the case that an event lasts
                                                                                               longer than 48 hours, the fee shall be $5 per each consecutive day after the 48
3.2% malt liquor temporary on-sale license                                      $15 per event  hours. If the days after the 48 hours are not consecutive, then it shall be
                                                                                               considered a new event, and a new license must be applied for under the
                                                                                               provisions of §§ 110.25 through 110.37 of this code of ordinances.
                                                                                $500, less any
                                                                                amount paid
                                                                                for the
                                                                                initial
                                                                                investigation
                                                                                if the
                                                                                investigation
                                                                                is to be
                                                                                conducted
                                                                                within the
Comprehensive background and financial investigation                            state; and
                                                                                $10,000, less
                                                                                any amount
                                                                                paid for the
                                                                                initial
                                                                                investigation,
                                                                                if the
                                                                                investigation
                                                                                is required
                                                                                outside the
                                                                                state.
Intoxicating liquor on-sale license                                             $2,300 per      
                                                                                year
Intoxicating liquor temporary on- sale license                                  $50 per day     
On-sale wine license                                                            $300 per year   
Preliminary background and financial investigation
                                                                                $50, plus any
                                                                                costs over for
                                                                                investigation
   Intoxicating liquor on-sale, on-sale wine, on-sale 3.2 malt liquor,       within the
intoxicating liquor temporary on-sale                                           state and all
                                                                                costs for
                                                                                investigation
                                                                                outside the
                                                                                state
   Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor, temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor and special All costs on
club licenses                                                                   an annual
                                                                                basis
Special club license
   Fewer than 200 members                                                    $300 per year   
   Between 201 and 500 members                                               $500 per year   
   Between 501 and 1,000 members                                             $650 per year
   1,001 or more                                                             Refer to M.S.
                                                                                § 340A.408
Special license for Sunday sales                                                $200 per year
 
Use Fee Special  Provisions
Use                                                                             Fee            Special  Provisions
ANIMALS
Temporary housing of canines in emergency circumstances for law enforcement                    
agencies
   Pick up fee                                                               $30             
   Daily Boarding Fee                                                        $35 per day     
BREW PUBS, BREWERIES, BREW TAP ROOMS AND THE LIKE
3.2% malt liquor off-sale license                                               $30 per year
3.2% malt liquor on-sale license                                                $100 per year   
                                                                                               The event shall not last longer than 48 hours. In the case that an event lasts
                                                                                               longer than 48 hours, the fee shall be $5 per each consecutive day after the 48
3.2% malt liquor temporary on- sale license                                     $15 per event  hours. If the days after the 48 hours are not consecutive, then it shall be
                                                                                               considered a new event, and a new temporary license must be applied for under
                                                                                               the provisions of §§ 110.01 through 110.11 of this code of ordinances.
                                                                                $500, less any
                                                                                amount paid
                                                                                for the
                                                                                initial
                                                                                investigation
                                                                                if the
                                                                                investigation
                                                                                is to be
                                                                                conducted
                                                                                within the
Comprehensive background and financial investigation                            state; and
                                                                                $10,000, less
                                                                                any amount
                                                                                paid for the
                                                                                initial
                                                                                investigation,
                                                                                if the
                                                                                investigation
                                                                                is required
                                                                                outside the
                                                                                state
Intoxicating liquor on-sale license                                             $2,300 per
                                                                                year
Intoxicating liquor temporary on- sale license                                  $50 per day     
On-sale wine license                                                            $300 per year   
Preliminary background and financial investigation                                              
                                                                                $50, plus any
                                                                                costs over for
                                                                                investigation
   Intoxicating liquor on-sale, on-sale wine, on-sale 3.2% malt liquor,      within the
intoxicating liquor temporary on-sale                                           state and all   
                                                                                costs for
                                                                                investigation
                                                                                outside the
                                                                                state
   Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor, temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor and special All costs on
club licenses                                                                   an annual       
                                                                                basis
Special club license                                                                            
   Fewer than 200 members                                                    $300 per year   
   Between 201 and 500 members                                               $500 per year   
Special license for Sunday sales                                                $200 per year
 
Use Fee Special  Provisions
Use                                Fee                    Special  Provisions
CANNABIS
Initial registration fee
   Cannabis retailer            $500                    
   Cannabis mezzobusiness       $500                    
   Cannabis microbusiness       $500                    
   Medical cannabis combination $500
business
   Low-potency hemp edible      $125                    
retailers
Renewal fee
   Cannabis retailer            $1,000                  
   Cannabis mezzobusiness       $1,000                  
   Cannabis microbusiness       $1,000                  
   Medical cannabis combination $1,000                  
business
   Low-potency hemp edible      $125                    
retailers
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (EDA)
Loan Application Fee               $150                   Shall be paid prior
                                                          to consideration.
Loan Late Fee                      $25 per month          Loans awarded after
                                                          12/31/2024.
Tax Abatement Application Fee      $500 per application    
TIF Application Fee                $500 per application    
EVENTS
                                   Application Fee $50.00
Special Event Permit               501(c)(3)       $0.00
                                   Application Fee
 
Use Fee Special  Provisions
Use                                                              Fee        Special
                                                                            Provisions
FIRE DEPARTMENT RESPONSE
                                                                            First 2 hours
                                                                            of Fire
                                                                            Department
                                                                            involvement;
                                                                            supplies and
                                                                            equipment
                                                                 $500       consumed
                                                                            during the
                                                                            mitigation of
                                                                            the incident
                                                                            will be
                                                                            charged at the
                                                                            replacement
Minimum call out fee for responding to a scene                              value.
                                                                            Hourly rate
                                                                            for engine/
                                                                 $200 per   rescue trucks
                                                                 hour       involvement
                                                                            beyond the
                                                                            initial 2
                                                                            hours.
                                                                            Hourly rate
                                                                            for F2 truck
                                                                 $100 per   involvement
                                                                 hour       beyond the
                                                                            initial 2
                                                                            hours.
LAND USE APPLICATIONS*
                                                                            Fee includes
                                                                            administrative
                                                                            review. Any
Administrative lot consolidation or lot line adjustment          $100       costs over and
                                                                            above may be
                                                                            billed to
                                                                            applicant.
Adult uses: license investigation advance fee                    $500        
                                                                 8 times    Penalty when
                                                                 base fee   violation is
                                                                 (included) corrected by
After-the-fact fees for permitted structures                     with a     removal or
                                                                 maximum    restoration
                                                                 penalty of shall be 50%
                                                                 $700       of penalty
                                                                            fee.
Appeals
   To Board of Adjustment (from action of Zoning Administrator$0          
                                                                            If Board of
                                                                            Appeal
   To Council (from action of Planning Commission or Board of            decision is
Adjustment)                                                      $300       overturned by
                                                                            Council, fee
                                                                            shall be
                                                                            refunded.
 
Use Fee Special Provisions
Use                            Fee        Special Provisions
COMMERCIAL
                               See 1994
Building Permit Fees           Uniform    In addition to zoning fees.
                               Building
                               Code
Demolition Fees                Based on   *Subject to surcharge.
                               Valuation*
                               Up to 199
                               sq. ft.:
                               $50
                               200 to 959
                               sq. ft.:
                               $200
                               960 to
                               3000 sq.
                               ft.: $400
                               3,001 to
Zoning review fees             6,000 sq.  All construction includes all first floor, second or above floor, basement,
                               ft.: $650  deck, accessory structure, porch or other usable area being constructed.
                               Over 6,000
                               sq. ft.:
                               $650 +
                               $80/hr.
                               review in
                               addition
                               to
                               building
                               permit
                               fees
                                          Fee includes public and mailed notices, filing fee and other preparation up to
Conditional Use Permit (CUP)   $400       3- hours’ review time. All other costs to be billed to applicant. Does not
                                          include building permit fees.
                                          Fee includes public and mailed notices, filing fee and other preparation up to
Interim Use Permit (IUP)       $400       3- hours, review time. All other costs to be billed to applicant. Does not
                                          include building permit fees.
Copies of documents
   All other ordinances     $10         
   Comprehensive Plan (text $5          
only)
   Comprehensive Plan       $30         
   Land Use Map (small)     $5          
   Land Use Map (poster size$40         
   Miscellaneous copies     $0.25 each  
   Subdivision Ordinance    $10         
   Zoning Ordinance         $30         
Fences                         $50
Final plat approval            $100 + $10  
                               per lot
Grade and fill                 $150       Wetlands issued only after SWCD and COE approval.
Home occupation permit         $50        CUP also needed for Type III and IV.
Initial review PUD/subdivision $150        
plats
Lot consolidation or lot line
adjustment and zoning          $500        
amendment
Lot splits (metes and bounds   $100        
subdivision)
Minor subdivision              $300        
Minor subdivision escrow       $300        
Minor subdivision & zoning map $700       Change/ordinance amendment.
PC/BOA special meeting         $500        
Pre-application meeting        $100        
Preliminary plat approval      $350        
Preliminary plat escrow                   
   10 lots or less          $2,500      
   11 - 25 lots             $4,000      
   26 - 100 lots            $5,500      
   101 - 200 lots           $7,000      
   200 lots or more         $8,500      
Property assessment search     $25         
 
Use Fee Special  Provisions
Use                   Fee          Special  Provisions
RESIDENTIAL
                      See 1994
   Building Permit Uniform
Fees                  Building
                      Code
In addition to zoning
fees.
                      $75*
   Demolition Fees *Subject to
                      $1 surcharge
                      fee.
                      Up to 199
                      sq. ft.: $25
                      200 to 959
                      sq. ft.:
                      $100
                      960 to 3,00
                      sq. ft.:
                      $300         All construction includes all first floor, second or above floor, basement,
   Zoning review fe3,001 to     deck, accessory structure, porch or other usable area being constructed.
                      6,000 sq.    Zoning administration fees shall not include general maintenance or
                      ft.: $495    replacement activities.
                      Over 6,000
                      sq. ft.:
                      $495 + $80/
                      hr. review
                      in addition
                      to building
                      permit fees
                      Re-roof: $75
                      Re-side: $75
                      Furnace
                      Replacement:
                      $50
                      Water Heater
                      Replacement:
                      $50
                      A/
                      C
                      Replacement:
                      $50
                      New
   Flat Fee PermitsPlumbing:    Flat Fee Permits are subject to $1 surcharge fee.
                      $75
                      New
                      Mechanical:
                      $75
                      New
                      Mechanical
                      with
                      Fireplace:
                      $125
                      Fireplace
                      Install: $50
                      Windows:
                      Based on
                      Valuation
Signs (on/off         $50 per sign  
premises)
Sketch plan           $150          
                                   Fee includes public and mailed notices, filing fee and other preparation up to
Variance              $400         3-hours’ review time. All other costs to be billed to applicant. Does not
                                   include building permit fees.
Zoning map change/                 Fee includes public and mailed notices, filing fee and other preparation up to
zoning ordinance      $400         3-hours’ review time. All other costs to be billed to applicant. Does not
amendment                          include building permit fees.
*   Note: Any non-permitted work or construction shall be removed and/or restored.
Note: Sewage treatment permits are in addition to construction permits.
Note: When costs associated with processing or reviewing an application exceed the original application fees, the
applicant shall reimburse the city for any additional costs. Such expenses may include, but are not limited to,
payroll, mailing costs, consultant fees and other professional services the city may need to hire in reviewing
permits. Outstanding fees shall be paid before issuance of the permit, and any construction of the project
begins.
 
Use Fee Special Provisions
Use                                           Fee                               Special
                                                                                Provisions
NUISANCES
                                                                                In no event
                                              Administrative fee in the amount  shall the
Public nuisance abatement                     of not more than 25% of the cost  administrative
                                              to abate the nuisance             fee be less
                                                                                than $50.
PARK
Fieldhouse Rental- Resident
   Entire building                         $125 per day                       
   Community room                          $100 per day                       
   Warming house room                      $50 per day                        
Fieldhouse Rental- Non-Resident
   Entire building                         $150 per day                       
   Community room                          $125 per day                       
   Warming house room                      $75 per day                        
Fieldhouse Rental- Civic Organizations/Nonprofits
   Entire building                         $0                                 
   Community room                          $0                                 
   Warming house room                      $0                                 
Fieldhouse Damage Deposit- Resident           $250                               
Fieldhouse Damage Deposit- Non-Resident       $250                               
Fieldhouse Damage Deposit- Civic              $250                               
Organizations/Nonprofits
PAWNBROKERS
Failure to report penalty, as detailed in §                                    Until the
152.200(C)                                    $50 daily                         error is
                                                                                corrected.
POLICE DEPARTMENT
                                              Staff time billed at the actual
P.D. Admin Staff Billing Rate                 cost of the employee(s)            
                                              completing the request, including
                                              wages and benefits
                                                                     Staff time
                                                                     billed at
                                                                     the actual
                                                                     cost of
                                                                     the
                                                                     employee
                                              Staff Billing Rate     (s)
                                                                     completing
Officer Time                                                         the
                                                                     request,
                                                                     including
                                                                     wages and
                                                                     benefits
                                              Drug Recognition       Actual
                                              Evaluator              Cost Plus
                                                                     Mileage
                                              Past Officer – Court $120 per
                                              Time                   day
                                              Audio CD               $10
Digital Copies                                Photos CD              $10
                                              Video Recordings DVD   $10
                                              Zip Drive              $20
                                              Victim                 No Charge
                                              Walk-In                $0.25 per
                                                                     page
Reports and ICRs                                                     $0.25 per
                                              Mail                   page plus
                                                                     cost of
                                                                     postage
                                              Vehicle                $20 per
                                                                     day
Storage Fees                                                         $20 per
                                              Forfeiture Vehicle     day plus
                                                                     Towing
                                                                     Bill
 
 
Use                     Fee                        Special Provisions
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
                                                   Administrative costs
                                                   1.50 x 40 = 50
                                                   For up to 3 days of non-
Delay penalty           $50 ($20 for each day over completion and non-prior
                        the third day late)        notice before specified
                                                   completion date. After 3
                                                   days, an additional charge
                                                   of $20/day will be levied.
                        $80 (excavation permits
Excavation permit fees  include obstruction permit  
                        and fees)
Obstruction permit fees $50                         
Permit extension fee    $20                         
 
Use Fee  Special Provisions
Use       Fee         Special Provisions
STREET DEPARTMENT
                  Hourly
                  Rate
          Volvo
          L70E w/
          bucket  $160
          or
          forks
          Vac
          Truck/  $350
          Sewer
          Jetter
          Sewer
          Pump    $100
          Truck
          Global  $250
          Sweeper
          Dump    $150
          Truck
          Zero-
          Turn    $100
          Lawn
          Mower          *Minimum Charge of Two Hours.
          BOBCAT          
          T590           *Sweeping: Minimum charge of $500.
Equipment Skid            
with      Steer   $160   All rates include a City of Aitkin Operator of Equipment.
Operator  w/              
          bucket         Equipment will not be released without a City of Aitkin Operator.
          or             All Equipment Rental is subject to the Street Supervisor’s approval.
          forks
          Pickup  $160
          Pickup  $165
          w/plow
          Snow
          blower
          (8hp)-  $60
          Walk
          Behind
          Water   $150
          Tanker  plus
          and     cost
          Water   of
                  water
                  $200
                  plus
          Sander  cost
                  of
                  sand
          Dump
          Truck   $200
          w/plow
Staff     Staff time billed at the actual cost of the employee(s) completing the request,
billing   including wages and benefits.
rate
 
Use Fee  Special Provisions
Use                                                                            Fee         Special
                                                                                              Provisions
SEWERS
Single Family Dwelling Unit: Inside City Limits                                $500           
                                                                               Water   Within
                                                                               Service City
                                                                               Size:   Limits
                                                                               1-inch
                                                                               or      $595
                                                                               smaller
                                                                               1-1/    $645
New connections based on size of water service connection                      4 inch
                                                                               1-1/    $720
                                                                               2 inch
                                                                               2-inch  $845
                                                                               3-inch  $1,095
                                                                               4-inch
                                                                               or      $1,345
                                                                               larger
Rates
                                                                              Current New     
   Biosolids disposal fund is 2.5% of a user’s total dollar amount billed for             
sewer
   Commercial/industrial user fee                                           $7              
   Each additional 1,000 gallons                                            $4.80           
   Minimum charge (0 - 2,000 gal.)                                        $18.50          
   Multi-dwelling is $5 per each additional unit for user fee                               
   Residential user fee                                                     $5              
   Rural rate is two times the city rate                                    $68             
   Rural sewer user fee is two times the city rate                          $10     $10     
   SWRF is 15% of a user’s total dollar amount billed on user’s water                   
   Un-metered commercial                                                    $88             
   Un-metered commercial sewer user fee                                     $24             
   Un-metered                                                               $34             
   Un-metered sewer user fee                                                $5
 
 
Use                       Fee           Special Provisions
TAXICABS
Duplicate taxicab license $10            
Taxicab license           $75 per year   
TOBACCO SALES
Retail sale license fee   $100 per year
 
(Ord. 415, passed 6-2-2025; Ord. 419, passed 1-5-2026)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   ELECTRICITY
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
50.01   Unauthorized dumpsters and other refuse containers
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 UNAUTHORIZED DUMPSTERS AND OTHER REFUSE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Use of city refuse containers. Only those persons using the city park,
ballfields or other city-owned facilities for personal use shall deposit
garbage, rubbish or refuse in a city-owned or leased dumpster or other garbage
receptacle. The garbage, rubbish or refuse deposited in a city-owned or leased
dumpster or other garbage receptacle must be generated while that person is
using the city-owned facilities.
   (B)   Use of private refuse containers. No person shall deposit garbage,
rubbish, refuse or other unauthorized materials in a commercial or private
dumpster or other garbage receptacle, except the owner or authorized agent of
the premises using the dumpster or garbage receptacle.
   (C)   Posting of prohibition of use. The owner of the premises using the
dumpster or other garbage receptacle shall post in a conspicuous manner the
prohibition as provided in this section. Failure to do so shall bar prosecution
under this section.
(Ord. 246, passed 8-19-1991) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor to deposit garbage, rubbish, refuse or other
unauthorized material in a dumpster or other garbage receptacle in violation of
§
50.01 of this chapter.
(Ord. 246, passed 8-19-1991)
Cross-reference:
   For penalty amount referenced in division (B), see §
10.98
CHAPTER 51: ELECTRICITY
Section
   
51.01   Application for service
   
51.02   Penalty for late payment
   
51.03   Disconnection for non-payment
   
51.04   Prescribing rules for owners
§ 51.01 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Procedure. Application for electrical service installation and for
electrical service shall be made to the Public Utilities Commission on forms
prescribed by the Public Utility Commission and furnished by the city. Every
person applying for electricity from the municipal electrical system, and every
owner of property for which the application is made, shall be deemed by the
application to consent to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city
relating to the municipal electrical system.
   (B)   Accounts in name of owners. All accounts shall be carried in the name
of the owner who personally, or by his or her authorized agent, shall apply for
the service. The owner shall be liable for electricity supplied to his or her
property, whether he or she is occupying the property or not.
   (C)   Security deposit. At the time of filing for an application for
electrical service, any applicant, other than the fee title owner of the
property to be served unless the fee title owner has previously been
disconnected for non-payment of bills, shall deposit a sum of money as set out
in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances. The deposit shall be refunded after 12
consecutive months of prompt payment of bills without have a late penalty added
or upon prior termination of service with all bills paid. Deposits shall bear
interest at the rate of 6% form the date of deposit to the date of refund. If
the customer is delinquent in his or her electric account, his or her deposit
shall be applied on the delinquent account and an additional deposit shall be
required to bring the deposit up to the amount originally required.
(Ord. 211, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 51.02 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   Bills for total electrical charges shall be mailed out on the last working
day of the month. The amount listed on the statement shall be due on or before
the fifteenth day of the following month. If payment is not made by that date,
a late payment penalty of 5% shall be added to the amount due.
(Ord. 211, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 51.03 DISCONNECTION FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   (A)   Reconnection. The city shall endeavor to collect delinquent accounts
promptly. In any case, if satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been
made, the Public Utility Commission may, after the procedural requirements of
division (B) below have been complied with, discontinue service to the
delinquent customer shutting off electrical service. When electrical service to
any premises has been discontinued, service shall not be restored, except upon
payment of all current and delinquent amounts due, together with a fee for
reconnection in the amount set out in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Procedure. Electricity shall not be shut off under division (A) above
until notice or an opportunity for hearing have first been given the occupant
of the premises involved. The notice shall be personally served and shall state
that if payment is not made before a date stated in the notice, but not less
than ten days after the date on which the notice is given, the electrical
supply to the premises will be shut off. The notice shall also state that the
occupant may, before the date demand a hearing on the matter, in which case the
electrical supply will not be cut off until after the hearing is held. If the
customer requests a hearing before the date specified, a hearing shall be held
on the matter by the Superintendent of the Public Utilities Commission, at
least one week after the date on which the request is made. If, as a result of
the hearing, the Superintendent of the Public Commission finds that the amount
claimed to be owing is actually due and unpaid, and there is no legal reason
why the electrical supply to the delinquent customer may not be shut off in
accordance with this chapter. The Public Utilities Commission may shut off the
supply.
(Ord. 211, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 51.04 PRESCRIBING RULES FOR OWNERS.
   The Public Utilities Commission is further empowered to make such reasonable
rules, regulations and rates as it may require consistent with this chapter and
in furtherance of the operation of the city’s electrical system.
(Ord. 211, passed 9-20-1982)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
Connection and Use
   
52.01   Application for service
   
52.02   Charges for service connections
   
52.03   Private water supply
   
52.04   Water quality and availability
   
52.05   Unauthorized water connection prohibited
   
52.06   Inspections
   
52.07   Location of water lines
   
52.08   Unmetered water use
   
52.09   Adherence to rules and regulations
   
52.10   Authority
   
52.11   Water main installation
   
52.12   Water service installation
   
52.13   Excavations
   
52.14   Water leaks
   
52.15   Frozen service lines
   
52.16   Water connection required
   
52.17   Water rates
   
52.18   Shutoff for non-payment
   
52.19   Lawn watering restrictions
 
   
52.99   Penalty
CONNECTION AND USE
§ 52.01 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Procedure. Application for water service installation and for water
service shall be made to the Public Utilities Commission on forms prescribed by
the Public Utilities Commission at the Public Utilities office. Every person
applying for water from the municipal water system, and every owner of property
for which such application is made, shall be deemed by such application to
consent to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city/Public Utilities
relating to the municipal water system.
   (B)   Accounts in name of owner. All accounts shall be kept in the name of
the owner who personally, or by authorized agent, shall apply for such service.
The owner shall be liable for water supplied to the property, whether the owner
is occupying the property or not. Any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the
property.
   (C)   Collection with taxes. Delinquent accounts shall be certified to the
City Administrator who shall prepare an assessment roll each year providing for
assessment of the delinquent amounts against the respective properties served.
The assessment roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption on or before
September 1 of each year. Upon such adoption, the City Administrator shall
certify the assessment roll to the County Auditor for collection along with
taxes. Assessments shall bare interest at a rate of 8% per annum.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.02 CHARGES FOR SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Connection fees. When a connection requires installation of a service
line from the main to the property line, the applicant for service shall
furnish or be responsible, for the following: Equipment and labor to tap the
main and install copper tubing, including, but not limited to the corporation
cock, curb stop, and curb stop box. All material used must be of approved
manufacture, as per the Public Utilities Commission.
   (B)   Owner connection.
      (1)   The applicant shall furnish all necessary labor, excavation and
material to connect the water system from the curb stop to the residence or
building at the applicant's expense. All excavation and connection work shall
be under the supervision of the public utilities. All work in the city right-
of-way shall be done in compliance with the right-of-way ordinance. Any bonds,
fees, or insurance as required by the city must be paid before work can
commence.
      (2)   At the time of application, the applicant will be required to
furnish the Public Utilities Commission with a connection fee. The fee schedule
is available at the Public Utilities Office and is required to be paid before
connection to the water main.
   (C)   Certification. No permit shall be issued to connect with any water
main unless the applicant has certified that one of the following statements
apply, or payment under division (D) is made.
      (1)   The tract or lot to be served has been assessed for the cost of
construction of the main with which the connection is made or that proceedings
for levying such assessment have been or will be commenced in due course;
      (2)   The cost of construction of the main has been paid by the developer
or builder platting the lot or tract; or
      (3)   If neither of the foregoing is true, a sum equal to the portion of
the cost of constructing the main which would be assessable against the lot or
parcel has been paid to the city.
   (D)   Additional connection fee. If certification in accordance with
division (C) above cannot be made, the applicant shall pay an additional
connection fee equal to the portion of the cost of construction of the main
upon the same basis as any assessment previously levied against other
properties for the main. The determination shall be made by the Manager of the
Public Utilities. If no such assessment has been levied, the assessable cost
shall be determined upon the basis of the uniform charge which may have been or
will be charged for similar connections with the main. The amount shall be
determined on the basis of the total assessable cost of the main allocated on
the basis of frontage where assessable costs cannot be determined, the charge
shall be the current connection fee. The current fee schedule is available at
the City Public Utilities Office.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.03 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.
   No pipe of the municipal water supply system shall be connected with any
pump, well or tank that is connected with any other source of water supply.
When any such connection is found, the Public Utilities Commission shall notify
the owner to sever the connection and if this is not done immediately, the
Public Utilities staff will shut off the municipal water supply to that
property. Before any new connection is made to the municipal water system, the
Public Utilities staff shall ascertain that no cross connection will exist when
the new connection is made.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.04 WATER QUALITY AND AVAILABILITY.
   (A)   Water availability. The Public Utilities cannot guarantee consumers
full volume, fixed pressure or an effective, continuous supply of water, such
matters being subject to the varying conditions which may affect the operation
and maintenance of the mains, services, pumping stations, and other parts of
the system.
   (B)   Water quality. The aesthetic appearance of the water will always be
satisfactory. The use of hydrants may temporarily affect the appearance of the
water which may result in staining of clothes or other material washed with
such water. These events cannot be controlled by the Public Utilities and care
should be exercised by all customers in the use of water.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.05 UNAUTHORIZED WATER CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized employee or
other authorized Agent of the Public Utilities to tap any pipe or make
attachments to any water pipe except under the provisions of these regulations.
No person shall obtain water from a hydrant except authorized employees or
other authorized agent of the Public Utilities or the Fire Department.
Unauthorized use is a misdemeanor. Tampering with a water system is a felony.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.06 INSPECTIONS
   Authorized employees of the Public Utilities shall have the right, at any
reasonable time, to enter the premises for the purpose of inspecting any water
service connection or fire protection service, backflow prevention device, and
any or all piping or equipment connected thereto. Denial of the right to enter
premise for the purpose of inspecting water service connection or fire
protection service, backflow prevention device, and any or all piping or
equipment connected to the water system, will result in discontinued water
service.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.07 LOCATION OF WATER LINES
   It is the property owner's responsibility to locate the water service lines
on private property.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.08 UNMETERED WATER USE.
   Except as provided within these regulations, no water service line shall be
provided without first being fully metered. The only exceptions to this rule
are for fire service and domestic water service during the period of
construction of an industrial, commercial or residential use building. Prior to
final inspection all construction shall be completed and the meter installed.
No water service to actual occupancy of industrial, commercial, or residential
premises shall be permitted without a meter being installed.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.09 ADHERENCE TO RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Manager of Public Utilities and the Water Department Supervisor shall be
authorized to discontinue service for failure to comply with any portion of the
rules and regulations.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.10 AUTHORITY.
   The Manager of the Public Utilities and the Water Department Supervisor will
have the authority to make the final determination in matters not specifically
addressed In the rules and regulations.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.11 WATER MAIN INSTALLATION.
   (A)   General installation requirements. All water mains and services shall
conform to the AWWA and APU standards for water mains and appurtenances. Bury
depth will be a minimum of 84 inches not to exceed 120 inches.
   (B)   Hydrostatic testing and disinfection.
      (1)   The contractor shall be responsible for hydrostatic testing and
disinfection of the water main and shall furnish, install, and bear the costs
of all work, materials, and assistance required to complete these tests
according to AWWA Standard for disinfecting water mains (ANSI/AWWA C651.92).
      (2)   Operation of all valves and hydrants will be done only by employees
of the Public Utilities or other authorized agent. Under no circumstances shall
the contractor or his employees open or close valves in the distribution system
or operate fire hydrants connected to mains except when authorized. This
provision applies both to the valves and hydrants on existing mains, and to
newly installed valves and hydrants and mains at the time of and after they are
opened to receive water from city mains.
   (C)   Hydrostatic (pressure) testing. After chlorine has been introduced
into the main, a pressure and leakage test shall be conducted by the contractor
under the supervision of the APU. The main shall remain isolated from adjacent
mains and a gauge pressure of at least 150 psi shall be applied by pumping
clean water containing 25 mg/l of chlorine. The duration of each pressure test
shall be a minimum of two hours.
   (D)   Disinfection. Hypochlorite solution (calcium hypochlorite - HTH,
sodium hypochlorite - bleach) shall be used of such strength to produce a
concentration of 25 mg/l of chlorine in the main. The chlorinating agent shall
be applied at the beginning within three feet of the valved section of the
pipeline extension through a corporation cock inserted in the top of the new
main. Water shall be supplied by Public Utilities personnel from the existing
city water main so as to flow slowly at a constant rate into the newly
installed water main. The chlorine shall be applied continuously at a constant
rate to develop a column of chlorinated water that will expose all interior
surfaces to a concentration of approximately 25 mg/l. Valves and hydrants shall
be operated so as to disinfect appurtenances and pipe branches. Chlorine
application shall not cease until the entire main is filled with chlorinated
water. If at any time the application of chlorine is interrupted, the flow of
water shall be stopped until chlorine application is resumed. After the main
has been chlorinated, the solution shall remain in the main for at least 24
hours to assure disinfection. After the minimum 24 hours, the solution shall be
tested at the extremities of the main and at intermediate points to make sure
it has Residual chlorine strength of 10 mg/l.
   (E)   Flushing. After disinfecting the main, it shall be thoroughly flushed
with city water at a fire hydrant or hydrants on the dead end or ends of the
water main until the water in the main has approximately the same chlorine
residual as water in the existing mains. This shall be done by personnel of the
Public Utilities or authorized personnel. Flushing stations shall be placed as
shown on the plans or as directed by the Public Utilities.
   (F)   Bacteriological tests. Two consecutive bacterial tests must be
negative for the presence of coliform. Tests must be analyzed by an approved
Minnesota Department of Health Lab. When all tests on the water main have been
successfully completed, and a copy of the results have been submitted to the
Public Utilities, the main shall be placed in service by the Public Utilities
and no further work on the main or its valves will be permitted without
permission.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.12 WATER SERVICE INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Permits. Permits and fees outlined in §
52.02, above, are required in advance before any work can begin.
   (B)   General requirements. All work performed shall be in accordance with
the current Minnesota Plumbing Code and Public Utilities requirements and
inspected for conformance with these codes and requirements. All water
installations including tapping of the water main are to be by a licensed,
bonded and insured plumbing contractor in good standing in the State of
Minnesota. Pressure testing and bacterial tests are required from the curb stop
to inside the building. Pressure test is 150 psi for two hours. Public
Utilities will approve the pressure test. Two consecutive bacterial tests must
be negative for the presence of coliform. Tests must be analyzed by an approved
Minnesota Department of Health lab. When all tests on the water service have
been successfully completed, and a copy of the results have been submitted to
the Public Utilities, the service line will be placed in service by the Public
Utilities and no further work on the service or its valves will be permitted
without permission.
   (C)   General installation requirements. When a water service line is
installed, the tap connection to the water main and the portion of the service
line within the right-of-way shall be installed in accordance with divisions
(1) and (2):
      (1)   A contractor shall install a water service, except under (2)
hereof, and it shall become the property of the city.
      (2)   (a)   It shall be the obligation of every developer, or subdivides
whose development includes the extension of the city's system, to provide a
separate water service line for every lot or facility abutting proposed streets
or rights-of-way within the development, which the water service line shall be
installed from the water main to the edge of the right-of-way and shall become
the property of the city upon acceptance.
         (b)   Any such developer or subdivider shall be responsible for the
proper installation, altering or repairing of such water service lines in
accordance with the ordinances and rules and regulations of the Public
Utilities. No water service lines shall be installed for water supply purposes
without a water meter. Only one meter is required for each apartment building
or development complex. However, upon approval by the Public Utilities, a meter
with shut off valves may be installed for each dwelling unit.
      (3)   Proper provisions shall be made to permit the Public Utilities to
discontinue service either by:
         (a)   Installation of separate curb stop valves in the public right-
of-way or easements and separate lines from the curb stop to the meter; or
         (b)   One service line and one curb stop to the meter room and
installation of lockout valves prior to each individual meter; and the right to
enter upon private property by the Public Utilities to the location of the
meters and lock-outs. Denial of the right of entrance will result in the turn-
off of water at the water main.
      (4)   The situation detailed in division (C)(3)((b) above will be for
multiple living units where one service line is run into the meter room and
each individual service is taken from a manifold. However, each building must
be individually served.
      (5)   The minimum required water service line for fire sprinkler systems
should be a minimum of six inches. Sprinkler system calculations must be
approved through Building Inspection before permits for installation will be
issued.
   (D)   Meter size.
      (1)   (a)   Minimum size of service shall be three-quarter inch. Where
the distance from the water main to the meter exceeds 100 feet, the minimum
size of the service line shall be one inch.
         (b)   The following are minimum service and meter requirements for
water service for residential use:
Service Size Meter Size
Service Size           Meter Size
1 Family 3/4 inch      5/8 by 3/4 inch or 3/4 inch
2–5 Family 1 inch    1 inch
6–8 Family 1-1/2 inch1-1/2 inch
9–12 Family 1-1/2 inc1-1/2 inch
13–20 Family 2 inch  2 inch
21–50 Family 4 inch  3 inch
51–115 Family 4 inch 4 inch
 
      (2)   (a)   Water service line system design criteria: The minimum size
service line and meter size of residential water service lines over 100 feet
and all commercial and industrial users shall be sized per the current
Minnesota Plumbing Code.
         (b)   The table below lists maximum flows:
Maximum Flow Size of Meter in Gallons Per Minute
Maximum Flow    Size of Meter in Gallons Per Minute
5/8 by 3/4 inch 20
3/4 inch        30
1 inch          50
1-1/2 inch      100
2 inch          160
3 inch          320
4 inch          500
6 inch          1,000
 
      (3)   Where unusual demands of water will be required, the sizes shall be
increased to provide for the expected demand. The Public Utilities does not
guarantee that the minimum sizes of lines and meters will be sufficient. The
sizing and installation of a water service to a residential or commercial
building must be sized per the current Minnesota Plumbing Code. A separate
service line and curb stop is required for each metered service. In a situation
where a lot split has occurred and only one service exists for both dwellings,
the service line and curb stop may be separated for each property split, but
must be metered separately. If an alternate water main is available along the
previous property split, the owner will be required to tap into this main, If
an alternate water main is not available, access may be granted to the property
split by the owner fronting the water main to allow a new service across the
property in a reasonable manner. The part of the water service extending from
the curb stop to the first meter valve within the building or structure shall
be installed and maintained at the expense of the consumer and shall be
installed to meet the requirements of these regulations.
   (E)   Pipe.
      (1)   All water service lines from the main to and including the curb
stop, in sizes three-quarter inch through two inch, shall be type K seamless
copper. All water service pipes from the curb stop into the building, in sizes
three-quarter inch through two inch shall be one of the following:
         (a)   Type K seamless copper.
         (b)   Polyethylene (PE) flexible pipe, being for potable water and
having a minimum pressure rating of 150 PSI minimum with water at 73.4 degrees
Fahrenheit.
            1.   Plastic water services are required to have a #12 gauge solid
copper tracer wire attached every three feet to the service line.
            2.   Plastic water service lines must be surrounded with a minimum
of six inches of sand or approved granulated pipe fill.
      (2)   All piping and fittings larger than two inches shall conform to the
AWWA and Public Utilities material standards for the installation of water
mains and appurtenances.
   (F)   Depth of line. A minimum of 84-inches cover is required for all
service lines. No service line shall have more than 108 inches cover. If
circumstances require a service line be buried less than 84 inches, two layers
of two-inch thick certifoam insulation is required over the entire service. At
no instance will a service be buried less than 60 inches.
   (G)   No connections ahead of meter. No water connections shall be made on
the city side of the water meter except for fire line connections.
   (H)   Backflow prevention. All commercial and industrial water services
regardless of size are required to have an RPZ immediately after the downstream
valve after the water meter.
   (I)   General location. Service lines shall be run as straight as possible
from the curb stop to the front wall of the building, or to the nearest point
of the building wall abutting the location of the meter. Curb stops shall be
located within the right-of-way, free from obstructions such as landscaping.
Access by Public Utilities personnel shall be maintained at all times.
   (J)   General requirements. All water taps are to be done with main under
pressure unless approved by the Public Utilities. Curb stop is per Public
Utilities specifications. Only Minneapolis threaded curb stops are allowed for
curb box attachment. Flared or compression may be used with a cement block
placed underneath curb stop during excavation. Each service line shall be
fitted with a valve immediately on entering the building. This valve may be a
part of the meter set. The valve shall be in accordance with the current Public
Utilities specifications, which require an all no lead brass ball valve. The
service line must enter the building no higher than four feet to the center of
the meter above the floor on which the meter is set. All service lines up to
and including two inches shall contain a check valve as specified by the Public
Utilities. Ford or AY McDonald check valves are approved manufactures. Check
valves shall be located on the outlet side of the meter after valve. No water
service shall be laid in the same trench with a sanitary sewer connection.
Service lines shall be laid at least ten feet horizontally from any existing or
proposed sanitary sewer line. Should local conditions prevent a lateral
separation often feet, a water service line may be laid closer than ten feet to
a storm or sanitary sewer line, provided that the service line is laid in a
separate trench or on an undisturbed earth shelf located on one side of the
sewer line and at such an elevation that the bottom of the service line is at
least 18 inches above the top of the sewer line.
   (K)   Maintenance of services. The Public Utilities shall maintain all water
service lines from the main to and including the curb stop. The owner shall
maintain the service line from the connection to the curb stop to the meter to
assure a safe potable water supply. No repairs to service lines will be
permitted except in case of damage to a portion of the line. Complete
replacement must be made where the service line is galvanized metal or lead; or
it is determined by the Public Utilities to be unserviceable. The owner is
responsible for costs replacing or repairing service line from curb valve to
meter. Repairs are to be done by a licensed plumbing contractor using Minnesota
plumbing code guidelines.
   (L)   Meters.
      (1)   Meters and meter locations. All meter sets shall conform to the
following requirements:
         (a)   Non-hazardous place; accessability. All meters shall be set in
an approved non-hazardous place and accessibility shall be maintained at all
times.
         (b)   Size. The maximum size of the meter shall not be greater than
the size of the water service. A smaller sized meter may be installed based
upon the sizing shown in these regulations as approved by the Public Utilities
Manager or Water Department Supervisor where it can be shown the water demand
is less than the rated capacity of the meter. When a meter is being used to
measure greater volumes of water than its designed operating capacity, as
evidenced by high readings or frequent repairs, the owner will be required to
pay for, and install, meter service large enough as determined by the Public
Utilities Manager or Water Department Supervisor to properly provide the
necessary service. Replacement cost of the meter will be evaluated on a case-
by-case basis by the Public Utilities.
         (c)   Specifications to be followed. The licensed plumber or owner
occupant of a single-family residence shall furnish and install all pipe
fittings and valves necessary for the meter set in accordance with the
appropriate specifications as required by the Public Utilities.
         (d)   Installation by Public Utilities or contractor. The Public
Utilities or the plumbing contractor shall install meters.
         (e)   AMI meters and transmitters. New AMI meters and transmitters
will be installed at all meter change outs.
         (f)   Installation of meters. All meters shall be installed in the
building or structure except as otherwise approved by Public Utilities Manager
or Water Department Supervisor. The water meters shall be installed in a
horizontal position as close as possible to the valve. Where an approved
basement is not or will not be available and the building or structure to be
served is of a type of construction defined as approved, the water meter shall
be placed within the building or structure in an accessible location in the
utility room and if no utility room is available, the meter shall be placed in
an accessible location in the kitchen or other approved location as approved by
the Public Utilities. The water meter shall always be located to provide
protection from mechanical injury.
         (g)   Meter space. Accessible meter space is required for all water
services. Accessible is defined as a space large enough for service workers to
read, service, change, install, etc. Meters shall be installed level. All
meters shall be located as near as practicable to the point of entrance and in
a position giving ample protection against freezing and other external damage.
Water meters shall not be installed in sheds, garages, storage buildings, crawl
spaces, or any other locations as specified in the Minnesota Plumbing Code. If
the meter is not placed in a basement, the part of the water service under the
building floor shall be installed not less than 18 inches below the first floor
if such floor is concrete with fill to the underside of the concrete floor and
not less than 12 inches below the top of soil under the building where wood
joist or other construction is used and an unheated space exists between the
floor and soil below.
         (h)   Service line protection. The part of the water service that
extends vertically from the excavated trench through the first floor shall be
protected from freezing by enclosing the same with a six-inch diameter
conductor pipe. This conductor pipe shall be securely fastened to the floor
joist in such a manner that the water service will be located in the center of
the six-inch conductor pipe tube, which shall extend to the underside of the
flooring. The space between the conductor pipe tube and the water service shall
be filled in an approved manner with mineral wool or other approved insulation.
The six-inch diameter conductor pipe tube shall be installed by the plumber
when the water service is provided for, and shall be accessible for inspection
before the floor is laid. Any part of the water service under a building will
not be considered accessible for inspection unless it is entirely visible
without crawling under the building.
         (i)   Setting of meters. Meters shall be installed on water service
lines prior to final inspection as required by the Public Utilities. All fees
must be paid in advance before the water meter is set.
      (2)   Small meters. All indoor meter sets for meters less than two inches
shall conform to the following requirements:
         (a)   Height for setting. Meters shall not be set higher than four
feet to center of connection above the floor.
         (b)   Not to be obstructed or concealed. Meters shall not be concealed
and obstructed by cabinets, benches, water heaters, or other fixtures. Meters
shall be accessible for service worker to service, change, install, etc.
         (c)   Located near point where service line enters building. Indoor
meter sets shall be made as near as possible to the point where the service
line enters the building.
         (d)   AMI transmitters. AMI transmitter shall be installed by
authorized employees of the Public Utilities only and will be located in a
place as deemed reasonably accessible to the meter reader or service worker.
Transmitters will be maintained under the same provisions as meters are
maintained. The Public Utilities shall not be responsible for defacement or
damage to property caused by necessary holes, fastening, or other work required
for proper installation. A charge for repairs to any AMI transmitter or
connections hereto, necessitated by damage or neglect by the consumer or owner,
shall be made in addition to any other charge provided.
      (3)   Large meters. Meters two inches and larger will be permitted to be
set indoors only under the following conditions:
         (a)   Clear access. A clear access way to the meter set shall be
maintained at all times. This access way shall be large enough to accommodate
an industrial truck dolly.
         (b)   Placed so as to not interfere with normal course of business.
Meter set shall be made in such a locality that reading and changing of the
meter shall in no way interfere with the customer's normal course of business.
Meter bypass are required for three-inch and larger meters.
         (c)   Use of customer lifting equipment, etc. Customer shall allow the
Public Utilities the use of lifting equipment and industrial truck dolly on
premises for the changing and transporting of meters on the premises.
         (d)   AMI transmitters. AMI transmitter shall be installed by
authorized employees of the Public Utilities only and will be located in a
place as deemed reasonably accessible to the meter reader or service worker.
Transmitters will be maintained under the same provisions as meters are
maintained. The Public Utilities shall not be responsible for defacement or
damage to property caused by necessary holes, fastening, or other work required
for proper installation. A charge for repairs to any AMI transmitter or
connections hereto, necessitated by damage or neglect by the consumer or owner,
shall be made in addition to any other charge provided.
      (4)   Meter ownership. With the exception of sprinkler meters, water
meter remains under sole control and ownership of the city and shall not be
removed or tampered with by unauthorized persons. Unserviceable or defective
meters will be replaced by the Public Utilities; however, if a customer wishes
his or her meter tested for accuracy, all costs of the test are the customers.
If the meter is found out of AWWA standards for accuracy, the meter will be
repaired or replaced at Public Utilities’s expense.
      (5)   Servicing of existing meters. The maintenance of meters shall occur
during normal working hours of the Public Utilities. In the event that this
procedure inconveniences a customer, he or she may request that his or her
meter be changed after normal working hours; however, he or she will be
required to bear the cost of this service.
      (6)   Protection of meters. The property owner shall be held responsible
for the meter in his or her custody and shall pay all costs of damage from any
causes over which he or she has control such as freezing.
      (7)   Meters required. All water service lines shall be metered. All new
construction shall require meters with wireless communication as per current
Public Utilities’s standards.
      (8)   Number of meters. The supply of water from the service connection
may be measured by one or more meters. When more than one meter is used, they
shall be set in an area not under the control of any tenant and accessible to
the city at all times. The minimum charge for each meter shall be based on the
size of each meter, except that in all cases, the meter or meters must satisfy
the minimum requirements for service lines and meters, as provided for by these
regulations and each separate service shall be subject to the same rules and
regulations as a service where one branch serves a single meter.
         (a)   Meter readings shall be used to calculate charges, but the Water
Billing office shall be authorized to use other means when it is apparent that
a meter has not been operating properly, or if it has been removed.
         (b)   Meters set inside a building in a manifold shall be set in
accordance with city standards.
      (9)   Unlawful removal of meter. No person except an authorized Public
Utilities employee shall remove a water meter. Where a meter is found to have
been unlawfully removed, the water shall be shut off forthwith and proper
charges made for the estimated amount of water used. The water shall not be
turned on again until the meter is reinstalled and all fees paid including
estimated usage and the cost of the meter, testing, and any installation.
      (10)   Access to water meter. Authorized employees of the Public
Utilities shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to enter any premises
where a meter is installed, for the purpose of reading, examining, or testing
the same on the premises, or for the purpose of removing the same from the
premises for examination, testing, repair, or replacement.
         (a)   Inability of employees to readily enter and safely gain access
to the meter for maintenance or replacement shall be sufficient cause to
discontinue service.
         (b)   Failure or refusal by a customer to make suitable arrangements
for the water meter to be read at regularly scheduled meter reading times shall
be sufficient cause for the Public Utilities to discontinue service.
         (c)   Ample clear space shall be provided and always kept available at
every water meter for purposes of reading or maintenance.
         (d)   Meter locations must be safe for Public Utilities staff to enter
which include safe stairways and safe walk ways. Areas must also be free of
human and animal waste. Water service may be discontinued after proper notice,
if a health hazard has not been corrected and a Public Utilities employee is
unable to inspect, repair, or replace a water meter in a timely matter.
         (e)   If the authorized agents and/or employees of the Public
Utilities are unable to remove, repair, install, or replace a meter due to
defective valves, or plumbing, the property owner will be given 30-days’
written notice in which to make the necessary corrections. Failure to replace
defective material within the allotted time may result in the discontinuance of
service.
      (11)   Deduct meters (sprinkling meters).
         (a)   The Public Utilities shall, at the request of any water customer
and upon payment by the customer or this authorized agent of the prescribed
service charge, permit the installation of a deduct meter for recording such
water usage that does not enter the sanitary sewer system. The metering of such
water shall be accomplished after the incoming water has passed through the
master meter. Water for such use shall only be for exterior hose connections,
yard hydrants, and lawn sprinkling systems or use on the outside of the
building. Sprinkler meters will be installed accordance to §
52.12 herein.
         (b)   All costs of the meter and installation are the customers. If a
customer is found not using the sprinkler meter as it is intended, the Public
Utilities Billing department will discontinue deduct metering for that
customer.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.13 EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   All rubbish, surplus materials, and excess earth shall be removed.
   (B)   All open excavations shall be either attended or guarded with fencing
and signage at all times and shall be performed according to the latest OSHA
trenching and excavating standards.
   (C)   All excavation and connection work shall be under the supervision and
direction of the Public Utilities. All work in the city right-of-way shall be
done in compliance with the right-of-way ordinance. All paving and sidewalks
are to be restored to at least as good a condition as it was previous to the
excavation.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.14 WATER LEAKS.
   (A)   The customer or owner shall be responsible for maintaining the service
pipe from the curb stop into the building served. In the event of a water leak
in a customer's steel water line that has rusted through, the entire service
from the curb stop will be replaced type K copper or plastic as described in §
52.04. All work done and all materials used must comply with applicable
plumbing and safety codes.
   (B)   If a customer or owner fails to make repairs to a leaking water
service within 24 hours after notification by the Public Utilities office, the
Public Utilities staff may shut the water off. Depending upon the severity of
the leak and to prevent damage to other property, the Manager of the Public
Utilities may have the leaking service shut off immediately. The water service
will not be turned on again until repairs are made, as directed by ordinance,
and the current reconnection fee as specified in the Public Utilities Office is
made. In the event of a water leak in the portion of the water system that is
the responsibility of the Public Utilities Commission, the Public Utilities
will make full repairs at its own expense.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.15 FROZEN SERVICE LINES.
   If a water service line freezes from after the curb stop to the building. It
is the responsibility of the owner to have the line thawed by licensed plumber
using Public Utilities approved methods. If a plumber is unable to thaw the
line, a temporary line will need to be installed by a plumber at owner's
expense. The temporary line will be maintained by the customer. If the service
line freezes from the main to the curb stop, the Public Utilities will attempt
to thaw the line from the interior of home or business, if the Public Utilities
is unable to thaw the line, a temporary water service will be made at the
Public Utilities expense, and maintained by the Public Utilities. Heat tapes
will be utilized and the owner will need to allow the use of electricity. In
certain instances of prolonged cold weather the Public Utilities Manager or
Water Department Supervisor may order the continuous running of a stream of
water to protect water services from freezing, if after proper public
notification of a water run order, and a customer's service freezes due to not
following the order, the customer will be responsible for service line thawing
regardless of where the service line is frozen.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.16 WATER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Notice.
      (1)   When property abuts upon any public street or alley along which a
water main has been constructed, the owner of any dwelling or commercial
establishment shall connect such dwelling or commercial establishment with the
municipal water system within 90 days after the date of mailing or delivery of
the official notification to do so. The notice shall be given to the owner in
writing by the City Administrator on order of the City Council. If the owner is
not in residence at the property, notice will be sent to the owners' place of
business or residence, or the address as listed with the County on the tax
rolls.
      (2)   When a private well or water supply has been in use prior to the
construction of a water main in the street or alley abutting the property upon
which the dwelling or commercial establishment is located, the owner of the
building making use of the private water supply shall comply with this section
when the private water supply is in need of repair or reconstruction, or within
two years of the completion of the water main, or within two years of the date
of passage of this chapter, whichever occurs first.
   (B)   Assessment. After the installation or connection has been completed
pursuant to Council resolution, the City Administrator shall serve a written
notice of the assessment upon the owner or a representative directing payment
of the assessment to the City Administrator within ten days after service of
the notice. If the assessment is not paid within ten days, the City
Administrator shall certify the amount to the County Auditor for collection in
the same manner as other special assessments. The Council may by resolution
spread the assessment over a three-year period. Interest on the assessment
shall be charged at the rate of 8% per annum.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.17 WATER RATES.
   Current rates are on file at the Public Utilities, and are subject to change
and public notification is made in accordance of law.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
Cross-reference
   For a list of water rates, see §
33.01
§ 52.18 SHUTOFF FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   (A)   The Public Utilities Commission will endeavor to collect delinquent
accounts promptly. In any case where satisfactory arrangements for payments
have not been made, the Public Utilities Commission may, after procedural
requirements of division (B) have been complied with, discontinue service to a
delinquent customer by shutting off the water at the curb stop. When water
service to any property has been discontinued, service shall not be restored
except upon payment of all delinquent amounts plus a fee for disconnection and
reconnection as specified in Public Utilities regulations.
   (B)   Water shall not be shut off under division (A) until notice and
opportunity for a hearing by the Manager of the Public Utilities or his or her
delegated representative have first been given to the owner of the property.
The notice shall be personally served or sent registered mail and shall state
that if payment is not made before ten days have elapsed from the date stated
in the notice, the water supply to the property will be shut off. The notice
shall also state that the owner, or their representative, has the right to
appear before the Public Utilities Commission, at the next scheduled meeting,
to appeal the shut off. The property owner is required to contact the Public
Utilities office at least three working days before the meeting to request
being included on the monthly agenda of the Commission meeting. If it is the
finding of the Public Utilities Commission that due process has been afforded
the owner and no payment agreement has been reached, the water service to that
property will be discontinued on the next working day after the Commission
meeting.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.19 LAWN WATERING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Public Utilities Manager or Water Department Supervisor may order
emergency restrictions to limit water use during periods that is deemed an
emergency situation. The Public Utilities Manager or Water Department
Supervisor shall notify city water users by publishing a notice in the Aitkin
Independent Age and on the local radio station.
   (B)   Residents with an odd numbered house are able to water their lawn and
other ornamental plants on odd numbered calendar days. Residents with an even
numbered house are able to water their lawns and ornamental plants on even
days. Outside water utilization, for the purpose of lawn sprinkling, will not
be allowed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   (C)   An exception may be granted for recently established lawns. Those
lawns may be watered for up to one month after installation, subject to review
by the Public Utilities Manager or Water Department Supervisor.
   (D)   In extreme cases, the Manager of the Public Utilities or the Water
Supervisor has the authority to issue a total watering ban until such emergency
situation has passed.
   (E)   The penalty for violating the Public Utilities' ban shall be as set
out in §
10.98. The Manager of the Public Utilities and the Water Department Supervisor
have the authority to discontinue a water service for willful disregard of the
watering ban as to protect to the city water supply. If fines are assessed,
they become part of the next month's water bill, and if not paid, may lead to
disconnection of the water service. Reconnection of water service to the
municipal water supply will not be allowed until all fines and the appropriate
reconnect fee is paid.
(Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of §§
52.01 through
52.19, or interfering with the lawful execution of these sections, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine as set forth in §
10.98.
(Ord. 315, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 315, passed 3-22-2017)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
Use Regulations
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Street Commissioner; control
   
53.03   Unlawful disposal of water
   
53.04   Private wastewater disposal
   
53.05   Building sewers and connections
   
53.06   Grease interceptors, sand traps and grinder pumps
   
53.07   Use of public sewers
   
53.08   Damage to wastewater facilities
   
53.09   Inspectors; powers and authority
   
53.10   Sewer service charge system
 
   
53.99   Penalty
USE REGULATIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also referred to as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33. U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
   AUTHORITY. The City of Aitkin, Minnesota, or its representative thereof.
   BOD5 or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet outside the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. Also referred to as a HOUSE CONNECTION or SERVICE
CONNECTION.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures, and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Aitkin as
presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a
future time. The term CITY, when used herein, may also be used to refer to the
City Council and its authorized representative.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES/SDS
permit if the treatment facilities are designed to treat the pollutants to a
degree which complies with effluent concentration limits imposed by the permit.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specially constructed for the purpose of
measuring flow and sampling of wastes.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
humans and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Gaseous, liquid and solid wastes resulting from industrial
or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the development,
recovery and processing of natural resources, as distinct from residential or
domestic strength wastes.
   INDUSTRY. Any non-governmental or non-residential user of a publicly-owned
treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A, B, D, E and I.
   INFILTRATION. Water entering the sewage system (including building drains
and pipes) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections and manhole walls.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I). The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.
   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including
building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar
drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch basins,
surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
   INTERFERENCE. The inhabitation or disruption of the city’s wastewater
disposal system processes or operations which causes or significantly
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES and/or SDS
permit. The term includes of sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in
accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under § 405 of the
Act, 33 U.S.C.§ 1345, or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401
et seq., the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or more
stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed
by the city.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MPCA. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-
owned wastewater treatment facilities which are determined to be not
susceptible to treatment by the treatment facilities or would interfere with
the operation of the treatment facilities, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1317(b).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally
discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to §§ 402 and 405
of the Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1342 and 1345.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers,
which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface
water or ground water.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air-
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant
added is heat.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater that is primarily introduced by
residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than 259 mg/l and a
suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than 305 mg/l.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
terms of grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to
the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to the a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point source discharges and connections.
      (2)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer.
      (3)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
      (5)   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a
public authority.
      (6)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public
authority.
      (7)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters
which are not admitted intentionally.
      (8)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to carry
storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, sub-surface water, street wash
water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment
facility which has a discharge flow:
      (1)   In excess of 25,000 gallons per average work day;
      (2)   Has exceeded 5% of the total flow received at the treatment
facility;
      (3)   Those waste contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts pursuant to
§ 307(a) of the Act 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a); or
      (4)   Whose discharge has a significant effect, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal
system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality or emissions
generated by the treatment system.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flows during normal operation, and shall adversely affect the collection
and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system as
defined by M.S. § 115.01, subd. 8, as it may be amended from time to time.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water,
wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause
adverse affects as defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities. (See NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.)
   USER. Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city’s wastewater disposal system.
   UTILITIES MANAGER or STREET COMMISSIONER. The Utilities Manager, or Street
Commissioner, or deputy, agent or representative thereof.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage. From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that
may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or
structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as
standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works including land
which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate
disposal of residues resulting from the treatment.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
   WEF. Water Environment Federation.
§ 53.02 STREET COMMISSIONER; CONTROL.
   The Street Commissioner shall have control and general supervision of all
public sewers and service connections in the city, and shall be responsible for
administering the provisions of this subchapter to the end that a proper and
efficient public sewer is maintained.
§ 53.03 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF WATER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage
or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this subchapter and the city’s NPDES/
SDS permit.
   (C)   Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   (D)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes from which wastewater is
discharged, and which is situated within the city and adjacent to any street,
alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be
located, a public sanitary sewer of the city, shall be required at the owner’s
expense to install a suitable service connection to the public sewer in
accordance with provisions of this subchapter, within 90 days of the date the
public sewer is operational; provided, the public sewer is within 200 feet of
the structure generating the wastewater. All future buildings constructed on
property adjacent to the public sewer shall be required to immediately connect
to the public sewer. If sewer connections are not made pursuant to this
section, an official 30-day notice shall be served instructing the affected
property owner to make said connection.
   (E)   (1)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in
compliance with a notice given under §
53.04 of this chapter, the city must undertake to have the connection made and
shall assess the cost thereof against the benefitted property. The assessment,
when levied, shall bear interest at the rate determined by the City Council and
shall be certified to the Auditor of the county and shall be collected and
remitted to the city in the same manner as assessments for local improvements.
      (2)   The rights of the city shall be in addition to any remedial or
enforcement provisions of this subchapter.
§ 53.04 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of §
53.03(D) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city.
The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as are deemed necessary to the city. Inspections will be conducted
by the county under a contract with the city. Private wastewater systems are
required to follow the county regulations and policies.
   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city
or its authorized representative. The city or its representative shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the city when work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice and shall be during
normal business hours.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all requirements of Minn. Rules Ch. 7080, as
it may be amended from time to time, entitled, “Individual Sewage Treatment
System Standards”. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer within 90 days in compliance with this subchapter, and
within 90 days any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater
disposal systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be broken to
permit drainage, and the tank or pit filled with suitable material. The Street
Commissioner will inspect the private wastewater system after pumped and
cleaned.
   (F)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA or the
Department of Health of the state.
§ 53.05 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any new connection(s) to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited
unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities including,
but not limited to, capacity for flow BOD5, and suspended solids, as determined
by the Utilities Manager and/or Street Commissioner.
   (B)   No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (C)   Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or authorized
agent and the party employed to do the work, and shall state the location, name
of owner, street number of the building to be connected and how occupied. No
person shall extend any private building drain beyond the limits of the
building or property for which the service connection permit has been given.
   (D)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or any other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the city. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of
activity and shall update their applications whenever substantial changes in
the volume or constituency of the wastewater occurs.
   (E)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   Old building sewers may not be used in connection with new buildings
unless PVC and only when they are found, on examination and test by the Street
Commissioner meet all requirements of this subchapter at the property owner’s
expense.
   (G)   When an existing building is removed for any reason, the sewer service
line must be capped off and approved by the Street Commissioner.
   (H)   The size, slopes, alignment, materials or construction of a building
sewer; and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the state’s Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in the
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (J)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or indirectly to the wastewater disposal system.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the state’s Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9.
All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight, and verified by
proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior
to installation. The design of the connection to the city sewer must be
approved by the Street Commissioner prior to construction.
   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection and inspection shall be made under the supervision of the Street
Commissioner or authorized representative thereof.
   (M)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. Any damage
to public property while excavating is the responsibility of the person or
party needing the work.
   (N)   A right-of-way permit is required for any excavation or obstruction of
the right-of-way areas located within the city.
   (O)   Any new sewer line or connection shall comply with MRWA trace wire
specifications.
   (P)   The property owner is responsible for service lines up to and
including connections to the main sewer.
   (Q)   For future connections of single-family dwelling units located inside
the city limits to the sanitary sewer system, a connection fee as set out in
the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances shall be paid to the City Administrator before
any such connection is made. For future connection of single-family dwelling
units located outside the city limits to the sanitary system, a connection fee
as set out in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances shall be paid to the City Administrator before
any such connection is made. For future connections of all purposes, other than
residential, the charge shall be dependent upon the size of the water service
connection to the premises as is set out in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances.
§ 53.06 GREASE INTERCEPTORS, SAND TRAPS AND GRINDER PUMPS.
   (A)   Grease interceptors required. All commercial restaurants, bakeries,
catering services, cafés, delis, dining rooms, hotels, motels, bars, taverns,
clubs, churches, schools, meat shops, community centers, hospitals, nursing
homes and establishments where food is prepared for sale either directly or
indirectly to the public shall install and maintain at the property owners’
expense grease interceptors in accordance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Sizing and other requirements for grease interceptors.
      (1)   A grease interceptor of sufficient size and efficiency shall be
installed in the waste line leading from sinks, drains or other fixtures.
Grease interceptors shall be placed as near as possible to the fixture and the
grease interceptor shall be vented. No food waste disposer or dishwashing
machine shall discharge into the building drainage system through a grease
interceptor. Sinks or other fixtures served by grease interceptors shall be
trapped and vented ahead of the grease interceptor. Interceptors shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Any
new facility requiring a grease interceptor shall install an outside
interceptor.
      (2)   Grease interceptors shall have a grease retention capacity in
pounds of grease, of at least twice the flow-through rate, in gallons per
minute; or be of a type and capacity approved by the city.
      (3)   Grease interceptors shall be equipped with devices to control the
rate of water flow through the interceptors so that it does not exceed the
rated flow of the interceptor. Air openings on flow control devices must
connect to the plumbing vent system.
   (C)   Sand traps. All commercial vehicle washes and automobile sales and
service establishments that engage in vehicle washing shall be equipped with an
adequate sand trap device. The device shall be of a size and type as per the
state’s Plumbing Code. Sand traps shall be installed and maintained at the
property owners’ expense.
   (D)   Grinder pumps. Grinder pumps are not allowed for food.
   (E)   Operation and cleaning. Each grease interceptor, sand trap and grinder
pump shall be installed to be readily accessible for cleaning, servicing and
maintaining. If installed below grade, safe access shall be provided.
Interceptors and traps shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by
regular removal of sand, solids, grease and any other substance that could
hinder the effectiveness of interceptors and traps in trapping the substances
and keeping them from entering the sanitary sewer system.
   (F)   Inspections.
      (1)   All property owners whose establishments are required to have a
grease interceptor and/or a sand trap and/or a grinder pump shall have their
devices constructed and placed in such a manner to allow ready access for
inspection by the city. Property owners shall maintain and make available,
during inspections by the Street Commissioner, a maintenance and inspection log
for each grease inteceptor and/or sandtrap. The city will inspect grease
interceptors, sand traps and grinder pumps on a regular basis for compliance
with this subchapter. Inspections will take place during regular business
hours.
      (2)   If, after inspection by the city, the grease interceptor and/or
sand trap and/or grinder pump is found to be out of compliance with this
subchapter, notice will be given in writing to the property owner or operator
stating the violation or violations, the actions required to correct the
violation and the time period when compliance must be achieved.
§ 53.07 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
water such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff, surface drainage or non-
contact cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet
on approval of the city and upon approval of the discharge permit by the MPCA.
   (C)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described m waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with
particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper,
wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel
or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater disposal system; and
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal
system. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act.
   (D)   The following described substances, materials, water or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works treatment
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
and/or soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise endanger lives,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The Street Commissioner, Chief
Wastewater Operator and/or Utilities Manager may set limitations lower than
limitations established in the regulations below if, in his or her opinion, the
more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming
his or her opinion as to acceptability of wastes, the Street Commissioner,
Chief Wastewater Operator and/or Utilities Manager will give consideration to
such factors as the quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, the city’s NPDES and/or SDS permit, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on
materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary
sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the Street Commissioner,
Chief Wastewater Operator and/or Utilities Manager as follows:
      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C), or
causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or
having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater
treatment works resulting in interference therein;
      (2)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65.5°C); and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral
origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not;
      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
“slug”, as defined herein;
      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded as defined in §
53.01 of this chapter. Garbage grinders shall not be connected to sanitary
sewers from hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places;
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (7)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage or ground
water;
      (8)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in
quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal system;
      (9)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Street Commissioner and/
or Utilities Manager in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations;
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing the following substances to such
degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the
wastewater treatment works is detrimental to the treatment processes, adversely
impacts land application, adversely affects the receiving waters, or is in
violation of standards pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act. The substances are
arsenic, cadmium, copper, cyanide, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, total
chromium, zinc and phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the city’s
wastewater treatment system;
      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater
disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation or ordinance of
any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory body; and
      (12)   Any water or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended solids of a
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
the materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by
specific written agreement subject to the provisions hereof.
   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in division (D) above, and/or which in the judgment
of the Street Commissioner, Chief Wastewater Operator and/or Utilities Manager
may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities,
processes or equipment; receiving waters and/or soil, vegetation and ground
water; on which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act and all addendums thereof;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating
and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
      (2)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design, installation and maintenance of the facilities and equipment
shall be made at the owners’ expense, and shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA. The pretreatment
or equalization systems are subject to random inspections and testing.
   (F)   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in divisions (C)
and (D) above, or contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards
or any state requirements.
   (G)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner(s).
   (H)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure,
or control manhole, with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes.
The structure shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed
by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by the owner to be
safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate
compliance with this subchapter and any special condition for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge. The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses
to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry
must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge
to assure that compliance with federal, state and local standards are being
met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses
to the city at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The
owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting
required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the
right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an independent
laboratory.
   (J)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be
determined on an Individual basis subject to approval by the Street
Commissioner, Chief Wastewater Operator and/or Utilities Manager.
   (K)   (1)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this subchapter. Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the Street Commissioner for review and approval prior to
construction of the facility. Review and approval of the plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the
user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Users shall notify the Street Commissioner and/or Utilities Manager
immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of substances of
wastewater in violation of this subchapter to enable countermeasures to be
taken by the Utilities Manager and/or Street Commissioner to minimize damage to
the wastewater treatment works. The notification will not relieve any user of
any liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment
system or treatment process or for any fines imposed by the city on account
thereof under any state and federal law. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (L)   No person, having charge of any building or other premises which
drains into the public sewer shall permit any substance or matter which may
form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer; within 60
days after receipt by written notice from the city, the owner shall install a
suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists,
shall clean out, repair or alter the same and perform, such other work as the
Street Commissioner may deem necessary. Upon the owner’s refusal or neglect to
install a catch basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair or alter the same
after the period of 60 days, the Street Commissioner may cause the work to be
completed at the expense of the owner or representative thereof.
   (M)   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the
purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause the work to be done as the
Street Commissioner may direct. Each day after 30 days that a person neglects
or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and
the Street Commissioner may then cause the work to be done, and recover from
the owner or agent the expense thereof by an action in the name of the city.
   (N)   The owner or operator of a motor vehicle washing or servicing facility
shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times a catch basin
or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil, dirt or any
mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
   (O)   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this subchapter, the city may assess against any person the cost
of repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result
of the discharge of prohibited wastes by the person, and may collect such
assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in
any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.
   (P)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the
industrial concern, providing that national categorical pretreatment standards
and the city’s NPDES and/or state disposal system permit limitations are not
violated.
Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.08 DAMAGE TO WASTEWATER FACILITIES.
   No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of a
misdemeanor.
Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 INSPECTORS; POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Street Commissioner or other duly authorized employees of the
city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observations, measurement,
sampling and testing pertinent to the discharges to the city’s sewer system in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Street Commissioner, Public Utilities Manager or other duly
authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial
processes which have a direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to
the wastewater collection system. An industry may withhold information
considered confidential; however, the industry must establish that the
revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an
advantage to competitors.
   (C)   The Street Commissioner or other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities
lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.10 SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a sewer service charge system whereby all
revenue collected from users of the wastewater treatment facilities will be
used to affect all expenditures incurred for annual operation, maintenance and
replacement and for debt service on capital expenditure incurred in
constructing the wastewater treatment works.
   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation maintenance
and replacement costs of the treatment works, based on the users proportionate
contribution to the total wastewater loading from all users.
   (C)   Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local capital costs
as determined by the City Council.
   (D)   Sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment
facility shall be determined and fixed in a “sewer service charge system”
developed, and approved by the city’s Public Utilities Commission.
   (E)   Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a separate
fund known as the “Sewer Service Fund”. Income from revenues collected will be
expended to offset the cost of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement
for the facility and to retire the debt for capital expenditures.
   (F)   The sewer service charges established shall not prevent the assessment
of additional charges to users who discharge wastes with concentrations greater
than normal domestic strength or wastes of unusual character or contractual
agreements with the users.
   (G)   Delinquent accounts shall be certified to the City Administrator, who
shall prepare an assessment roll each year providing for assessment of the
delinquent amounts against the respective properties served. The assessment
roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption on or before September 1 of
each year. Upon the adoption, the Administrator shall certify the assessment
roll to the County Auditor for collection along with taxes. Assessments shall
bear interest at a rate of 8% per annum.
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of §§
53.01 through
53.10 of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any person, who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (B)(1) above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction thereof, shall be fined as set forth in §
10.98 each violation. Each day in which any violation occurs shall be deemed as
a separate offense.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
53.01 through
53.10 of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of the violation.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Section
Traffic Regulations
   
70.01   Highway Traffic Regulations Act incorporated
   
70.02   Engine retarder brakes
   
70.03   Unreasonable acceleration; reckless driving
   
70.04   Motorized vehicles on park trails
Parking Rules
   
70.15   General parking requirements
   
70.16   Restricted parking during snow season
   
70.17   Parking semi-trucks in residential areas
 
   
70.99   Penalty
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 70.01 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ACT INCORPORATED.
   The regulatory provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to
time, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance regulating the use of highways,
streets and alleys within the city and are hereby incorporated in and made a
part of this traffic code as completely as if set out here in full.
(Ord. 284, passed 9-14-1998) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 ENGINE RETARDER BRAKES.
   The use of engine retarder brakes is prohibited within the city limits,
except in an emergency.
(Ord. 284, passed 9-14-1998) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION; RECKLESS DRIVING.
   (A)   Unreasonable acceleration prohibited. No person shall accelerate any
motor vehicle with an unnecessary exhibition of speed on any street, driveway
or parking lot, whether public or private property, within the city. Prima
facie evidence of unnecessary exhibition of speed shall be squealing or
screeching sounds emitted by the tires, or the throwing of dirt by the tires of
the vehicle, or both.
   (B)   Driving conduct regulated. No person shall drive a motor vehicle
within the city in such a manner that it could endanger person(s) or property
within the city.
(Ord. 325, passed 4-2-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON PARK TRAILS.
   (A)   Definition of terms. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY PARK TRAILS. Any bituminous, concrete, gravel or grass trail or
walkway constructed by the city as a city park trail. The TRAILS are not
specifically limited to the city park and may be placed in other parts of the
city, such as playgrounds and dikes.
      MOTORIZED VEHICLES. Any motorized type of transportation, to include, but
not be limited to, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles, scooters and
automobiles.
   (B)   Motorized vehicles on city park trails. No person shall operate a
motorized vehicle, except authorized maintenance and/or emergency vehicles on a
city park trail.
(Ord. 259, passed 9-21-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
PARKING RULES
§ 70.15 GENERAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every vehicle parked upon any street with a curb shall be parked
parallel to the right-hand curb and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle
within 12 inches of the curb, except on streets where angle parking is required
and designated. On any street, every vehicle parked shall be parked with the
vehicle facing the curb or away from the traveled portion of the street at an
angle of approximately 45 degrees from the direction of travel on the adjacent
traffic lane and aligned between the painted marking on the street or curb
indicating the parked space. No vehicle longer than a standard manufactured
passenger vehicle or longer than a manufactured light-duty pickup truck or van
rated at one ton or less and no vehicle with a trailer attached shall be parked
in any angle parking or space. On any street without a curb, every vehicle
shall be parked to the right of the main traveled portion thereof and parallel
thereto facing the direction of travel in the adjacent traffic lane in such a
manner as not to interfere with the free flow of traffic.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle and let it stand, whether attended or
unattended, upon any street in the city for longer than 24 hours.
   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle and let it stand, whether attended or
unattended, upon any street in the city at a distance of less than 25 feet from
the intersection of street curbs or at any other distance from intersection
curbs; providing that, such a distance is approved by the City Council and
appropriately posted and marked; nor shall any person park a vehicle where the
curb is painted yellow or appropriately marked to indicate no parking.
   (D)   No person shall place or leave any property or other article, except a
vehicle, as herein defined, on any street in the city at any time.
   (E)   No person shall park or let stand, whether attended or unattended, any
vehicle upon the streets in the city for a longer period of time than that is
posted or appropriately marked; provided, however, that, such time limitations,
postings and markings have been approved by the City Council. This section,
however, shall not prevent the city’s Police Department from regulating and
enforcing emergency parking situations.
   (F)   No person shall park a vehicle or let it stand, whether attended or
unattended, so that any portion thereof shall project and extend over the
boundary line of any private or public driveway extended at right angles from
the curb line intersected by the driveway. No person shall park a vehicle where
it blocks or partially blocks any sidewalk or pathway designated for walking or
bicycle use.
   (G)   The regulations and limitations contained in this subchapter shall not
be construed as a change to those laws provided in the state’s Uniform Traffic
Code, but shall provide regulation in addition to those contained in the Act.
   (H)   Any vehicle parked on any street in the city during the hours in which
lights are required by state law shall be equipped with lighted parking lights
or reflectors, both front and rear, of a type approved by the Commissioner of
Public Safety.
(Ord. 327, passed 11-19-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 RESTRICTED PARKING DURING SNOW SEASON.
   (A)   (1)   No owner or driver of a vehicle shall park the vehicle or permit
any vehicle to remain on any street between November 1 and May 1 in the city
after accumulation of snow to a depth of one inch or more, unless otherwise
posted.
      (2)   This prohibition shall not apply on any block after it has become
substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb.
   (B)   If any vehicle is parked, abandoned or left standing in violation of
division (A) above, the same may be summarily removed, without notice to the
owner, at the direction of the city’s Police Department. The removal shall be
at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. The owner of the vehicle shall pay
the city all costs incurred for the removal of the vehicle including, but not
limited to, towing, storage and parking citation. After all costs are paid, the
vehicle will be released to the owner.
(Ord. 327, passed 11-19-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17 PARKING SEMI-TRUCKS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to park a semi-trailer, truck tractor or combination
thereof, or any other vehicle with more than 12,000 pounds of gross vehicle
weight, or any vehicle designed, used or maintained for towing other motor
vehicles or equipment, upon any street, alley, private road, driveway or upon
any public property which is within an area zoned as residential, except when
loading or unloading is actively taking place.
   (B)   The vehicle described in division (A) above may be parked on private
property under the following conditions:
      (1)   If the private property owner has granted permission;
      (2)   If the above vehicle is not in violation of any other part of this
subchapter; and
      (3)   If the above vehicle is not parked there for more than 24 hours.
   (C)   No truck tractor engines or auxiliary motors on any vehicle or trailer
shall be allowed to operate, except when actively loading, unloading or
performing service.
   (D)   No semi-trailer shall be left unattended on any city street or parking
lot.
(Ord. 327, passed 11-19-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of the statutes adopted by reference in §
70.01 of this chapter is a violation when it occurs within the city. Any person
thus violating any provision of §
70.01 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; but, if a minimum fine
or imprisonment is prescribed by M.S. §§ 169.01 et seq., as it may be amended
from time to time, for an offense, the penalty shall apply to a person
convicted of the same offense under §
70.01 of this chapter.
   (C)   Anyone violating §
70.03 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §
70.04 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (E)   Violation of §§
70.15 through
70.17 of this chapter shall be considered a petty misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, may be punished by the maximum penalty allowed by state law for a
petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 259, passed 9-21-1992; Ord. 284, passed 9-14-1998; Ord. 325, passed 4-2-
2007; Ord. 327, passed 11-19-2007)
Cross-reference:
   For specific fines for divisions (B) to (E), see §
10.98
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Generally
   
71.01   Purpose and intent
   
71.02   Definitions
Snowmobiles
   
71.15   Limitations of operations
   
71.16   Operation generally
   
71.17   Equipment
   
71.18   Owner responsibility
   
71.19    Leaving snowmobile unattended
   
71.20   Chasing animals forbidden
   
71.21   Enforcement
Recreational Motor Vehicles
   
71.35   Recreational vehicle operation requirements
   
71.36   Street crossings
   
71.37   Hours of operation
   
71.38   Minimum equipment requirements
   
71.39   Designation of public areas for use
   
71.40   Enforcement
 
   
71.99   Penalty
GENERALLY
§ 71.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide reasonable regulations
for the use of special and recreational motor vehicles on public property and,
in conformance with private property, in the city.
   (B)   This subchapter is not intended to allow what the Minnesota Statutes
prohibit or to prohibit what the Minnesota Statutes expressly allow. This
subchapter is intended to ensure the public safety and to prevent a public
nuisance.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 366, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of Natural Resources acting directly or
through his or her authorized agent.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Aitkin.
   OPERATION. To ride in or on, and control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates, or is in actual physical control of, a
snowmobile.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property that may be used for all of the public, subject to
reasonable regulations by a governmental body. PUBLIC PROPERTY includes, but is
not limited to, city parks, city parking lots and public school parking lots
and grounds.
   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle
propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes
including, but not limited to trail bike, off-highway motorcycle, as defined by
M.S. § 84.787, subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time, or other all-
terrain vehicle as defined by M.S. §§ 84.90 and 84.92, subd. 8 through 10 as it
may be amended from time to time, or motorized go-carts, hovercraft, or motor
vehicle licensed for highway operation, which is being used for off-road
recreational purposes, but not including motorized golf carts, personal
electric mobility devices, motorized foot scooters, neighborhood electric
vehicles, medium-speed electric vehicles, or mini-trucks.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
steered by skis or runners.
   STREET, HIGHWAY or ALLEY. The entire width between boundary lines of any way
or place when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 367, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 366, passed 9-7-
2021; Ord. 367, passed 9-27-2021)
SNOWMOBILES
§ 71.15 LIMITATIONS OF OPERATIONS.
   Snowmobiles may be operated only in the following locations within the city:
   (A)   On the operator's property subject to the provisions of this
subchapter;
   (B)   On privately owned property if the operator has permission from the
property owner; or, on privately owned property if the property owner has
posted a clearly visible notice indicating “Snowmobiles Allowed” or words
substantially similar; and
   (C)   On city streets only when the operation is necessary to gain access to
designated snowmobile trails, private property, to conduct commerce, or areas
which, by Minnesota Statutes, may be used by snowmobiles provided that:
      (1)   The use of any street is as a means of traveling in as direct a
route as practicable to a destination for the use of snowmobile.
      (2)   The operator uses the most right-hand lane available for traffic or
as close as practicable to the edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle stopped in that lane or proceeding in the same
direction.
      (3)   The operator not exceeds the posted speed limit.
      (4)   If on public property, use is allowed only if clearly posted with
signs designating the area or specific areas as snowmobile operating areas or
trails.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 367, passed 9-27-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.16 OPERATION GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person under 14 years of age shall make a direct crossing of a
trunk, county state aid, or county highway as the operator of a snowmobile, or
operate a snowmobile upon a street or highway within a municipality.
   (B)   A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may
make a direct crossing of a trunk, county state aid, or county highway only if
he or she has in his or her immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety
certificate issued by the Commissioner.
   (C)   No person under the age of 14 years shall operate a snowmobile on any
public land or water under jurisdiction of the Commissioner unless accompanied
by one of the following listed persons on the same or an accompanying
snowmobile: his or her parent; legal guardian; or other person 18 years of age
or older. However, a person 12 years of age or older may operate a snowmobile
on public lands or waters under the jurisdiction of the Commission if he or she
has in his or her immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate
issued by the Commissioner.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile
in the following unsafe or harassing ways:
      (1)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the
surrounding circumstances;
      (2)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto;
      (3)   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
which disturbs annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons;
      (4)   On any sidewalk, bike path, walking trail, Central City Park, or
within 200 feet of the ice skating rinks in the city park, unless these areas
are posted for authorized use.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 367, passed 9-27-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17 EQUIPMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile any place within the
limits of the city unless it is equipped with the following:
   (A)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and in constant
operation and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation.
   (B)   No person shall use a muffler cutout by-pass, straight pipe or similar
device on snowmobile motors and the exhaust system shall not emit or produce a
sharp popping or cracking sound.
   (C)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
snowmobile under any conditions of operation.
   (D)   At least one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. The
head lamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes
of oncoming vehicle operators.
   (E)   At least one red tail lamp having a minimum candle power of sufficient
intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
   (F)   The equipment specified in (D) and (E) above is to be in operating
condition when the vehicle is operated between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 367, passed 9-27-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.18 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile
to be operated contrary to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 367, passed 9-27-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.19 LEAVING SNOWMOBILE UNATTENDED.
   Every person leaving a snowmobile in a public place shall lock the ignition,
remove the key and take the same with him or her.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 367, passed 9-27-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.20 CHASING ANIMALS FORBIDDEN.
   It shall be unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
animal, wild or domestic, with a snowmobile.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 367, passed 9-27-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.21 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the City Council, by and through the city’s Police
Department, to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and the City Council
may, by resolution, delegate to other officers or agencies power to enforce
particular provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 367, passed 9-27-2021)
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 71.35 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a recreational motor vehicle:
   (A)   On private property without written or oral permission of the owner of
the property. (Written permission may be given by a posted notice of any kind
or description, so long as it specifies the kind of vehicles allowed that the
owner, occupant, or lessee prefers, such as by saying “Recreational Vehicles
Allowed”, “Trail Bikes Allowed”, “All-Terrain Vehicles Allowed”, or words
substantially similar.)
   (B)   On publicly owned land, including school, exclusive city streets, park
property, playgrounds, and recreation areas except where permitted by this
chapter.
   (C)   On city streets only when the operation is necessary to gain access to
designated ATV trails, private property, or to conduct commerce, which by state
statutes may be used by ATVs provided that:
      (1)   The use of any street as means of traveling is in as direct a route
as practicable to a destination for the use of an ATV;
      (2)   The operator uses the most right-hand lane available for traffic or
as close as possible to the edge of the roadway except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle stopped in that lane or proceeding in the same
direction;
      (3)   The operator does not exceed the posted speed limit;
      (4)   If on public property, use is allowed only if clearly posted with
signs designating the area of specific areas as ATV operating areas or trails.
   (D)   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise that
disturbs, annoys, or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons.
   (E)   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian
travel.
   (F)   At a place while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
unlawful controlled substances or unlawful drugs.
   (G)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the
surrounding circumstances.
   (H)   At any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or to cause injury or
damage thereto.
   (I)   On any public street, highway, or right-of-way unless registered
pursuant to Minnesota law.
   (J)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over, or kill any animal, wild or
domestic.
   (K)   By halting any recreational motor vehicle carelessly or heedlessly in
disregard of the rights or the safety of others or in a manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or in excess of 25
miles per hour on publicly owned lands.
   (L)   Without headlight and taillight lighted at all times if the vehicle is
equipped with headlight and taillight.
   (M)   Without a functioning stoplight if so equipped.
   (N)   Without a brake operational by either hand or foot.
   (O)   Helmet and seat belts required.
      (1)   A person less than 18 years of age shall not ride as a passenger or
as an operator of a recreational vehicle regulated herein on public land,
public waters, or on a public road right-of-way unless wearing a safety helmet
approved by the commissioner of Public Safety.
      (2)   A person less than 18 years of age shall not ride as a passenger or
as an operator of a vehicle regulated herein without wearing a seat belt when
such seat belt has been provided by the manufacturer.
   (P)   All-terrain vehicles and passengers.
      (1)   No person under 18 years of age shall operate a Class 1 all-terrain
vehicle while carrying a passenger. A person 18 years of age or older may
operate a Class 1 all terrain vehicle carrying one passenger. For the purposes
of this section a CLASS 1 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE means an all-terrain vehicle that
has a total dry weight of less than 1,000 pounds.
      (2)   No person under 18 years of age shall operate a Class 2 all-terrain
vehicle while carrying a passenger. A person 18 years of age or older may
operate a Class 2 all terrain vehicle while carrying a passenger, or up to the
number of passengers for which the vehicle was designed, whichever is greater.
For the purposes of this section a CLASS 2 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE means an all-
terrain vehicle that has a total dry weight of 1,000 to 1,800 pounds.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 366, passed 9-7-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.36 STREET CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No person under 12 years of age operating the vehicles regulated
herein shall make a direct crossing of any street, highway, or public right-of-
way; or operate a vehicle regulated herein on a public street, highway, or road
right-of-way; or operate a vehicle regulated herein on public lands or waters,
except that a person at least ten years of age but under 12 years of age may
operate an all-terrain vehicle with an engine capacity up to 90cc on public
lands or waters if accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
   (B)   An all-terrain vehicle may make a direct crossing of a public road
right-of-way provided:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the road and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and
safe crossing.
      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the road.
      (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard.
      (4)   In crossing a divided road, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of the road with another public road.
      (5)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 366, passed 9-7-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.37 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Use of vehicles regulated herein is allowed during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 71.38 MINIMUM EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant operation
to reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for
operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass, straight pipe, or
similar device on a recreational motor vehicle motor. The exhaust system shall
not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.
   (B)   Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement of and to stop and
hold under any conditions of operation.
   (C)   At least one clear lamp shall be attached to the front with sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. The
head lamp shall be so that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an
oncoming vehicle operator. It shall also be equipped with at least one red tail
lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red
light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the hours
of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. This equipment shall be
required and shall be in operating condition when the vehicle is operated
between the hours of one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before
sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 366, passed 9-7-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.39 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC AREAS FOR USE.
   (A)   The Council may designate areas and exclusive city streets and or
alleys for use of recreational motor vehicles by approval of a resolution by a
majority of the members of the City Council. The areas designated may be
changed from time to time by the City Council. Any area designated shall be
published in the official newspaper of the city in a conspicuous place after
the approval. If an area is changed, the change shall be published in like
manner in the official newspaper of the city. An up-to-date map of any
designated park areas open for recreational motor vehicle use shall be kept on
file in the office of the City Clerk, who shall provide on request a copy of
the map together with the applicable rules, regulations, and this ordinance to
each person requesting the information from the city.
   (B)   Unless designated by the City Council as an area for recreational
motor vehicles, the use on city park property and city streets shall be
unlawful. Further, the use of city parks designated by the City Council shall
be in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Recreational motor vehicles may be used for the purpose of snow
removal, as long as the vehicle is used for removal of snow from driveway,
sidewalk, alley or yard.
   (D)   Recreational motor vehicles may be used on special events; for
example, a parade, as long as such use has been approved by the Aitkin Police
Chief or Aitkin City Council.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 366, passed 9-7-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.40 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the City Council by and through the city’s Police
Department to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and the City Council
may by resolution delegate to such other officers or agencies power to enforce
particular provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 366, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall fail to comply with any order made under the provisions
of this chapter, upon conviction thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days, or both.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 367, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 366, passed 9-7-
2021; Ord. 367, passed 9-27-2021)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
91.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
      
92.   NOISE CONTROL
      
93.   ANIMALS
      
94.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
95.   JUNK, ABANDONED VEHICLES AND PROPERTY
      
96.   CANNABIS
      
97.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
CHAPTER 90: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Burning Solid Fuels
   
90.01   Purpose
   
90.02   Applicability
   
90.03   Definitions
   
90.04   Requirements
   
90.05   Non-conforming uses
   
90.06   Burn barrels
   
90.07   Officers and enforcement
Burning in City Limits
   
90.20   Definitions
   
90.21   Hours
   
90.22   Public places
   
90.23   Burning bans
   
90.24   Burning permitted materials
 
   
90.99   Penalty
BURNING SOLID FUELS
§ 90.01 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare
and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the city by eliminating the air pollution and fire hazards of
external solid fuel-fired heating devices.
(Ord. 341, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 90.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to all solid fuel-fired heating devices in the
city.
   (B)   This subchapter does not apply to grilling or cooking food using
charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
   (C)   This subchapter does not include natural gas-fired fireplace logs or
traditional wood-burning fireplaces in the interior of a dwelling.
   (D)   This subchapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene,
natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating,
construction or maintenance activities.
   (E)   This subchapter does not apply to campfires.
(Ord. 341, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 90.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURN BARREL. A barrel or barrel-shaped type object used for burning leaves,
sticks, garbage or other combustibles.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, company or other
association.
   SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICE. A device designed for solid fuel combustion
so that usable heat is derived for a specific purpose, and includes solid fuel-
fired stoves, solid fuel-fired cooking stoves and combination fuel furnaces or
boilers which burn solid fuel, and outdoor wood-burning stoves or units. SOLID
FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICES do not include natural gas-fired fireplace logs or
traditional wood-burning fireplaces in the interior of a dwelling.
   STACKS or CHIMNEYS. Any vertical structure incorporated into a building, or
upon an outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device, and enclosing a flue or flues
that carry off smoke or exhaust from a solid fuel-fired heating device;
especially that part of such a structure extending above a roof.
   TRADITIONAL WOOD-BURNING FIREPLACE. A unit (usually masonry) which is built
into the wall of a house and has a permanent chimney. TRADITIONAL WOOD-BURNING
FIREPLACES may have glass doors or metal shields to cover the opening into the
room.
(Ord. 341, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 90.04 REQUIREMENTS.
   No solid fuel-fired heating devices designed and intended, and/or used, for
the purpose of heating the principal structure or another accessory structure
on the premises are allowed to be installed in the city.
(Ord. 341, passed 4-19-2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   The lawful use of any solid fuel-fired heating device existing at the
time of the effective date of this subchapter may be continued.
   (B)   No pre-existing, legal non-conforming solid fuel-fired heating device
shall hereafter be extended, enlarged or expanded.
   (C)   No pre-existing, legal non-conforming solid fuel-fired heating device
shall create any nuisance as described by §§
94.01 through
94.07 of this code of ordinances, as may be amended.
(Ord. 341, passed 4-19-2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 BURN BARRELS.
   Upon the effective date of this subchapter, burn barrels are no longer
allowed within the city.
(Ord. 341, passed 4-19-2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 OFFICERS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The city’s Building Inspector, Administrator, Police Department or other
designated official shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Emission
standards shall be enforced by the EPA.
(Ord. 341, passed 4-19-2010)
BURNING IN CITY LIMITS
§ 90.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED CONTAINER AND APPROVED PLACE. An approved place shall be a garden
or driveway of gravel, pavement or dirt cover. A fire shall be surrounded by
this gravel, dirt or pavement for a seven-foot radius.
   BURNING PERMITS. A burning permit for burning permitted matter in an area or
place not described in §
90.22 of this chapter must be obtained from the City Administrator’s office.
The BURNING PERMIT may be subject to restrictions placed by the city’s Fire
Chief or the state’s Department of Natural Resources.
   PERMITTED BURNING MATERIAL. Non-human-made organic matter such as leaves,
grass, untreated wood and tree branches.
(Ord. 265, passed - -1971; Ord. 341, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 90.21 HOURS.
   No fire shall be started before 5:00 p.m. unless otherwise stated on an
approved burning permit.
(Ord. 265, passed - -1971) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall start a fire on any street, alley, public park or any public
right-of-way unless written permission is received from the City Administrator.
(Ord. 265, passed - -1971) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 BURNING BANS.
   Due to dry or hazardous conditions or other certain conditions, the city’s
Fire Chief or the state’s Department of Natural Resources or the City
Administrator may declare that any or all types of burning be banned in the
city for any period of time.
(Ord. 265, passed - -1971) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.24 BURNING PERMITTED MATERIAL.
   Only permitted burning material, as defined in §
90.20 of this chapter, in an approved container or approved place, as defined
in §
90.20 of this chapter, shall be burned. Any person burning permitted material
not in an approved container shall first obtain a burning permit, as defined in
§
90.20 of this chapter.
(Ord. 265, passed - -1971)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of any provision of §§
90.01 through
90.07 of this chapter shall be considered a petty misdemeanor for each day that
§§
90.01 through
90.07 of this chapter are being violated.
   (C)   Any person violating any provisions of §§
90.20 through
90.24 of this chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine, plus the cost of prosecution in any case.
(Ord. 265, passed - -1971; Ord. 341, passed 4-19-2010)
Cross-reference:
   For specific fines, see §
10.98
CHAPTER 91: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
91.01   Findings, purpose and intent
   
91.02   Election to manage the public right-of-way
   
91.03   Definitions
   
91.04   Administration
   
91.05   Registration; occupancy and information
   
91.06   Reporting obligations
   
91.07   Permit requirement; application; issuance; fees
   
91.08   Patching and restoration
   
91.09   Joint applications
   
91.10   Supplementary applications
   
91.11   Other obligations
   
91.12   Permit denial
   
91.13   Installation requirements
   
91.14   Inspection
   
91.15   Work done without permit
   
91.16   Supplementary notification
   
91.17   Revocation of permit
   
91.18   Mapping data
   
91.19   Location, relocation of facilities
   
91.20   Damage to other facilities
   
91.21   Right-of-way vacation
   
91.22   Indemnification and liability
   
91.23   Abandoned and unusable facilities
   
91.24   Appeal
   
91.25   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
§ 91.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this chapter relating to right-of-
way permits and administration. This chapter imposes reasonable regulation on
the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its
rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to
complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this
chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear
financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this chapter provides for
recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public
rights-of-way.
   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws,
Ch. 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79,
237.81 and 238.086 (the “Act”), as they may be amended from time to time, and
the other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-
of-way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules
parts 7819.0050 through 7819.9950, where possible. To the extent any provision
of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules,
that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory
and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the
regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects pursuant M.S.
§ 237.163, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. References hereafter
to “sections” are unless otherwise specified references to sections in this
chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   CITY. The City of Aitkin, Minnesota. (For purposes of §
91.22 of this chapter, CITY means its elected officials, officers, employees
and agents.)
   COMMISSION. The state’s Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at the permittee’s option:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; and
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct the right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, the cost to achieve
a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the permit is
issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in Plates 1 to 13, set
forth in Minn. Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration as established by
permit.
   DEPARTMENT. The Street Department and the Public Utilities Commission of the
city.
   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the Director to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
   DIRECTOR. The Street Commissioner or the Public Utilities Manager, or their
designee.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that:
      (1)   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of
property; or
      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to
restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair or maintain facilities
in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION PERMIT
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in §
91.07(D) of this chapter.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of the person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions
for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right-of-way permit applications;
inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting,
protecting or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the
adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed
after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking
right-of-way permits. MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, the fees
and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minn. Session Laws
1997, Ch. 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as they may be amended from time to
time; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs
related to appeals taken pursuant to §
91.24 of this chapter.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in §
91.07(D) of this chapter.
   PATCH or PATCHING.
      (1)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A
PATCH consists of:
         (a)   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base; and
         (b)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
      (2)   A PATCH is considered full restoration only when the pavement is
included in the city’s five-year project plan.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate or gravel.
   PERMIT. The meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of the state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or non-profit, and whether natural, corporate or political.
   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions
of this chapter.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified
in writing that they have been put on probation.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the city has an
interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and
utility easements of the city. A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the airwaves
above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who:
      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any
right-of-way; or
      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-
of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to Plates 1 to 13 of the state’s
Public Utilities Commission Rules.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit,
or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.
      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user, as defined by M.S. §
237.162, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that
is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a
right under law, franchise or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes:
      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility, as defined in M.S. §
216B.02, subds. 4 and 6, as they may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information;
      (3)   Services of a cable communications system, as defined in M.S. Ch.
238, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by the city;
      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Ch. 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (6)   Water and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or
heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer’s premises.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already
been issued.
   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting
telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this
chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S. Ch. 238,
as it may be amended from time to time, and telecommunication activities
related to providing natural gas or electric energy services whether provided
by a public utility, as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be amended from
time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under
M.S. Ch. 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time to time, or a
cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, as it may be
amended from time to time, are not TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USERS.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature, except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
   TWO-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next two years.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.05 REGISTRATION; OCCUPANCY AND INFORMATION.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Registration. Each person who occupies, uses or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way, or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will
consist of providing application information.
      (2)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install,
repair, remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or
any part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the
city.
      (3)   Exceptions. Nothing herein relieves a person from complying with
the provisions of the M.S. Ch. 216D, Gopher One Call Law, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (B)   Registration information.
      (1)   Information required. The information provided to the city at the
time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
         (b)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information
regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be
provided at the time of registration and kept up to date;
         (c)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
            1.   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
            2.   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the:
               a.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant,
its officers, agents, employees and permittees; and
               b.   Placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-
of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees,
including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from
completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of
property.
            3.   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all coverages;
            4.   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
            5.   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, worker’s compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
         (d)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies;
         (e)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate
required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to
time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and
         (f)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the state’s Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the certificate
from the Commission or other state or federal agency.
      (2)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge
of any change.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.06 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December
1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground
facilities with the city. The plan shall be submitted using a format designated
by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city to be
necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of
excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of
all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
“next-year project”); and
         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated
beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years
following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five-year project”).
      (3)   The term “project” in this section shall include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
      (4)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for
inspection in the city’s office a composite list of all projects of which the
city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for
keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project
in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other
registrants of all changes in the list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant
listed by the other registrant.
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.07 PERMIT REQUIREMENT; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE; FEES.
   (A)   Permit requirement.
      (1)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained
the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.
         (a)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a
registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the permit
and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-
way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
         (b)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-
of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project.
      (2)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-
way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless:
         (a)   The person makes a supplementary application for another right-
of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and
         (b)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.
      (3)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000
subpart 3, and notwithstanding division (A)(2) above, the city shall establish
and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established
from time to time by City Council resolution.
      (4)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
   (B)   Permit applications. Application for a permit is made to the city.
Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete
only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
      (1)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities;
      (3)   Payment of money due the city for:
         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city; and
         (d)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
      (4)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing; and
      (5)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
   (C)   Issuance of permit; conditions.
      (1)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
      (2)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use.
   (D)   Permit fees.
      (1)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
         (a)   The city’s management costs; and
         (b)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
      (2)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee which shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city
management costs.
      (3)   Payment of permit fees.
         (a)   No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued
without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees.
         (b)   The city may allow applicant to pay the fees within 30 days of
billing.
      (4)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the
city has revoked for a breach as stated in §
91.17 of this chapter are not refundable.
      (5)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.08 PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch his, her or its own
work. The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way
or to restore the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, the
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, within one
year following the restoration, the pavement settles due to the permittee’s
improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of
billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, he, she or it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit
post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn.
Rules part 7819.3000.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules part 7819.1100.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by the permittee or his, her or its agents.
The permittee, upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration
work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. The work
shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from
the city.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city, at its option, may do the work. In that event, the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
the permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under
the construction performance bond.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.09 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation
performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more
registrants or a single application, are required to apply for a permit.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.10 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater
area:
      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby; and
      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.11 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve the permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other
applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including, but not limited to,
M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System), as
they may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560. A permittee
shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established
rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and only with the approval of
the Director, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for the work or
between the period of October 1 to May 1 each year.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way.
      (1)   A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural
free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may
not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance
with city parking regulations.
      (2)   The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the
defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including, but not limited
to, horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch.
7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground
utilities before excavating, as determined by the Director.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.12 PERMIT DENIAL.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.13 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
parts 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so
far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they
may be amended from time to time. Installation of service laterals shall be
performed in accordance with Minn. Rules Ch. 7560 and these ordinances. Service
lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions
set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in
§
91.18 of this chapter. Any ferncos and any connection to main sewers must be
completely encased with concrete.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.14 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
with Minn. Rules part 7819.1300.
   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site available to
the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of Director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work which
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Director that
the violation has been corrected. If the proof has not been presented within
the required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to § 
91.17 of this chapter.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.15 WORK DONE WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of any event
regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The registrant
may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency
situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant’s
facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each
registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event,
the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the
normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required by the city,
deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-
way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.16 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city
of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.17 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in the permitted time; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
91.14 of this chapter.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy the violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. The permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or permittee’s failure to timely submit an acceptable
plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, the permittee’s
failure to so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one
full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, the permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked
and the permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except
for emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with the revocation.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.18 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules parts
7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of any work
pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director accurate maps
and drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all equipment installed,
owned and maintained by the permittee. The maps and drawings shall include the
horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be
provided consistent with the city’s electronic mapping system, when practical
or as a condition imposed by the Director. Failure to provide maps and drawings
pursuant to this division (A) shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder’s
registration.
   (B)   Service laterals.
      (1)   (a)   All permits issued for the installation or repair of service
laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules part 7560.0150,
subpart 2, shall require the permittee’s use of appropriate means of
establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the
service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the Director reasonably
requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the Director
evidence satisfactory to the Director of the installed service lateral
locations. Compliance with this division (B) and with applicable Gopher State
One Call Law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after 12-
31-2005, shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for:
            1.   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement
project including those under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to
time; and
            2.   City approval of performance under development agreements or
other subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be
amended from time to time.
         (b)   The Director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method
of providing the information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and
accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in the
revocation of the permit issued for the work or for future permits to the
offending permittee or its subcontractors.
      (2)   Mapping and installation of locating wire on any service for sewer,
storm sewer, water or electric shall also be done by the city department
responsible for the utility. Service must be kept uncovered until the city has
completed this and approved backfilling to proceed. Any service covered without
approval shall be uncovered at the permittee’s expense. Appropriate city
department must be notified a minimum of 48 hours before any excavation begins,
not counting weekends or holidays. For any inspections or mapping needed during
non-business hours, the permittee shall pay the city applicable overtime rates.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.19 LOCATION, RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   (1)   General. Placement, location and relocation of facilities must
comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules parts
7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit
authority otherwise available to cities.
      (2)   Corridors.
         (a)   The city may assign specific area within the right-of-way, or
any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
         (b)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a
position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later
than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the
registrant.
      (3)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any
facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be
deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at
law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
      (4)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making the decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way and future city plans for
public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be
in the public interest.
   (B)   All registrants, permittees, property owners, contractors or others
performing work in the city’s right-of-way areas will comply with the
requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09, as they may be amended from
time to time (One Call Excavation Notice System). Any registrant whose
facilities are less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall
notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact
location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.20 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   (A)   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within 30 days from the date of billing.
   (B)   (1)   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing
any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damage.
      (2)   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the city’s
response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.21 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minn. Rules part 7819.3200.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.22 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.1250.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.23 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the city.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.24 APPEAL.
   (A)   A right-of-way user, as follows, may have the denial, revocation, fee
imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council:
      (1)   Has been denied registration;
      (2)   Has been denied a permit;
      (3)   Has had a permit revoked;
      (4)   Believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with M.S. §
237.163, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (5)   Disputes a determination of the Director regarding §
91.18 of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the
denial, revocation, fee imposition or decision will be in writing and supported
by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 91.25 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 321, passed 11-6-2006)
CHAPTER 92: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
92.01   General prohibition
   
92.02   Exhaust
   
92.03   Defective vehicles or loads
   
92.04   Loading, unloading and unpacking
   
92.05   Participation in noisy parties or gatherings
   
92.06   Radios, tapes and disc players
   
92.07   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising and the like
   
92.08   Hourly restrictions on certain operations
   
92.09   Enforcement duties
   
92.10   Civil remedies
   
92.11   Noise impact statements
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   (A)   No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and loudly
audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of any person or precludes
his or her enjoyment of property or affects his or her property’s value.
   (B)   This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions
of the remaining sections of this chapter.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 EXHAUST.
   No person shall discharge the exhaust or permit the discharge of the exhaust
of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor
vehicle or snowmobile except through a muffler or other device that effectively
prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable
state laws and regulations.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 DEFECTIVE VEHICLES OR LOADS.
   No person shall use any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create
loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 LOADING, UNLOADING AND UNPACKING.
   No person shall create loud or excessive noise in loading, unloading or
unpacking any vehicle.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 PARTICIPATION IN NOISY PARTIES OR GATHERINGS.
   No person shall participate in any party or gathering of people giving rise
to noise, unreasonable disturbance of the peace, quiet or repose of another
person. When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating such a
noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than the
owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse
immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police
officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of the premises who has knowledge of
the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the disturbance
is stopped. Special events approved by the City Council do not apply to this
section.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 RADIOS, TAPES AND DISC PLAYERS.
   No person shall use, operate or permit to be played any radio receiving set,
tape or disc player, musical instrument or other machine or device used for
producing or reproducing sound in such manner, considering the time and place
and the purpose for which the sound is produced, as to disturb the peace, quiet
or repose of a person or persons of ordinary sensibilities.
   (A)   The play, use, operation of any radio, tape or disc player, musical
instrument or other machine or device used for the production or reproduction
of sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet
from the machine or device shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this
section.
   (B)   When sound violating this section is produced or reproduced by a
machine or device that is located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle’s owner is
guilty of the violation; provided, however, that, if the vehicle’s owner is not
present at the time of the violation, the person in charge or in control of the
vehicle at the time of the violation is guilty of the violation.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 LOUDSPEAKERS, AMPLIFIERS FOR ADVERTISING AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall operate or permit the use or operation of any loudspeaker,
sound amplifier or other device for the production or reproduction of sound on
a street or other public place for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any commercial establishment or
vehicle.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 HOURLY RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawnmower,
power hedge clipper, chainsaw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or other
similar domestic power maintenance equipment except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Snow removal equipment, public utilities equipment, Street
Department equipment and state or county equipment are exempt from this
provision.
   (B)   Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in
any residential district, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (C)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric-, diesel- or
gas-powered machine or other power equipment, except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 ENFORCEMENT DUTIES.
   (A)   The Police Department, or other specified officer or agency, shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   These personnel may inspect private premises other than private
residences and shall make all reasonable efforts to prevent violations of this
chapter.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005)
§ 92.10 CIVIL REMEDIES.
   This chapter may be enforced by injunction, action for abatement or other
appropriate civil remedies.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005)
§ 92.11 NOISE IMPACT STATEMENTS.
   The City Council may require any person applying for a change in zoning
classification or for a permit or license for any structure, operation,
process, installation or alteration or project that may be considered a
potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement. The City Council
shall evaluate each statement and take its evaluation into account in approving
or disapproving the license or permit applied for or the zoning change
requested.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine or imprisonment,
or both. In all cases, the city shall be entitled to collect the costs of
prosecution to the extent outlined by law, rules of criminal procedure and
rules of the court. Each act of violation and each day a violation occurs or
continues constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-19-2005)
Cross-reference:
   For specific fines, see §
10.98
CHAPTER 93: ANIMALS
Section
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   License requirements
   
93.03   Nuisances
   
93.04   Running at large
   
93.05   Dog bites or rabid animal
   
93.06   Number of animals
   
93.07   Impounding
   
93.08   Animal shelter policy
 
   
93.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Notice of Impoundment
   
Appendix B: Shelter release form
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person appointed by the City Council to assist
in the enforcement of this chapter or who contracted with the city for the
purpose of pick-up and transport of animals at large within the city and is in
charge of care and general operation of the city animal shelter.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under immediate control of
the owner or other accompanying person, either by leash or otherwise. In order
to be considered under immediate control of the accompanying person, the dog
must at all times be within at least 15 feet of the person, be responsive to
the commands of the person and not be endangering or causing damage in any way
to any person or property.
   HABITUAL BARKING. Barking for repeated intervals of at least five minutes
with less than one minute of interruption. The barking must be audible off of
the owner’s or caretaker’s property.
(Ord. 302, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 93.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall keep any dog within the city without securing a license from
the City Administrator’s office or Animal Control Officer. The tag shall be
attached to the collar of the licensed dog, by the owner. Failure of a dog
owner to purchase a license annually or attach the tag shall be a violation of
this chapter. Licenses shall be issued annually and purchased in the month of
May. The license would expire on May 31 the following year. The cost for the
license shall be set by the City Council.
(Ord. 302, passed 6-16-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 NUISANCES.
   No person shall keep, or allow to be kept, any animal which shall, by any
noise, disturb the peace. No person shall keep within the city any animal which
habitually barks or cries, and any such animal that damages any private or
public property, excluding the owner’s property. Any person who owns, keeps or
has charge or control of any animal shall immediately collect and remove any
and all feces deposited by the animal on public property or on private property
not occupied by or under control of that person. If the Animal Control Officer
or law enforcement officer deems it necessary, they may immediately impound the
animal to stop the nuisance.
(Ord. 302, passed 6-16-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   No dog or other animal shall be permitted to run at large.
(Ord. 302, passed 6-16-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 DOG BITES OR RABID ANIMAL.
   Any rabid domestic animal or domestic animal, for which there is probable
cause to believe is rabid, shall be securely confined and kept from contact
with any other animals or person. Any such animal that bites a person shall be
quarantined for such a time as directed by the Animal Control Officer, law
enforcement officer or Health Officer. The quarantine may be on the premises of
the owner unless the Animal Control Officer, law enforcement officer or Health
Officer requires impoundment. In this event, the owner thereof shall surrender
the animal for the quarantine period.
(Ord. 302, passed 6-16-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 NUMBER OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain more than four dogs and
cats, combined, with maximum total of three dogs or three cats.
   (B)   No person shall run, keep, harbor or maintain more than two specialty
animals, as defined in the zoning code, per household.
   (C)   An owner shall have 90 days from the date of birth of new members of
the above species in which to comply with this section.
(Ord. 302, passed 6-16-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 IMPOUNDING.
   The Animal Control Officer, law enforcement officer or agent representing
the city may impound any dog or domestic animal in violation of §§
93.02 through
93.06 of this chapter. Notice of impound shall be given to the owner of the
animal, if known, and if the owner is not known, notice shall be posted at City
Hall and the animal shelter. After seven business days, the Animal Control
Officer shall dispose of the above animal in accordance with the city animal
shelter policy. The above fee for impoundment shall also be in accordance with
the city animal shelter policy. The animal shelter policy shall be posted at
the city animal shelter.
(Ord. 302, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 93.08 ANIMAL SHELTER POLICY.
   (A)   Animal Control Officer. The city has an independent contractor
relationship with an Animal Control Officer. The Duties of the Animal Control
Officer are on file at the City Administrator's office.
   (B)   Dog pound.
      (1)   The city maintains and operates a shelter for the temporary housing
of canines only.
      (2)   The shelter is a service for residents of the city. Canines from
outside the city will be accepted only in the circumstance when a dog has been
deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous under Minnesota State Statutes. The
canine will be held for other law enforcement agencies within Aitkin County
until the matter has been remedied in court.
      (3)   The shelter will temporarily house canines in emergency
circumstances for law enforcement agencies within Aitkin County for purposes
such as arrest of the owner and no other arrangements can be made for the
canine. In such cases, the owner of said canine shall be billed at the rate as
set by the city as listed in §
33.01.
      (4)   Felines or other such domestic animals will not be accepted nor
picked up by the Animal Control Officer or Police Officers and brought to this
shelter.
   (C)   Description/notice.
      (1)   Impounding officers shall record the description of the canine by
breed, sex, approximate age, and distinguishing traits, as well as location of
seizure, date of seizure, name and address of owner of canine (if known) as
required by Minnesota State Statutes.
      (2)   Upon impounding any canine, the Animal Control Officer or Police
Officer shall immediately post on the bulletin board at the City Hall a “Notice
of Impoundment.” All attempts will be made to notify the owner of the canine
(if known).
   (D)   Fees/charges.
      (1)   A pickup fee, as set by the city from time to time and listed in §
33.01, will be charged for each canine picked up under §§
93.02 to
93.06.
      (2)   A charge per day, as set by the city from time to time and listed
in §
33.01, will be assessed thereafter until the owner or representative of the
owner picks up the canine.
   (E)   Care of veterinarian. If a canine that has been taken into the shelter
requires the care of a veterinarian, such care will be provided. The city will
pay for the care; however, if the owner or representative claims the canine,
the owner or representative must reimburse the city for the veterinarian
expense before the canine will be released.
   (F)   Release of canine.
      (1)   Canines will only be released to owners or persons previously in
possession of the canine unless authorized.
      (2)   Canines will only be released from the shelter upon the owner or
representative paying all impound fees, pickup fees, and veterinarian fees (if
any); and producing a valid dog license from the city (if applicable).
      (3)   The Animal Control Officer will fill out a City of Aitkin Shelter
Release form, which will be kept on file for as long as deemed necessary.
   (G)   Uncollected canine.
      (1)   After seven days, if the canine has not been collected by the owner
or representative, the Animal Control Officer shall dispose of the canine by
ordinance unless the owner or representative contacts the Animal Control
Officer to make arrangements for the canine. All attempts will be made to
collect the impound fees, pickup fees, and veterinarian fees (if any) from the
owner (if known).
      (2)   If deemed suitable, the canine will be placed for adoption.
Adoptive owners may make a donation to the city to help offset the cost of
caring for the canine while it was in the shelter. However, a donation is not
required.
      (3)   The goal of the city is to maintain a “no kill” shelter facility.
Every attempt will be made to provide a safe, secure home for the canine.
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Anyone violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter may result in the issuance of a citation as
set forth in §
10.98.
(Ord. 302, passed 6-16-2003)
APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT
   City of Aitkin
   Notice of Impoundment
Date:                         
I have this day impounded and taken to the City of Aitkin shelter a canine of
the following description:
 
 
Canine Description
 
Sex:                     Color:                            Breed:                                
 
Approximate Age:                                                                                              
 
Name of Owner (if known):                                                                                
 
Address of Owner (if known):                                                                            
 
Location of Seizure:                                                                                          
 
 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that unless said canine is claimed and redeemed on or
before                            at                      o’clock       .m.,
this animal will be disposed of as designated by City of Aitkin Ordinance No.
302.
   To claim this canine, contact the Aitkin City Administrator’s office,
   109 First Avenue NW, Aitkin. 218-927-2527
Signed:                                                          
APPENDIX B: SHELTER RELEASE FORM
DATE:                 
I have this day released from the City of Aitkin shelter a canine of the
following description:
 
 
Canine Description
 
Sex:                     Color:                            Breed:                                
 
Approximate Age:                                                                       
 
Name of Owner (if known):                                                                                
 
Address of Owner (if known):                                                                            
 
Location of Seizure:                                                                                          
 
 
To the following party:
 
 
Name:                                                                                                 
 
Address:                                                                                              
 
Phone #:                                                                                              
 
Impound Fee Paid: $  Pickup Fee Paid: $
 
Veterinarian Fee Paid (if any): $
 
Licensed:                                                                                             
 
 
Signature of Owner or Representative:
                                                                                   
Officer Badge #                               
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Public Nuisances
   
94.01   Public nuisance defined
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Public nuisances affecting health, safety, comfort or repose
   
94.04   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
94.05   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
94.06   Enforcement
   
94.07   Powers of officers
   
94.08   Abatement of nuisance by City Council
Snow, Ice, Dirt and Rubbish; Weeds and the Like
   
94.20   Definition
   
94.21   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish
   
94.22   Public health and safety hazards
   
94.23   Installation and repair of water service lines
   
94.24   Installation and repair of sewer service lines
   
94.25   Repair of sidewalks and alleys
   
94.26   Tree care
   
94.27   Personal liability
   
94.28   Assessment
Littering; Unwholesome Substances
   
94.40   Prohibited behavior
   
94.41   Enforcement
   
94.42   Abatement
   
94.43   Recovery of cost
Tree Maintenance, Removal and Planting
   
94.60   Definitions
   
94.61   Creation and establishment of a city Tree Board
   
94.62   Term of office
   
94.63   Compensation
   
94.64   Duties and responsibilities
   
94.65   Operation
   
94.66   Planting
   
94.67   Street tree species
   
94.68   Spacing
   
94.69   Distance from curb and sidewalk
   
94.70   Distance from street corners, stop signs and fire hydrants
   
94.71   Public tree care
   
94.72   Tree topping
   
94.73   Pruning, corner clearance
   
94.74   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
   
94.75   Removal of stumps
   
94.76   Interference with city Tree Board
   
94.77   Review by City Council
   
94.78   Violation and penalties
 
   
94.99   Penalty
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 94.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.
   A PUBLIC NUISANCE is a thing, act, or use of property which shall:
   (A)   Annoy, injure, or endanger the health, safety, comfort or repose of
the public;
   (B)   Offend public decency;
   (C)   Unlawfully interfere with the use of, or obstruct or tend to obstruct,
or render dangerous for passage, a public water, park, square, street, alley or
highway;
   (D)   Depreciate the value of property of inhabitants of the city or of a
considerable number thereof; or
   (E)   In any way render the inhabitants of the city, or a considerable
number thereof, insecure in life or in use of property.
(Ord. 400, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   CITY. The City of Aitkin, Aitkin County, Minnesota.
   (B)   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Aitkin, Minnesota
   (C)   PERSON. Any person, firm or corporation, and the singular shall
include the plural.
   (D)   Where references are made herein to particular officers, councils,
boards or agencies, such officers, councils, boards or agencies are those of
the city.
(Ord. 400, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 94.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH, SAFETY, COMFORT, OR REPOSE.
   The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting health,
safety, comfort, or repose:
   (A)   All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (D)   Accumulations of manure or rubbish;
   (E)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight;
   (F)   Dumping the contents of any cesspool, privy vault, or garbage can
except at places authorized by law, or allowing any cesspool or individual
sewage disposal system to overflow in any manner; All noxious weeds, tall
grasses, and other rank growths; the word WEEDS shall be construed to mean and
include all noxious weeds as defined by the Statutes of the State of Minnesota
and all such useless and troublesome plants as are commonly known as weeds to
the general public. All grasses growing to a height greater than six inches
upon any lot or parcel of land within the platted portions of the city are
hereby declared to be a nuisance;
   (G)   All noxious weeds, tall grasses, and other rank growths; the word
WEEDS shall be construed to mean and include all noxious weeds as defined by
the Statutes of the State of Minnesota and all such useless and troublesome
plants as are commonly known as weeds to the general public. All grasses
growing to a height greater than six inches upon any lot or parcel of land
within the platted portions of the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance;
   (H)   An accumulation of tin cans, bottles, or trash or debris of any nature
or description, and the throwing, dumping or disposing of any dead animals,
manure, garbage, waste, decaying matter, ground, sand, stones, ashes, rubbish,
tin cans, or other material or debris of any kind on private property;
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, and soot or cinders in unreasonable
quantities;
   (J)   Offensive trades and businesses as defined by statutes or ordinances
not licensed as provided by law;
   (K)   All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease;
   (L)   The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples
are placed in the hands of an adult person by someone properly licensed;
   (M)   All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations, and uses of property
which are deemed by the City Council and the City Health Officer to be a menace
to the health of the inhabitants of the city or a considerable number thereof;
   (N)   It shall be a nuisance for any person in control of, causing or
permitting any domesticated animal to be on any property, public or private,
not owned or possessed by such person, to fail to remove excrement left by such
domesticated animal to a proper receptacle located on the property owned or
possessed by such person;
   (O)   The provisions of division (N) of this section shall not apply to the
ownership or use of seeing eye dogs by blind persons, dogs when used in police
activities by the city or county Sheriff’s Department, or tracking dogs when
used by or with the permission of the city;
   (P)   Every owner and occupant of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents,
vermin, or other pests in all exterior areas of the premises. Whenever
infestation exists in the shared or public parts of the premises, extermination
thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. In the case of single family
structures, the occupants shall be responsible for the extermination of
insects, rodents, and vermin in all exterior property areas.
   (Q)   It shall be unlawful to accumulate and store building material,
lumber, firewood, boxes, cartons, or other containers, machinery, scrap metal,
junk, raw material, fabricated goods and other items in such manner as to
become infested with rodents. Stored items must be stored on an impervious
surface, such as a poured concrete slab, or must be elevated at least eight
inches above the ground. Firewood piles and other materials may only be located
in the rear yards and side yards. Such wood piles and other materials may not
encroach on any required rear or side yard setbacks and must be a minimum of
one foot from buildings used for habitation.
(Ord. 400, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 94.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public
morals and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards;
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatuses used in such operations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses;
   (D)   Any place where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered
or given away in violation of law, or where persons are permitted to resort for
the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquors as a beverage contrary to law, or
where intoxicating liquors are kept for sale, barter or distribution in
violation of law, and all liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars and other
property kept at and used for maintaining such a place;
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating liquor
or any immoral purpose;
   (F)   The public use of profane or obscene language;
   (G)   The looking into or peeping through doors, windows, or openings of
private homes by methods of stealth and without proper authority and
surreptitious methods, or what is commonly known as “window peeping”;
   (H)   All other things, acts, omissions or occupations that may be
considered detrimental to the moral well being of the inhabitants of the city
or a considerable number thereof.
(Ord. 400, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 94.05 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting peace and safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks within 24 hours
after the snow and ice have ceased to be deposited thereon;
   (B)   All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of any
public street or alley;
   (C)   All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been
substantially damaged by fire, decay or otherwise; all buildings, walls, and
other structures which contain broken, boarded or taped windows; all buildings,
walls, and other structures which have deteriorated to such an extent that they
are structurally deficient or otherwise unsafe; and all buildings, walls, and
other structures which are so situated so as to endanger the safety of the
public;
   (D)   All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances or
materials stored or accumulated in any manner or in any amount other than that
provided by law or ordinance;
   (E)   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by law or
ordinance;
   (F)   All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected in
violation of fire ordinances and building codes concerning manner and materials
and construction;
   (G)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use of the public
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such conditions as
are provided by ordinance, and any other excavation left unprotected or
uncovered indefinitely or allowed to exist in such manner as to attract minor
children;
   (H)   Radio aerials strung or erected in any manner except that provided by
law or ordinance;
   (I)   The piling, storing or keeping of old machinery, wrecked, junked, or
inoperative vehicles, and other junk or debris;
   (J)   The use of property abutting a public street or sidewalk, or any use
of a public street or sidewalk, which causes large crowds of people to gather
obstructing the traffic and the free use of public streets or sidewalks, except
where any such use is expressly permitted by the outdoor dining and sidewalk
sale regulations set forth in §
152.037;
   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over public
streets or sidewalks or so situated as to endanger public safety, not
constructed or maintained as provided by law or ordinance, or without proper
permit;
   (L)   The allowing of rain, water, ice, or snow to fall from any building
onto any public street or sidewalk or to flow across any public sidewalk;
   (M)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery, equipment, or other property in
any public place, or so situated or operated on private property so as to
attract minor children;
   (N)   Throwing, dropping, or releasing printed matter, paper, or any other
material or objects over and upon the city from an airplane, balloon or other
aircraft or in such a manner as to cause such materials to fall on land in the
city;
   (O)   Placing entrance culverts or doing any act which may alter or affect
the drainage of public streets or alleys or the surface or grade of public
streets, alleys, or sidewalks without proper permit;
   (P)   Making repairs to motor vehicles, or tires in public streets or alleys
excepting only emergency repairs when it will not unduly impede or interfere
with traffic;
   (Q)   Throwing, placing, depositing, or burning leaves, trash, clippings,
weeds, grass, or other materials in the streets, alleys or gutters;
   (R)   Erecting, painting, or placing of unauthorized traffic signs or
advertising signs in streets, or alleys, or on sidewalks;
   (S)   All unnecessary interferences and disturbances of radios or TV sets
caused by defective electrical appliances and equipment or improper operation
thereof;
   (T)   Driving scooters, bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, motorcycles,
or any type of motorized vehicle or non-motorized vehicle on any sidewalk
located in the downtown business district;
   (U)   To operate any private parking lot without keeping the same reasonably
free from dust;
   (V)   To operate any artificial lighting devices upon any residential,
commercial or industrial premises so as to cause a distraction to passing
motorists or to operate said artificial lighting devices upon any residential,
commercial or industrial premises without some effective device so as to
protect adjacent premises from being adversely affected thereby;
   (W)   The maintenance of any tree or shrub, the roots of which are causing
damage to any public sewer, sidewalk, pavement, or other public property, or
setting out or planting any tree or bush in the public street or any portion
thereof;
   (X)   All other conditions, acts, or things which are liable to cause injury
to the person or property of another.
(Ord. 400, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 408, passed 1-3-2023)
§ 94.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the City Council by and through the city’s Police
Department to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and the City Council
may by resolution delegate to such other officers or agencies power to enforce
particular provisions of this subchapter, including the power to inspect
private premises and the officers charged with enforcement of this subchapter
shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance
of public nuisances.
(Ord. 400, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 94.07 POWERS OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Whenever, in the judgment of the officer charged with enforcement, it
is determined upon investigation that a public nuisance is being maintained or
exists within the city, such officer shall notify in writing the person
committing or maintaining such nuisance and require him or her to terminate and
abate said nuisance and to remove such conditions or remedy such defects. Said
written notice or citation shall be served upon the person committing or
maintaining said nuisance in person or by registered mail. If the premises are
not occupied and the address of the owner is unknown, service on the owner may
be had by posting a copy of the notice on the premises. Said notice or
citations shall require the owner or occupant of such premises, or both, to
take reasonable steps within a reasonable time to abate and remove said
nuisance, said steps and time to be designated in said notice or citations, but
the maximum time for the removal of said nuisance after service of said notice
or citation shall not in any event exceed 30 days. In the case of tall grass,
the maximum time for removal shall not exceed 72 hours. Service of a notice may
be provided by filing an affidavit of service with the City Clerk setting forth
the manner and time thereof. Service of a citation may be proved by filing a
copy of the citation with the City Clerk setting forth the manner and time of
the service thereof.
   (B)   When a notice related to the removal of tall grass is given, the owner
shall have 72 hours to appeal the notice to the City Council. If no appeal is
taken, the city shall abate the nuisance forthwith and the cost incurred in the
abatement, together with the administrative fee described in division (D),
shall become an assessment against the property upon which the nuisance existed
and the City Administrator shall certify the same to the County Auditor for
collection in the same manner as taxes and special assessments are certified
and collected. If an appeal is taken, the City Council shall hold a hearing as
soon as practicable and order whether the notice shall be complied with,
modified or annulled. If the notice is ordered complied with or modified, such
action shall be taken within 24 hours by the person receiving the notice. If
the person does not abate the nuisance within 24 hours, the city shall as
provided for herein as if an appeal were not taken.
(Ord. 400, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 94.08 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   If, after service of notice of intent to abate nuisance, the person
served fails to abate the nuisance or make the necessary repairs, alterations
or changes in accordance with the direction of the enforcement officer or the
City Council, the enforcement officer or person designated by the City Council
shall notify the City Council of the noncompliance. The City Council may order
the person receiving the notice to comply with the notice or may provide a
modified order.
      (1)   The order shall be in writing; recite the grounds therefore;
specify the necessary corrections, if any, and provide a reasonable time for
compliance; and shall state that a motion for summary enforcement of the order
will be made to the district court of Aitkin County unless corrective action is
taken, or unless an answer is filed within 21 days.
      (2)   The order shall be served upon the owner of record, or the owner’s
agent if an agent is in charge of the building or property, and upon the
occupying tenant, if there is one, and upon all lienholders of record, in the
manner provided for service of a summons in a civil action. If the owner cannot
be found, the order shall be served upon the owner by posting it at the main
entrance to the building or, if there is no building, in a conspicuous place on
the property, and by three week’s publication in the official newspaper of the
city.
      (3)   A copy of the order with proof of service shall be filed with the
court administrator of Aitkin County District Court no less than five days
prior to the filing of a motion pursuant to § 94.07(B) to enforce the order. At
the time of filing such order the city shall file for record with the county
recorder or registrar of titles a notice of the pendency of the proceeding,
describing with reasonable certainty the ands affected and the nature of the
order. If the proceeding be abandoned the city shall within ten days thereafter
file with the county recorder a notice to that effect.
   (B)   If no answer is served, the city may move the court for the
enforcement of the order. If such a motion is made the court may, upon the
presentation of sufficient proof of service of the order, affirm or modify the
order and enter judgment accordingly, fixing a time after which the governing
body may proceed with the enforcement of the order. The court administrator
shall cause a copy of the judgement to be mailed forthwith to person upon whom
the original order was served.
   (C)   If an answer is filed and served as provided above, further
proceedings in the action shall be governed by the Rules of Civil Procedure for
the District Courts. If the order is sustained following the trial, the court
shall enter judgement and shall fix a time after which the nuisance shall be
abated in compliance with the order as originally filed or modified by the
court. If the order is not sustained, it shall be annulled and set aside. The
court administrator of the court shall cause a copy of the judgement to be
mailed forthwith to the persons upon whom the original order was served.
   (D)   If a judgement is not complied within the time specified, the city may
cause the nuisance to be abated at the expense of the city and recover such
costs as a judgment against the person or persons served. In the alternative,
the City Council may direct the City Administrator to extend the sum as an
assessment against the property upon which the nuisance existed and shall
certify the same to the County Auditor for collection in the same manner as
taxes and special assessments are certified and collected. To cover
administrative costs necessarily incurred in the abatement and assessment
procedure, an administrative fee in the amount of not more than 25% of the cost
to abate the nuisance shall be imposed, except that in no event shall the
administrative fee be less than as set out in the fee schedule in §
33.01 of the code of ordinances.
   (E)   In order to determine the amount of the judgment or assessment as the
case may be, the city shall keep an accurate account of the expenses incurred
in carrying out the order and of all other expenses theretofore incurred in
connection with its enforcement, including specifically, but not exclusively,
filing fees, service fees, administrative fees, publication fees, attorney’s
fees, appraisers’ fees, witness fees, including expert witness fees, and
traveling expenses incurred by the city from the time the order was originally
made, and shall report its action under the order, with a statement of expenses
incurred to the court for approval and allowance. Thereupon the court shall
examine, correct, if necessary, and allow the expense account and enter
judgement or certify the same to the city administrator for assessment, as the
case may be.
(Ord. 400, passed 9-7-2021)
SNOW, ICE, DIRT AND RUBBISH; WEEDS AND THE LIKE
§ 94.20 DEFINITION.
   The term CURRENT SERVICE, as used in this subchapter, means one or more of
the following: snow, ice or rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination
from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal
or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property,
excluding any hazardous building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 to 463.26, as they
may be amended from time to time; installation or repair of water service lines
or sewer service lines; repair of sidewalks and alleys; and trimming and care
of trees and removal of unsound and insect-infected trees from the public
streets or private property.
(Ord. 300, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 94.21 SNOW, ICE, DIRT AND RUBBISH.
   See
Chapter 151 of the city code of ordinances.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.22 PUBLIC, HEALTH AND SAFETY HAZARDS.
   When the city removes or eliminates public health or safety hazards from
private property under §§
94.40 through
94.43 of this chapter and
Ch. 95 of this code of ordinances, the administrative officer responsible for
doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination
against each parcel of property affected and annually deliver the information
to the City Administrator. This section does not apply to hazardous buildings
under the Hazardous Building Law, M.S. §§ 463.15 to 463.26, as they may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 300, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 94.23 INSTALLATION AND REPAIR OF WATER SERVICE LINES.
   Whenever the city installs or repairs water service lines serving private
property under
Ch. 52 of this code of ordinances, the Public Utilities Manager shall keep a
record of the total cost of the installation or repair against the property and
deliver the information to the City Administrator annually by August 15 as to
each parcel of property on which the cost has not been paid.
(Ord. 300, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 94.24 INSTALLATION AND REPAIR OF SEWER SERVICE LINES.
   Whenever the city installs or repairs sewer service lines serving private
property under
Ch. 53 of this code of ordinances, the Street Commissioner shall keep a record
of the total cost of the installation or repair against the property and
deliver the information to the City Administrator annually by August 15 as to
each parcel of property on which the cost has not been paid.
(Ord. 300, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 94.25 REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   The owner of any property within the city abutting a public sidewalk
or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe for pedestrians.
Repairs shall be made in accordance with
Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The Street Commissioner may make such inspections as are necessary to
determine that public sidewalks and alleys within the city are kept in repair
and safe for pedestrians or vehicles. If the Street Commissioner finds that any
sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and in need of
repairs, he or she may cause a notice to be served, by registered or certified
mail or by personal service, upon the record owner of the property and the
occupant, if the owner does not reside within the city or cannot be found
therein, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired and made
safe within 30 days and stating that, if the owner fails to do so, the Street
Commissioner may do so on behalf of the city, that the expense thereof must be
paid by the owner and that if unpaid it will be made a special assessment
against the property concerned.
   (C)   If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30 days after receipt
of the notice, the Street Commissioner may report the facts to the Council and
the Council may, by resolution, order the Street Commissioner to repair the
sidewalk or alley and make it safe or order the work done by contract in
accordance with the law. The Street Commissioner shall keep a record of the
total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of property and
report the information to the City Administrator.
(Ord. 300, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 94.26 TREE CARE.
   (A)   The Council shall determine, by resolution, from time to time the
streets on which trees shall be trimmed and cared for, the kind of work to be
done and what unsound trees shall be removed. Before any work is done pursuant
to either of these resolutions, the City Administrator shall, under the
Council’s direction, publish notice that the Council will meet to consider the
projects. The notice shall be published in the official newspaper at least once
no less than two weeks prior to the meeting of the Council and shall state the
date, time and place of the meeting, the streets affected, and the particular
projects proposed, and the estimated cost of each project, either in total or
on the basis of the proposed assessment per front foot or otherwise. Property
owners will also be notified individually.
   (B)   At the hearing or at any adjournment thereof, the Council shall hear
property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed
projects. The Council may, thereupon, adopt a resolution confirming the
original projects with such modifications as it considers desirable and may
provide for the doing of the work by day labor through the Street Commissioner
or by contract. The Street Commissioner shall keep a record of the cost and the
portion of the cost properly attributable to each lot and parcel of property
abutting on the street or alley on which the work is done and shall report the
information to the City Administrator.
(Ord. 300, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 94.27 PERSONAL LIABILITY.
   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service has
been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the service. As soon
as the service has been completed and the cost determined, the City
Administrator, or other designated official, shall prepare a bill and mail it
to the owner and thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at
the office of the City Administrator.
(Ord. 300, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 94.28 ASSESSMENT.
   On or before September 1 of each year, the Administrator shall list the
total unpaid charges for each type of current service against each separate lot
or parcel to which they are attributable under this subchapter. After notice
and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended from time to
time, the Council may then spread the charges against property benefitted as a
special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the Council may determine in each case.
(Ord. 300, passed 4-21-2003)
LITTERING; UNWHOLESOME SUBSTANCES
§ 94.40 PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR.
   Whoever, by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally,
does any of the following is guilty of a misdemeanor: brings, deposits or
leaves, within the city, any unwholesome substance or deposits solid waste
within the city, not otherwise authorized by law.
(Ord. 254, passed 2-3-1992) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.41 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Administrator or Police Department shall enforce the provisions of
this subchapter; the officer shall have the power to inspect private premises
and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance
of acts prohibited by this subchapter.
(Ord. 254, passed 2-3-1992)
§ 94.42 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place
and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council
order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by
the officer charged with enforcement on the owner of record or occupant of the
premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises
is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or
occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be
served by posting it on the premises.
      (2)   Notice of Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council
hearing to determine or abate the acts prohibited by this subchapter shall be
served on the owner of record and occupant of the premises either in person or
by certified or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of
record is unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice
of Council hearing, notice of Council hearing shall be served by posting it on
the premises.
      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by
the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council
order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17, as it may be amended from
time to time.
      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any
motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Procedure. Whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines
that unwholesome substances or solid waste are brought into or deposited or
left on premises within the city, the officer shall notify in writing the owner
of record or occupant of the premises of the fact and order that the
unwholesome substance or deposit of solid waste be removed from the city. The
notice of violation shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the act
prohibited by this subchapter and the time within which the act and violation
is to be abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the
time specified, the enforcing officer shall report that fact forthwith to the
Council. Thereafter, the Council may, after notice to the owner or occupant and
an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition identified in the
notice of violation is an act prohibited within this subchapter and further
order that, if the act is not abated within the time prescribed by the Council,
the city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order
and notice of motion for summary enforcement.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement.
      (1)   In cases of emergency, where delay in abatement required to
complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and
(B) above will permit any act prohibited by this ordinance to unreasonably
endanger public health, safety or welfare, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the illegal act. To proceed with summary enforcement, the
officer charged with enforcement shall determine that a violation of this
subchapter exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay
in abatement of the illegal act will unreasonably endanger public health,
safety or welfare.
      (2)   The enforcement officer shall notify in writing the occupant or
owner of the premises of the nature of the prohibited illegal act and of the
city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the
Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement. The City
Council shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice
to the owner or occupant is an act prohibited by the ordinance, whether public
health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement
required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A) above, and may
order that the illegal act be immediately terminated or abated. If the illegal
act is not immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the act and violation of this subchapter.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing herein shall prevent the city, without
notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an
imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
(Ord. 254, passed 2-3-1992)
§ 94.43 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability and lien.
      (1)   The owner of premises on which an act prohibited by this subchapter
has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city
of the abatement, including administrative costs.
      (2)   As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the
City Administrator or other official designated by the Council shall prepare a
bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.
      (3)   Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the
office of the City Administrator.
   (B)   Assessment. The Administrator shall list the expenses, which shall be
a lien upon the property, and, on or before September 1 next following
abatement of the prohibited act, list the total unpaid charges against each
separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable if unpaid. The
Council may then spread the charges against the property to be assessed under
M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection, along with
current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten,
as the Council may determine in each case.
(Ord. 254, passed 2-3-1992)
TREE MAINTENANCE, REMOVAL AND PLANTING
§ 94.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways
within the city.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.61 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF A CITY TREE BOARD.
   There is hereby created and established a city Tree Board for the city which
shall consist of five members of this city who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Council.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.62 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of the five persons to be appointed by the Mayor annually. In the
event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.63 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.64 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate,
counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for
the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition
of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such
plan will be presented annually to the City Council and upon their acceptance
and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the
city.
   (B)   The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider,
investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of
question coming within the scope of its work.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.65 OPERATION.
   The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations
and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a
quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.66 PLANTING.
   All residents must obtain permission prior to planting trees on public
property and must plant under the species and placement requirements outlined
in §§ 94.66 through 94.71. All trees will be hand-dug.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.67 STREET TREE SPECIES.
   (A)   The following list constitutes the official street tree species for
the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted
within rights-of-way without written permission of the city Tree Board.
Small Trees Medium Trees Large Trees
Small Trees                Medium Trees             Large Trees
Crabapple, flowering (sp.) Hackberry                Maple, silver
Hawthorne (sp.)            Honey locust (thornless) Maple, sugar
Lilac, Jap. Tree           Linden or basswood (sp.) Maple, red
Plum                                               Hackberry
Serviceberry                                       Oak, bur
Blue beech                                         Oak, swamp white
Chokecherry                                        Oak, white
Pin cherry                                         Oak, red
Dogwood, pagoda                                    Cottonwood (cottonless,
                                                    male)
                                                  Elm, accolade, princeton,
                                                    triumph or new horizon
 
   (B)   The following trees are prohibited for planting within city limits:
 
Gingko(female)                    Nonhybrid cottonwood species Mulberry
Boxelder                          Black locust                 Russian olive
Non-disease resistant elm species Siberian elm                 Buckthorn
 
   (C)   Additional recommended trees for parks and yards away from streets:
 
Aspen-quaking or bigtooth Balsam fir         Black spruce
Paper birch               Eastern white pine Arborvitae/white cedar
River birch               Red/Norway pine     
Tamarack                  White spruce        
 
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.68 SPACING.
   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
size classes listed in § 94.66 of this subchapter, and no trees may be planted
closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40
feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or
approved by a landscape architect.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.69 DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.
   Small trees may be planted within three feet from edge of right-of-way,
medium trees may be planted within four feet from edge of right-of-way, and
large trees shall be planted at least five feet from edge of right-of-way.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.70 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS, STOP SIGNS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No street tree shall be planted closer than 50 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street
tree shall be planted closer than 50 feet of any stop sign. No street tree
shall be planted closer than five feet of any fire hydrant.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.71 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety
or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
   (B)   The city Tree Board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any
tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its
nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or
other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or
other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by
adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said
trees is in accordance with §§
94.66 through
94.71 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.72 TREE TOPPING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or
city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public
property. “Topping” is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree
so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
   (B)   Aitkin Public Utilities, at its discretion, may top trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.73 PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the
street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of
the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device
or sign.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.74 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential
threat to other trees within the city. The city Tree Board will notify in
writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their
own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of
failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the
authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's
property tax notice.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.75 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump is at least four inches below ground.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.76 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street
trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.77 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the city Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or
order of the city Tree Board to the City Council who may hear the matter and
make final decision.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.78 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
   A violation of this subchapter shall be an administrative offense and is
subject to the city penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and
penalties in §
10.98 of the Aitkin City Code. In the event a party charged with an
administrative offense fails to pay the penalty, a charge may be brought
against the alleged violator in accordance with the applicable statutes. If the
penalty is paid, no further charge shall be brought by the city for the same
violation.
(Ord. 390, passed 1-7-2019; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall cause or create a nuisance or permit a nuisance
to be created or placed upon, or to remain upon any premises owned or occupied
by him or her, and any person who shall fail to comply with any order made
under the provisions of §§
94.01 through
94.07 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both.
   (C)   Any person who maintains a nuisance in violation of §
94.21 of this chapter and any person who interferes with a city employee or
other authorized person in the performance of any current service under §§
94.20 through
94.28 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, but a prosecution shall be
brought for the violation only on the direction of the Council. If convicted of
the violation, the person shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment, and the
costs of prosecution in either case may be added.
   (D)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§
94.40 through
94.43 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine or imprisonment, or both, together with the costs of prosecution in either
case.
(Ord. 254, passed 2-3-1992; Ord. 300, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 330, passed 12-3-
2007; Ord. 400, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 414, passed 4-7-2025)
CHAPTER 95: JUNK, ABANDONED VEHICLES AND PROPERTY
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Parking and storage of junk vehicles; nuisance
   
95.03   Unclaimed property
   
95.04   Abandoned motor vehicles
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which is not in operable condition and
remains in the inoperable condition for a period of 96 hours, or which is
partially dismantled, or which is used for sale or parts or as a source of
repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, or which is kept for scrapping,
dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly licensed for
operation within the state by the state.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is not a street or
highway.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides, and
transport people or property or pull machinery, and shall include without
limitation automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobile.
(Ord. 253, passed 1-6-1992)
§ 95.02 PARKING AND STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES; NUISANCE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property
within the corporate limits of the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant,
lessee or otherwise, to allow or in any manner permit any junk vehicle to
remain on the property for a period longer than 96 hours, unless housed within
a lawfully erected building or unless the junk vehicle is on the premises of a
bona fide business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner and the
junk vehicle is necessary to the operation of the business enterprise.
   (B)   Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance pursuant to the authority granted in M.S. § 412.221, subd. 23, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 253, passed 1-6-1992) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   All property lawfully coming into the possession of the city and unclaimed
by its owner shall be disposed of as follows:
   (A)   The department of the city into whose possession property comes shall
arrange for storage of the same. If municipal facilities for storage are
unavailable or inadequate, arrangements for storage at privately owned
facilities may be arranged;
   (B)   The owner of the property may claim the same by exhibiting
satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or maintenance
costs incurred by the city. A receipt for the property shall be obtained upon
release to the owner;
   (C)   In the event that the property remains unclaimed in the possession of
the city for a period of three months, the property shall thereafter be sold to
the highest bidder at a public auction conducted by the City Administrator. The
auction shall be held after two-weeks’ published notice setting forth the time
and place thereof and the property to be sold; and
   (D)   Net proceeds from the sale of the property after deduction of storage
costs incurred, if any, shall be placed in the treasury of the city, subject to
the right of the former owner to payment of the sale price to him or her from
the fund upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership within six months
of the sale.
(Ord. 253, passed 1-6-1992)
§ 95.04 ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding §
95.03 of this chapter, the following shall apply to abandoned motor vehicles:
      (1)   The city’s Police Department shall take into custody and impound
any abandoned motor vehicle;
      (2)   (a)   When an abandoned motor vehicle is taken in custody, the
Police Department shall give notice of the taking within ten days. The notice
shall set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and
serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle and the place where the vehicle is
being held, shall inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to
reclaim the vehicle under §
95.03(C) of this chapter, and shall state that failure of the owner or
lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle be deemed a waiver
by them of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the
sale of the vehicle at a public auction pursuant to §
95.03(D) of this chapter.
         (b)   The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the registered
owner, if any, of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable
lienholders of record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable
certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders,
the notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
area where the motor vehicle was abandoned. Published notices may be grouped
together for convenience and economy.
      (3)   The owner or any lienholder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall
have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city, upon payment of all towing
and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15
days after the date of the notice required by division (A)(2)(b) above.
   (B)   Nothing in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall be construed to
impair any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of the state, or the right of
a lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, GARAGEKEEPER is an
operator of a parking facility, or an operator of an establishment for the
servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.
   (C)   An abandoned motor vehicle taken into custody and not reclaimed under
division (A)(3) above shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or
sale, following two weeks’ published notice thereof. The purchaser shall be
given a receipt which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The
receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a
certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership.
   (D)   When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven model years of age,
is lacking vital component parts and does not display a license plate currently
valid in Minnesota or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately
be eligible for sale at public auction, and shall not be subject to the
notification, reclamation or title provisions of divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3)
above.
   (E)   From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the city
shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the
vehicle, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this
chapter. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner
of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then be deposited in the
city treasury.
   (F)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 168B.011,
subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time, that has remained for a period
of more than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component
parts, or has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property
without consent of the person in control of the property or in an inoperable
condition, such that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent
with its usual functions unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage
building. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. § 168.10, as it may
be amended from time to time, and vehicles on the premises of junk yards and
auto graveyards maintained and licensed in accordance with applicable state
laws and local ordinances shall not be considered ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
within the meaning of this section.
      VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle chat are essential
to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to,
the motor, drive train and wheels.
   (G)   Where no bid has been received for an abandoned motor vehicle, the
city may dispose of it pursuant to contract under M.S. §§ 168B.09 and 168B.10,
as they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 253, passed 1-6-1992) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who parks or stores a junk vehicle within city limits in
violation hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine or by imprisonment in the county jail or both.
   (B)   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private
property, without the consent of the person in control of the property, is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine or by imprisonment in the county jail or both.
(Ord. 253, passed 1-6-1992)
Cross-reference:
   For specific fines, see §
10.98
CHAPTER 96: CANNABIS
Section
Cannabis and Cannabis Derived Products in Public Places
   
96.01   Purpose and intent
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Prohibited Acts
   
   
96.99   Penalty
CANNABIS AND CANNABIS DERIVED PRODUCTS IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 96.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This chapter is adopted by the City of Aitkin City Council for the purpose
of protecting public health and safety by regulating/prohibiting the use of
cannabis and cannabis derived products in public places and places of public
accommodation within Aitkin County. Minnesota Session Law 2023, Chapter 63,
effective in relevant part August 1, 2023, establishes that the adult use,
possession and personal growing of cannabis is legal subject to the
requirements and restrictions of Minnesota Statutes. M.S. § 342.0263, subd. 5
authorizes the adoption of a local ordinance establishing a petty misdemeanor
offense for public use of cannabis. The city intends to be proactive in
protecting public health and safety by enacting an ordinance that will mitigate
threats presented to the public and public health by the public use of
cannabis. The City of Aitkin (hereinafter "the city") recognizes the risks that
unintended access and use of cannabis products and exposure to cannabis and its
effects present to the health, welfare, and safety of members of the public and
in particular the youth within the City of Aitkin.
(Ord. 410, passed 11-6-2023)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The following words, terms,
and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS FLOWER. Cannabis flower that is approved for sale by the
Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management or is substantially similar to a
product approved by the office. ADULT-USE CANNABIS FLOWER does not include
medical cannabis flower, hemp plant parts, or hemp-derived consumer products.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PRODUCTS. Cannabis product that is approved for sale by
the office or is substantially similar to a product approved by the office.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PRODUCT includes edible cannabis products, but does not
include medical cannabinoid products or lower-potency hemp edibles.
   CANNABIS FLOWER. The harvested flower, bud, leaves, and stems of a cannabis
plant. Cannabis flower includes adult-use cannabis flower and medical cannabis
flower. CANNABIS FLOWER does not include cannabis seed, hemp plant parts, or
hemp-derived consumer products.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT. Any of the following:
      (1)   Cannabis concentrate;
      (2)   A product infused with cannabinoids, including but not limited to
tetrahydrocannabinol, extracted or derived from cannabis plants or cannabis
flower; or
      (3)   Any other product that contains cannabis concentrate.
   HEMP-DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS. 
      (1)   A product intended for human or animal consumption, does not
contain cannabis flower or cannabis concentrate, and:
         (a)   Contains or consists of hemp plant parts; or
         (b)   Contains hemp concentrate or artificially derived cannabinoids
in combination with other ingredients.
      (2)   HEMP-DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS does not include artificially
derived cannabinoids, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived topical
products, hemp fiber products, or hemp grain.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. Any product that:
      (1)   Is intended to be eaten or consumed as a beverage by humans;
      (2)   Contains hemp concentrate or an artificially derived cannabinoid;
in combination with food ingredients;
      (3)   Is not a drug;
      (4)   Consists of servings that contain no more than five milligrams of
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, 25 milligrams of cannabinol, 25 milligrams of
cannabinol, or any combination of those cannabinoids that does not exceed the
identified amounts;
      (5)   Does not contain more than a combined total of 0.5 milligrams of
all other cannabinoids per serving;
      (6)   Does not contain an artificially derived cannabinoid other than
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol;
      (7)   Does not contain a cannabinoid derived from cannabis plants or
cannabis flower; and
      (8)   Is a type of product approved for sale by the office or is
substantially similar to a product approved by the office, including but not
limited to products that resemble non-alcoholic beverages, candy, and baked
goods.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk, any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, theaters, restaurants, bars, food establishments, places licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor, wine, or malt beverages, retail businesses, gyms, common
areas in buildings, public shopping areas, auditoriums, arenas, or other places
of public accommodation.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, refreshment, entertainment,
recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whose goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered,
sold, or otherwise made available to the public.
   EXCEPTIONS TO THE DEFINITION OF PUBLIC PLACE OR PLACE OF PUBLIC
ACCOMMODATION. A PUBLIC PLACE or a PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION does not
include the following:
      (1)   A private residence, including the individual's curtilage or yard.
      (2)   A private property, not generally accessible by the public, unless
the individual is explicitly prohibited from consuming cannabis flower,
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products on the property by the owner of the property; or
      (3)   On the premises of an establishment or event licensed to permit on-
site consumption.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated product containing
cannabis flower, cannabis products, artificially derived cannabinoids, or hemp-
derived consumer products. Smoking includes carrying or using an activated
electronic delivery device for human consumption through inhalation of aerosol
or vapor from the product.
(Ord. 410, passed 11-6-2023)
§ 96.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency
hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place or a place of
public accommodation unless the premises is an establishment or event licensed
to permit on-site consumption of adult-use cannabis flower and adult use
cannabis products. See M.S. §§ 342.09, subd. 1(2) and 342.09, subd. l(7)(iii)
and M.S. § 152.0263, subd. 5.
   (B)   No person shall vaporize or smoke cannabis flower, cannabis products,
artificially derived cannabinoids, or hemp-derived consumer products in any
location where the smoke, aerosol, or vapor would be inhaled by a minor. See
M.S. § 342.09, subd. 1(7)(b)(9).
(Ord. 410, passed 11-6-2023)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Criminal Penalty. A violation of this chapter shall be a petty
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $300. Nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the United States, the State of Minnesota, or the city from
investigating or prosecuting any other activity that is a crime under any other
federal or state statute or county ordinance.
   (B)   An alleged violation or violation of this chapter may be investigated
by a peace officer as defined in M.S. § 626.84, subd. 1. Any alleged violation
or violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted by the office of the Aitkin
County Attorney.
(Ord. 410, passed 11-6-2023)
CHAPTER 97: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
97.01   Title
   
97.02   Scope
   
97.03   Intent
   
97.04   Application
   
97.05   Definitions
   
97.06   Terms, words, and meanings
   
97.07   Code Official for property maintenance inspections
   
97.08   Duties and powers of the Code Official
   
97.09   General requirement
   
97.10   Unsafe structures and equipment
   
97.11   Emergency measures
   
97.12   Demolition
   
97.13   Exterior structure
   
97.14   Exterior property areas
   
97.15   Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs
   
97.16   Nuisances, junk, and blight
   
97.17   Rubbish and garbage
   
97.18   Extermination
   
97.19   Notices and orders
   
97.20   Means of appeal
   
97.21   Administrative hearing
   
97.22   File transmittal
   
97.23   Presentation of case
   
97.24   Written decision
   
97.25   No appeal available
   
97.26   Failure to appear
   
97.27   Decision review
   
97.28   Option to withdraw
   
97.29   Appeal
   
97.30   Notice
   
97.31   Decisions
   
97.32   Suspension or revocation
   
97.33   Abatement
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code,
hereinafter referred to as "this chapter," and the City of Aitkin, Minnesota,
hereinafter referred to as "city."
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.02 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing residential and
non-residential structures and all existing premises, structures, equipment,
and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection
from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for
safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators, and
occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for
administration, enforcement, and penalties.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.03 INTENT.
   This chapter shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to
ensure public health, safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by the
continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing
structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be
altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required
herein.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   General. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in §§
97.01 to
97.03. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this chapter specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
   (B)   Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards required by
this chapter or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or
premises was constructed, altered, or repaired shall be maintained in good
working order. No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service,
facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except
for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are
in progress. The requirements of this chapter are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner
or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures, and premises.
   (C)   Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the State Building Code, State Mechanical, Fuel
Gas, and Plumbing Code, and the National Electrical Code. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any provision of
Chapters 94,
95 or
152 of this code.
   (D)   Existing remedies. The provisions in this chapter shall not be
constructed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe, or unsanitary.
   (E)   Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations, or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter
shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
   (F)   Historic buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings
when such buildings or structures are judged by the Code Official to be safe
and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare.
   (G)   Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this chapter shall be those that are listed in §
150.15 and considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the
prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this chapter and the reference standards, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
   (H)   Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure, or
equipment, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this chapter, shall be determined by the Code Official.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Code Official.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
   BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures, including a bathtub or
shower.
   BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes
in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter or any duly authorized representative.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   EASEMENT. The portion of land or property reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The
EASEMENT shall be permitted to be for use under, on, or above a said lot or
lots.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and an adjoining property
under the control or owners or operators of such premises.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats, or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serves as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination method.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or
near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility
of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
   HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure used for living, sleeping, eating, or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered HABITABLE SPACES.
   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space
equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating
which does not contain within such a unit a toilet, lavatory, and bathtub or
shower.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   INFESTATION. The presence within or contiguous to a structure or premises of
insects, rats, vermin, or other pests.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public
streets for reason, including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own
power.
   LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been
affixed a label, seal, symbol, or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency, or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items, and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
   LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET. To permit, provide, or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises, or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement, or license, or pursuant to
an unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
   OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
   OPENABLE AREA. The part of a window, skylight, or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, or any other group acting
as a unit.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot, or parcel of land, easement, or public way, including
any structures thereon.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded or otherwise
permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living but not for cooking
purposes.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage;
includes the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other
combustible materials; paper, rages, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials.
   SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include
permanent provisions for living, eating, and either sanitation or kitchen
facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a
dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership, or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
   TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
   VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner (e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work).
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.06 TERMS, WORDS, AND MEANINGS.
   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
   (B)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
   (C)   Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
chapter and are defined in the International Fire Code, International Zoning
Code, State Building Code, State Mechanical, Fuel Gas, and Plumbing Code, or
the National Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them as stated in these codes.
   (D)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
   (E)   Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,”
“building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping unit,” or “story”
are stated in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.07 CODE OFFICIAL FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   General. The executive official in charge of property maintenance
inspection shall be known as the Code Official.
   (B)   Appointment. The Code Official shall be appointed by the City Council.
   (C)   Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the city and
with the concurrence of the City Council, the Code Official shall have the
authority to appoint Deputy Code Officials; other related technical officers,
inspectors, and other employees as needed.
   (D)   Liability. The Code Official, officer, or employees charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the city, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally, and are hereby relieved from all personal liability
for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required
or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against
any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee
in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter
shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the
final termination of the proceedings. The Code Official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit, or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter; and any officer,
acting in good faith and without malice with regards to the enforcement of this
chapter, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its
provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official
duties in connection therewith.
   (E)   Fees. The fees for activities and services performed in carrying out
the responsibilities under this chapter shall be as indicated in the fee
schedule adopted by the City Council and updated from time to time.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.08 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   General. The Code Official shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Implementation authority. The Code Official shall have authority as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare to
interpret and implement the provisions of this chapter; to secure the intent
thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or
other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or
fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this chapter, or of
violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety.
   (C)   Inspections. The Code Official shall make all of the required
inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing. The Code
Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to
report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the
City Administrator.
   (D)   Right of entry. The Code Official is authorized to enter the structure
or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the Code Official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by
law.
   (E)   Identification. The Code Official shall carry proper identification
when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of the Official's
duties under this chapter.
   (F)   Notices and orders. The Code Official shall issue all necessary
notices or orders pursuant to §
97.99 listed below to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (G)   Records. The Code Official shall keep records of all business and
activities specified in the provisions of this chapter. Such records shall be
retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which
such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by
other regulations.
   (H)   Alternative materials, methods, and equipment. The provisions of this
chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
chapter, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative
material or method of construction shall be approved where the Code Official
finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of
the provisions of this chapter, and that the alternate material, method, or
work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability, and safety.
   (I)   Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or
method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Code Official
shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance
at no expense to the jurisdiction.
   (J)   Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Code Official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing
procedures performed by an approved agency.
   (K)   Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code Official
for the period required for retention of public records.
   (L)   Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment, and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been
reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working
condition, and approved.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.09 GENERAL REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment, and exterior property.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except
as otherwise provided for in this chapter. A person shall not occupy as owner-
occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit
are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition that part
of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit, or premises which they
occupy and control.
   (C)   Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blight problem or adversely
affect the public health or safety.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.10 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   General. When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official
to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is
found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
      (1)   Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property, or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete
collapse is possible.
      (2)   Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable
liquid containers, or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to
life, health, property, or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or
structure.
      (3)   Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy whenever the Code Official finds that such structure is unsafe,
unlawful, or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or
lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating
facilities, or other essential equipment required by this chapter, or because
the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the
structure or to the public.
      (4)   Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or
in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this chapter, or
was erected, altered, or occupied contrary to law.
   (B)   Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for
human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse,
the Code Official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the
premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the Code Official shall cause the premises to be closed
and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement
by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
   (C)   Notice. Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with §
97.19(C). The notice shall be in the form prescribed in §
97.19(B).
   (D)   Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply
with the notice provisions within the time given, the Code Official shall post
on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word
"condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment, or removing the placard.
   (E)   Placard removal. The Code Official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or
removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the Code Official shall
be subject to the penalties provided by §
97.99.
   (F)   Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded
by the Code Official shall be vacated as ordered by the Code Official. Any
person who shall occupy a placarded premise or shall operate placarded
equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall
let anyone occupy a placarded premise or operate placarded equipment shall be
liable for the penalties provided by §
97.99.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.11 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   (A)   Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and
life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual
or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any
structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of
toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous
equipment, the Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and
require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The Code Official shall
cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as
follows: “This structure is unsafe and its occupancy has been prohibited by the
Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure
except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs,
removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same.
   (B)   Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
chapter, whenever, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is imminent
danger due to an unsafe condition, the Code Official shall order the necessary
work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such
structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described
has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the Code
Official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
   (C)   Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the Code Official
shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having
jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways, and places adjacent to
unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
   (D)   Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Code Official
shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as
expeditiously as possible.
   (E)   Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the
jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such
costs.
   (F)   Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter have the right
to appeal such order pursuant to §§
97.21 to
97.32.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.12 DEMOLITION.
   (A)   General. The Code Official shall order the owner of any premises upon
which is located any structure, which in the Code Official's judgment is so
old, dilapidated, or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that
it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to
repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's
option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such
structure.
   (B)   Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with §
97.99.
   (C)   Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply or
appeal under §§
97.21 to
97.32 with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the Code Official
shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and
the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate.
   (D)   Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and
removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or
arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable
materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after
deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly
remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of
expense and the amounts deducted, to the person who is entitled thereto,
subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned
over, the report shall so state.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.13 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.
   (A)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound, and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety, or welfare.
   (B)   Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks, and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
Peeling, flaking, and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted.
All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope
and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather
resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall
be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or
corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion.
Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for
stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. Upon notification
of violation, the owner has 30 days in which to comply.
   (C)   Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers
in accordance with §§
150.01 to
150.04.
   (D)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
   (E)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. All foundation walls shall also
be kept clear of volunteer trees and brush that is overgrown near the house
that could cause damage to the foundation walls.
   (F)   Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials; and weather resistant and properly surface
coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   (G)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight, and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and
free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.
   (H)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta
trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
   (I)   Overhang extension. All overhang extensions, including, but not
limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes,
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
   (J)   Stairways, decks, porches, and balconies. Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch, and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   (K)   Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in
good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   (L)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (M)   Window, skylight, and door frames. Every window, skylight, door, and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair, and weather tight.
   (N)   Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks
and holes.
      (1)   Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
      (2)   Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies, and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and
sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors
shall be in accordance with the appropriate code.
   (O)   Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain, and surface drainage water.
   (P)   Other hatchways. Doors, windows, or hatchways for dwelling units, room
units, or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide
security for the occupants and property within.
      (1)   Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress
is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, and shall
have a latch throw of not less than one inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall
be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in
good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not
be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
      (2)   Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part six feet
(1,828 mm) or higher above ground level or a walking surface below that
provides access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit that is
rented, leased, or let shall be equipped with a fall protection device.
      (3)   Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or
let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized
entry.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.14 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   (A)   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in
a clean, safe, and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the
exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (B)   Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any structure located thereon. The exception is approved
retention areas and reservoirs.
   (C)   Sidewalk and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces, and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair,
and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
   (D)   Weeds and grass.
      (1)   Violations involving weeds and long grass are subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 94.
      (2)   A landowner wishing to maintain a managed natural landscape in
compliance with M.S. § 412.925, as it may be amended from time to time, may be
exempted from the requirements of this section by submittal of a managed
natural landscape plan.
   (E)   Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.
   (F)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans, or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors, or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
   (G)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences, and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
   (H)   Abandoned and wrecked vehicles.
      (1)   State laws adopted. The provisions of M.S. Ch. 168B, as it may be
amended from time to time, relating to abandoned motor vehicles, is adopted and
made a part of this division (H) as if set out in full herein.
      (2)   Definitions. See § 97.05. Additionally, for the purposes of this
division (H), the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein
ascribed to them as follows.
         (a)   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A VEHICLE, as defined below, that has
remained for a period of more than four hours on public property illegally, or
lacking vital component parts, or has remained for a period of more than four
hours on private property without consent of the person in control of such
property, or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial,
potential further use consistent with its usual functions, unless it is kept in
an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall include a vehicle which is in
a wrecked, junked, or partially dismantled condition. It shall also mean a
motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to the city or a vehicle
offered for sale by its owner parked on public property. It shall also include
any vehicle which is not properly and/or currently licensed within the state.
         (b)   CLASSIC OR PIONEER CAR. As defined in M.S. § 168.10, as it maybe
amended from time to time, a CLASSIC OR PIONEER CAR shall not be considered an
abandoned vehicle.
         (c)   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      (3)   Nuisance declared. The City Council has determined that abandoned
(including vehicles not currently licensed), wrecked, junked, partially
dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the city create a public nuisance
tending to reduce the value of private property, invite plundering, create fire
hazards, attract vermin, and constitute a threat to the health and safety of
the public. The accumulation and outside storage of such vehicles, in the
nature of rubbish, litter, and unsightly debris is a detriment to the
environment and is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be
abated as provided herein or as provided under any other ordinance of the city
or law of the state.
      (4)   Abandonment of vehicles. No person shall park, store, or leave, or
permit the parking, storing, or leaving of, any abandoned vehicle on public or
private property within the city unless:
         (a)   Within a building;
         (b)   Such vehicle is stored or parked on private property in
connection with a duly licensed or authorized commercial enterprise operated
and conducted pursuant to law when such parking or storing of vehicles is
necessary to the operation of said commercial enterprise.
      (5)   Impoundment of abandoned vehicles. The city may take into custody
and impound any abandoned vehicle which is in violation of the provisions of
this section. Any person, at the direction of the City Administrator, Police
Chief, or any other police officer of the city is hereby expressly authorized
to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing this section.
      (6)   Sale of abandoned vehicles.
         (a)   Vehicles over seven years old. When an abandoned vehicle is more
than seven model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not
display a license plate currently valid in the state, or any other state or
foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction
and shall not be subject to the notification and reclamation provisions of this
section.
         (b)   Vehicles seven years old and newer.
            1.   Notice to owner. When an abandoned vehicle does not fall
within the provisions of this section, the City Administrator, Police Chief, or
a police officer of the city shall give notice of the taking into custody of
the vehicle pursuant to M.S. § 168B.06, as it may be amended from time to time.
            2.   Public sale of vehicle. An abandoned vehicle taken into
custody and not reclaimed under this section shall be sold to the highest
bidder at public auction or sale, following ten days' published notice thereof
in the official newspaper of the city.
            3.   Proceeds of sale. From the proceeds of the sale of the
abandoned vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing,
preserving, and storing of the vehicle, and all notice, publication and
administrative costs incurred pursuant to this section. Any remainder from the
proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled
lienholder for 90 days and, if not claimed, shall thereafter be deposited in
the city treasury.
            4.   Reclamation of vehicle. The owner, or any lienholder of an
abandoned vehicle, or any person in lawful possession or control of the
property upon which said vehicle was abandoned, shall have a right to reclaim
said vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing and storage charges
resulting from the taking of the vehicle into custody within 15 days after the
date of the notice required by this section.
      (7)   Notification. Upon notification of violation, the owner has seven
days in which to comply.
   (I)   Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate, or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any
private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving, or
graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface
to an approved state of maintenance and repair. Upon notification of violation,
the owner has seven days in which to comply.
   (J)   Household furnishings, appliances, and trade fixtures. It is unlawful
for any person to store or keep any household furnishings or appliances or
trade fixtures intended for use inside of a building on any property within the
corporate limits of the city, unless housed within a lawfully erected building
or unless such person has a valid junk dealer's license.
   (K)   Storage of wood.
      (1)   Definition. WOOD shall include, but not be limited to, firewood and
lumber, whether rough, precut construction grade, or finished, which is stored
or kept on property in the city.
      (2)   Persons exempt. This division (K) shall not apply to:
         (a)   Persons having property on which new construction is taking
place and the wood on such property is being used for said construction, unless
the said wood has remained on the property for more than six months and is not
a permanent part of the new construction at the end of that time; and
         (b)   Persons storing or keeping wood on property when said wood is
stored or kept in neat and secure stacks in a covered structure impervious to
the elements.
      (3)   Conditions of outside storage. Wood stored or kept in the city
which is not contained within a covered enclosure impervious to the elements
shall be stored or kept in neat and secure stacks as follows: there is no
minimum width requirement for open stacks under three feet in height. Any open
stacks over three feet in height shall have a height which is no more than
twice its width with a maximum height of nine feet. Stacks shall be no less
than five feet from any side property line on corner lots, 30 feet from any
front property line or any front of a house, whichever is closer, and two feet
from any rear property line or any side property line of interior lots. Grass
height around all wood stacks shall be maintained at a maximum height of six
inches.
      (4)   Number of cords. No more than one cord of wood shall be stored on
any residential property.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.15 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBS.
   (A)   Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition
and in good repair.
   (B)   Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.16 NUISANCES, JUNK, AND BLIGHT.
   (A)   Public nuisance.
      (1)   Whoever by an act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally
maintains a public nuisance may be ordered to abate the nuisance as provided in
this chapter, and may be charged with a misdemeanor offense or issued a city
penalty.
      (2)   The following acts or omissions shall constitute a public nuisance:
         (a)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public;
         (b)   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any
public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public;
         (c)   Willfully opposes or obstructs a health officer or physician
charged with the enforcement of the health laws in performing any legal duties;
or
         (d)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law to be a
public nuisance, junk, or blight and for which no sentence is specifically
provided.
   (B)   Permitting public nuisance, junk, or blight. No person shall permit
real property under such person's control to be used to maintain a public
nuisance, junk, or blight or let the same knowing it will be so sold.
   (C)   Permitting unhealthful waste disposal systems. No person shall permit
or maintain an offensive, nauseous, hurtful, dangerous, or unhealthful
outhouse, privy vault, sewer, or private drain upon said premises or land, or
premises or land occupied or used by or under such person's control.
   (D)   Permitting unhealthful conditions. No person shall permit, suffer, or
maintain or fail to remove any offensive, nauseous, hurtful, dangerous, or
unhealthful condition to or for the neighborhood resulting from the failure to
properly dispose of sick or unsound flesh, meat, fish, carcass, garbage,
sewage, waste, debris, or any other offensive substance, liquid, or thing
whatsoever upon said premises or land, or premises or land occupied or used by
or under such person's control, or drop, discharge, pass, deposit, or otherwise
deliver the same upon any ground, private or public.
   (E)   Fertilizer and burial of waste. No person shall leave, deposit, or
cause to be placed on any private ground any garbage, sewage, waste, debris,
carcass, or other substance or matter which is offensive or unhealthy by
decomposition, provided that the use of manure in the normal course for
agriculture or horticulture is permitted.
   (F)   Slaughterhouses. Except as permitted by §
152.040, no person shall keep or use any slaughterhouse, nor slay, kill, or
butcher any animal, except for their own home use, nor melt or fry out any
rough tallow, nor keep or have any stale, putrid, or stinking fat, grease, or
meat. No person shall keep within said city any undressed or dry hides, or
offensive, nauseous substance or liquid at any place from whence the stench
thereof may reach the street, avenue, alley, lane, or public land, or to any
dwelling. No owner or occupant of any grocery, cellar, packing house, meat
shop, soap factory, tannery, brewery, distillery and dye house, stable, or
other place of business shall suffer or permit any litter or garbage to be
thereon, or swept therefrom upon any street, avenue, lane, or alley. Nor shall
any business owner suffer or permit any foul, unclean, nauseous, or offensive
liquid or substance to pass from any premises under the owner's control
adjacent thereto, into, over, or upon any street, avenue, lane, or alley, or
open drain, gutter, or sewer, or over or upon any private grounds.
   (G)   Septic tanks. No person shall cause, permit, or maintain any abandoned
cesspool or septic tank without it being properly filled.
   (H)   Junk. No person, firm, or corporation of any kind shall permit the
accumulation of junk that includes, but is not limited to, any of the
following: waste material, trash, rubbish, refuse, or litter of any kind upon
any land or inside or under any building or structure which may provide
harborage or breeding places for mosquitoes, vermin, or rats. No person, firm,
or corporation of any kind shall permit on a property the accumulation of:
batteries; paper; lumber or salvaged wood; boxes or containers; bottles; cans;
discarded chemicals; bricks; stones; old or scrap copper, brass, iron, steel,
or other metals; old and/or inoperable appliances; tanks; barrels; cages;
clothing; pallets; wire/cable; dismantled, abandoned, or inoperable vehicles,
farm equipment, construction equipment, campers, recreation vehicles, boats, or
parts thereof; rope; rags; glass; rubber; construction debris; plumbing
fixtures; furniture; brush piles; cut down trees and branches; pulled stumps;
leaf piles not in a composting container; or other similar objects and
materials which may provide harborage or breeding places for mosquitoes,
vermin, or rats. Useful items such as firewood and building materials may be
stored in compliance with § 97.14, provided they are stored in a manner that
will not create any danger or threat to public health.
   (I)   Blight. No person, firm, or corporation of any kind shall maintain or
permit to be maintained any of these causes of blight or blighting factors upon
any property owned, leased, rented, or occupied by such person, firm, or
corporation:
      (1)   The building, structure, or parcel of land is in a condition which
poses a threat to the safety, health, morals, and general welfare of the
community;
      (2)   It is attracting illegal activity as documented by the Police
Department;
      (3)   It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Department;
      (4)   The existence of the following conditions: missing, damaged, or
boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing walls or roofs; parts of walls
that need repair; damaged or missing siding or gutters; a structurally faulty
foundation, porch, chimney, or other attached structure; a principal or
accessory buildings in need of repair, paint, or sealer; fencing in disrepair;
overgrown brush; grass or weeds in violation of § 97.14(D) listed above;
      (5)   Accumulation of junk as defined in this section;
      (6)   Sanitary matter, meaning liquid and solid waste intended to be
carried off in sewers or drains;
      (7)   A structure on the property that has been continuously vacant for
at least one year, has been condemned as unfit for human occupancy or use by
the Building Official in accordance with the State Building Code, but has
neither been demolished nor repaired by the owner as directed by the Building
Official;
      (8)   There is evidence of rat or rodent infestation or harborages caused
by conditions on the property;
      (9)   The property has an inadequate sewage, septic, plumbing, well, or
heating system;
      (10)   If the property is vacant, the owner has failed to take adequate
precautions to prevent the use of or access to the property by trespassers; or
      (11)   A potential attractive nuisance to children exists on the
property, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, basements,
excavations, or broken fences, refrigerators, and other appliances.
   (J)   Unlawful occupations or hobbies. No person shall exercise, carry on,
follow, or engage in or work at any business, hobby, trade, or calling or
occupation which shall be dangerous, hurtful, offensive, or unhealthy to the
neighborhood.
   (K)   Deposit of materials on city streets prohibited. No person shall
deposit or permit to be deposited on any public street in this city, leaves,
grass, sand, or similar materials, nor shall any person plow, shovel, or blow
or permit the plowing, shoveling, or blowing of snow onto a public street in
the city, excepting in those commercial districts where property owners have
prior permission to deposit snow from the public sidewalk onto a public street.
This provision shall not apply to any person who is in the process of
constructing or maintaining a yard or drive, provided that the materials are
immediately removed from the street. Upon notification of violation, the owner
has seven days in which to comply.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.17 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
   (A)   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
   (B)   Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner.
   (C)   Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premise shall
provide approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises
shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
   (D)   Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned, or stored on premises without first removing
the doors.
   (E)   Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
   (F)   Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of
the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit;
or an approved leak-proof, covered, outside garbage container.
   (G)   Garbage containers. The owner of every establishment which produces
garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-
proof containers for the storage of such materials until removed from the
premises for disposal. The owner of every one- and two-family dwelling unit
shall be responsible for the removal of garbage. The owner of every
establishment with more than two dwelling units shall provide adequate
containers with close-fitting covers for the storage of garbage until removed
from the premises for disposal.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.18 EXTERMINATION.
   (A)   Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-
infestation.
   (B)   Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
   (C)   Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-
tenant non-residential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the
premises.
   (D)   Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house, or a non-residential
structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas
of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of
an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant
shall be responsible for extermination.
   (E)   Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.
   (F)   Exception. Where the infestations are caused by defects in the
structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.19 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Notice to person responsible. Whenever the Code Official determines
that there has been a violation of this chapter or has grounds to believe that
a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed below
to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this chapter.
Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with division (B) below.
   (B)   Form. Such notice prescribed in division (A) above shall be in
accordance with all of the following:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
      (3)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued;
      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (5)   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal; and
      (6)   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
§
97.99.
   (C)   Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address;
      (3)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure affected by such notice; and
      (4)   Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set
forth in §
97.99.
   (D)   Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a
notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or
otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied
with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee, or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to the Code Official a signed and
notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and
fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections
or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.20 MEANS OF APPEAL.
   Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice
or order issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal pursuant to
§§
97.21 to
97.32, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within ten days
after the day the decision, notice, or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or applied,
the provisions of this chapter do not fully apply, or the requirements of this
chapter are adequately satisfied by other means.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.21 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   Hearing officers. The City Council will periodically approve a list of
qualified individuals, from which the City Administrator will randomly select a
hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for which a hearing is
requested. The hearing officer will be a public officer, as defined by M.S. §
609.415, as it may be amended from time to time. The hearing officer must not
be a city employee. The City Administrator must establish a procedure for
evaluating the competency of the hearing officer, including comments from
accused violators and city staff. These reports must be provided to the City
Council.
   (B)   Notice of hearing. Within 30 days of the request for a hearing, the
City Administrator will schedule the hearing and will notify the violator and
involved city staff of the date, time, and place for the hearing. Parties are
expected to be available for two hours. Notice of the hearing must be mailed to
the violator and the hearing officer at least ten days in advance of the
scheduled hearing, unless a shorter time is accepted by all parties. The notice
must contain the names of the parties, the identity of the hearing officer, the
location of the alleged violation and the type of violation alleged.
   (C)   Continuance. A request for a continuance must be made to the City
Administrator at least five days prior to the scheduled hearing date. The City
Administrator may grant a continuance at the request of the violator or the
city staff member only for good cause shown and for no more than ten days from
the originally assigned date.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.22 FILE TRANSMITTAL.
   (A)   Upon receipt of any request for a hearing, the City Clerk-Treasurer's
office will compile a summary report detailing the facts in support of any
determination that the offense constitutes a violation.
   (B)   The summary report will include:
      (1)   Copy of the citation issued;
      (2)   Copy of the administrative notice, which preceded the citation;
      (3)   Copy of any case history in the issuing employee's department;
      (4)   Photographs and/or videotape of property where available; and
      (5)   Proof of mailing and/or posting of notice on the property if the
citation was not personally served on the violator.
   (C)   The file must be ready for the hearing officer to pick up on the
business day preceding the scheduled hearing.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.23 PRESENTATION OF CASE.
   At the hearing, the parties will have the opportunity to present testimony
and question any witnesses, but strict rules of evidence will not apply. The
hearing officer must tape record the hearing and receive testimony and
exhibits. The hearing officer must receive and give weight to evidence,
including hearsay evidence, that possesses probative value commonly accepted by
reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their affairs.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.24 WRITTEN DECISION.
   (A)   The hearing officer must issue a written decision containing findings
of fact, conclusions of law, and an order. The decision will be mailed to the
parties within ten days after the hearing. The hearing officer has the
authority to determine that a violation occurred, to dismiss a citation, to
impose the scheduled fine, and to reduce, stay, or waive a scheduled fine
either unconditionally or upon compliance with appropriate conditions.
   (B)   When imposing a penalty for a violation, the hearing officer may
consider any or all of the following factors:
      (1)   Duration of the violation;
      (2)   Frequency of reoccurrence of the violation;
      (3)   Seriousness of the violation;
      (4)   History of the violation;
      (5)   Violator's conduct after issuance of the administrative notice and
citation;
      (6)   Violator's conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;
      (7)   Good faith effort by the violator to comply;
      (8)   Impact of the violation upon the community;
      (9)   Prior record of city code violations; and
      (10)   Any other factors appropriate to a just result.
   (C)   The hearing officer may not impose a fine greater than the established
fine, except that the hearing officer may impose a fine for each week that the
violation continues if:
      (1)   The violation caused or is causing a serious threat of harm to the
public health, safety, or welfare; or
      (2)   The violator intentionally and unreasonably refused or refuses to
comply with the code requirement.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.25 NO APPEAL AVAILABLE.
   Except as provided in §§
97.27 to
97.32, the decision of the hearing officer is final without any further right
of appeal.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.26 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   The failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the violator's
rights to an administrative hearing and an admission of the violation. A
hearing officer may waive this result upon good cause shown. Examples of good
cause are death in the immediate family or documented incapacitating illness of
the violator; a court order requiring the violator to appear for another
hearing at the same time; and lack of proper service of the citation or notice
of the hearing. Good cause does not include forgetfulness, lack of
transportation or childcare, and intentional delay.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.27 DECISION REVIEW.
   An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the hearing
officer as provided in state law.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.28 OPTION TO WITHDRAW.
   These procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have
been charged with administrative offenses. The individual may withdraw from
participation in this administrative process by submitting a written request
for withdrawal to the City Administrator within seven days of the issuance of
the city penalty. Upon receiving this written request, the city may bring
criminal or other civil charges according to this code and state law. Likewise,
nothing in this section shall prohibit the city, in its discretion, to initiate
criminal charges or any other remedy in lieu of the administrative procedures
herein set forth.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.29 APPEAL.
   A violator may appeal the hearing officer's decision in any of the following
matters to the City Council for administrative review:
   (A)   An alleged failure to obtain a permit, license, or other approval from
the City Council as required by an ordinance;
   (B)   An alleged violation of a permit, license, other approval, or the
conditions attached to the permit, license, or approval, that was granted by
the City Council; or
   (C)   An alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity who
has received a license granted by the City Council.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.30 NOTICE.
   The appeal under this chapter will be heard by the City Council. Notice of
the hearing must be delivered to the alleged violator or property owner and
involved city staff, in person or by mail, at least ten days in advance of the
hearing. The parties to the hearing will have an opportunity to present oral or
written arguments regarding the hearing officer's decision.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.31 DECISIONS.
   The City Council must consider the record, the hearing officer's decision,
and any additional arguments before making a determination. The Council is not
bound by the hearing officer's decision, but may adopt all or part of the
officer's decision. The Council's decision must be in writing.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.32 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   In addition to imposing a civil penalty, the Council may suspend or revoke a
city-issued license, permit, or other approvals associated with the violation.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.33 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Declaration of policy. The City Council has determined that the
health, safety, good order, general welfare, and convenience of the public are
threatened by certain public nuisances on property within the city limits. It
is declared to be the intention of the Council to abate these nuisances, and
this section is enacted for that purpose.
   (B)   Application. This section shall apply to the abatement of all public
nuisances, junk, and blight as defined anywhere within this chapter, unless
another procedure is specifically provided.
   (C)   Periodic inspection and investigation. The Code Official, Building
Official, City Administrator, Police Department personnel, or any other duly
authorized representative with all due just cause, shall cause to be inspected
all public and private places in the city within plain view which might contain
a public nuisance as defined in this chapter as often as practicable to
determine whether any such conditions exist. The Code Official, Building
Official, City Administrator, Police Department personnel, or any duly
authorized representative shall also investigate all reports of public
nuisances located within the city.
   (D)   Abatement of nuisances. Upon a determination by the Code Official,
Building Official, City Administrator, Police Department personnel, or any
authorized representative that a public nuisance exists within plain view on
any public or private property in the city, the Code Official, Building
Official, City Administrator, Police Department personnel, or any authorized
representative shall order the public nuisance to be abated in a manner
consistent with city code.
   (E)   Procedure for removal of public nuisances.
      (1)   Whenever the Code Official, Building Official, City Administrator,
Police Department personnel, or any authorized representative finds with
reasonable certainty that a public nuisance as identified by this chapter
exists within plain view on any public or private property in the city, the
duly authorized official shall notify the affected property owner by posting
notice in a conspicuous location on the property, or by first-class mail
addressed to the last known address that the public nuisance must be abated
within a reasonable period of time, not more than 14 days from the date of
service of the notice. Service by first-class mail shall be deemed complete
upon mailing. The order shall state with specificity the nature of the
violations and the requirements for compliance. The order shall also state that
the property owner may appeal the order, within ten days of the date of the
order, and request a hearing pursuant to §§
97.21 to
97.32. The order shall also state that failure to abate the public nuisance or
request a hearing within the applicable time periods will result in summary
abatement procedures, and that the cost of abatement will be assessed against
the subject property. Upon expiration of the time required by the notice, the
Code Official, Building Official, City Administrator, Police Department
personnel, or any authorized representative may abate the nuisance unless a
request for a hearing has been timely filed.
      (2)   Any property owner who feels aggrieved by an order of the Code
Official, Building Official, City Administrator, Police Department personnel,
or any authorized representative issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal the
order pursuant to §§
97.21 to
97.32.
      (3)   The Code Official, Building Official, City Administrator, Police
Department personnel, or any authorized representative shall keep a record of
the costs of abatements done under this section and shall report periodically
to the City Administrator or other appropriate officer all work done for which
assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the land,
lots, or parcels involved and the amount assessable to each.
      (4)   On or before October 1 of each year, the Finance Officer shall list
the total unpaid charges for each abatement made under this chapter against
each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable. The City Council
may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property
involved as a special assessment under other pertinent statutes, for
certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with current taxes. Such assessment shall be payable in no more than ten equal
annual installments, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.98 or by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and/or 90 days in jail. Each day that a
violation of this chapter occurs, shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. 416, passed 7-7-2025)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   TAXICABS
      
112.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
113.   TOBACCO
      
114.   CANNABIS BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Brew Pubs, Breweries and the Like
   
110.01   State law adopted
   
110.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
110.03   License required
   
110.04   Application for license
   
110.05   License fees
   
110.06   Granting licenses
   
110.07   Persons ineligible for license
   
110.08   Places ineligible for license
   
110.09   Conditions of license
   
110.10   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
   
110.11   Suspension and revocation of license
Intoxicating and 3.2% Malt Liquor
   
110.25   Provisions of state law adopted
   
110.26   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
110.27   Municipal liquor store established
   
110.28   License required
   
110.29   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses
   
110.30   Application for license
   
110.31   License fees
   
110.32   Granting of licenses
   
110.33   Person ineligible for license
   
110.34   Places ineligible for license
   
110.35   Conditions of license
   
110.36   Restriction on purchase and consumption
   
110.37   Suspension and revocation
   
110.38   Intoxicating liquor; off-sale
 
   
110.99   Penalty
BREW PUBS, BREWERIES AND THE LIKE
§ 110.01 STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made part of this subchapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of
the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if
they had been in existence at the time this subchapter is adopted.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017)
§ 110.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this subchapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017)
§ 110.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   General requirement. No person may directly or indirectly manufacture
or sell wholesale intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor without obtaining an
appropriate license from the Commissioner, except where otherwise provided in
this subchapter. The following types of licenses may be issued in the city.
   (B)   Classification of licenses.
      (1)   Brew pub. BREW PUB is a brewer who also holds one or more retail
on-sale licenses and who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor
in a year, at any one licensed premises, the entire production of which is
solely for consumption on tap on any licensed premises owned by the brewer, or
for off-sale from those licensed premises as permitted in M.S. § 340A.24, subd.
2, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (a)   On-sale license. A brew pub may be issued an on-sale
intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor license by the city for a restaurant
operated in the place of manufacture.
         (b)   Off-sale license. Notwithstanding M.S. § 340A.405, as it may be
amended from time to time, a brew pub that holds an on-sale license issued
pursuant to this section may, with the approval of the Commissioner, be issued
a license by the city for off-sale of malt liquor produced and packaged on the
licensed premises. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours
for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the jurisdiction in which the brew
pub is located, and the malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the
premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor
stores. Packaging of malt liquor for off-sale under this division (B)(1)(b)
must comply with M.S. § 340A.285, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (c)   Total retail sales. A brew pub’s total retail sales at on- or
off-sale under this section may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year; provided
that, off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.
      (2)   Brewer taprooms.
         (a)   Brewer taproom license.
            1.   The city may issue the holder of a brewer’s license under M.S.
§ 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (6)(i) or (6)(j), as it may be amended from time to
time, a brewer taproom license. A brewer taproom license authorizes on-sale of
malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of or
adjacent to one brewery location owned by the brewer. Nothing in this division
(B)(2)(a) precludes the holder of a brewer taproom license from also holding a
license to operate a restaurant at the brewery. M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be
amended from time to time, shall apply to a license issued under this division
(B)(2)(a). All provisions of this chapter that apply to a retail liquor license
shall apply to a license issued under this division (B)(2)(a) unless the
provision is explicitly inconsistent with this division (B)(2)(a).
            2.   A brewer my only have one taproom license under this division
(B)(2)(a), and may not have an ownership interest in a brew pub.
         (b)   Sunday on-sale. Notwithstanding M.S. § 340A.504, subd. 3, as it
may be amended from time to time, a taproom may be open and may conduct on-sale
business on Sundays.
      (3)   Small brewer off-sale.
         (a)   License limitations. A brewer licensed under M.S. § 340A.301,
subd. 6(c), (6)(i) or (6)(j), as it may be amended from time to time, may be
issued a license for off-sale of malt liquor at its licensed premises that has
been produced and packaged by the brewer. The license must be approved by the
Commissioner. A brewer may only have one license under this division (B)(3)(a).
The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed 500 barrels annually.
Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at
exclusive liquor stores in the jurisdiction in which the brewer is located. The
malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the
applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores. Malt liquor in
growlers may be sold at off-sale on Sundays. Packaging of malt liquor for off-
sale under this division (B)(3)(a) must comply with M.S. § 340A.285, as
hereinafter adopted and as may be amended from time to time.
         (b)   Prohibition. The city may not issue a license under this section
to a brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or any person having an economic
interest in the license or exercising control over the brewer seeking the
license, is a brewer that brews more than 20,000 barrels of its own brands of
malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 25,000 gallons of wine
annually.
      (4)   Brewer temporary on-sale. Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating
liquor licenses may be issued, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety, to brewers who manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a
year and are licensed for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with
a social event within the city sponsored by the brewer.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017)
§ 110.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license to sell liquor shall state the
name of the applicant, age, representations as to character (with such
references as the Council may require), citizenship, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the
business, how long he or she has been in that business at the place and such
other information as the Council may require from time to time. Every
application shall also include a copy of each summons received by the applicant
under M.S. § 340A.802, as it may be amended from time to time, during the
preceding year. Per M.S. § 340A.409,, as it may be amended from time to time,
in addition to containing such information, the application shall be in the
form prescribed by the Department of Public Safety and shall be verified and
filed with the City Administrator. No person shall make a false statement in an
application. Proof of liquor liability insurance must accompany the
application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. No liquor license may be issued, maintained
or renewed unless the applicant demonstrates proof of financial responsibility
as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with
regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801 (dram shop laws), as it may be
amended from time to time. Such proof shall be filed with the Department of
Public Safety and the City Administrator. Any liability insurance policy filed
as proof of financial responsibility under this division (B) shall conform to
M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, this section shall not apply to licensees who by affidavit establish
that:
      (1)   They are on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licensees with sales of less than
$25,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year;
      (2)   They are off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licensees with sales of less
than $50,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year;
      (3)   They are holders of an on-sale wine license with sales of less than
$25,000 for wine for the preceding year; or
      (4)   They are holders of temporary wine licenses issued under law.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017)
§ 110.05 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Fees. The fee for a liquor license shall be as set forth in the Fee
Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Payment. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the City Administrator for payment in full of the license fee and
the fixed investigation fee required under §
110.07(A) of this chapter, if any. All fees shall be paid into the General
Fund. If an application for a license is rejected, the City Administrator shall
refund the amount paid as the license fee.
   (C)   Term; pro rata fee.
      (1)   Each license, except temporary licenses, shall be issued for a
period of one year; except that, if the application is made during the license
year, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee,
with an unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month.
      (2)   Every license, except temporary licenses, shall expire on June 30.
   (D)   Refunds. No refund of any fee shall be made, except as authorized by
statute.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017)
§ 110.06 GRANTING LICENSES.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial
application for any license issued pursuant to this subchapter and, on
application for transfer of existing license, the applicant shall pay with the
application the investigation fee as set out in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances. The application for off-sale 3.2% malt
liquor, temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor and special club licenses in such
case shall be made on a form prescribed by §
110.04(A) of this chapter and with such additional information as the Council
may require. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council,
a comprehensive background and financial investigation of the applicant is
necessary, the Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract
with the Commissioner of Public Safety or Bureau of Criminal Investigation. The
investigation fee for this comprehensive background and financial investigation
to be paid by the applicant shall be as set out in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances. The unused balance of the fee shall be
returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee
shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount actually expended
on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the application is
denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on-sale wine license. No license shall be issued,
transferred or renewed if the results show to the satisfaction of the Council
that issuance would not be in the public interest.
   (C)   Hearing and issuance. The City Council shall investigate all facts set
out in the application and not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive
background and financial investigation conducted. Opportunity shall be given to
any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the
investigation and hearing, the Council shall, in its discretion, grant or
refuse the application. No license shall become effective until the proof of
financial security has been approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (D)   Person and premises licensed; transfer.
      (1)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the
premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another
person or place without City Council approval.
      (2)   Where a liquor license is held by a corporation, a change in
ownership of 10% or more of the stock of the corporation must be reported in
writing to the City Council within ten days of the transfer. A transfer of
stock without prior Council approval is grounds for revocation of the license.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017)
§ 110.07 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   No retail license shall be issued to:
      (1)   A person under 21 years of age;
      (2)   A person who has had an intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor
license revoked within five years of the license application or to any person
who at the time of the violation owns any interest, whether as a holder of more
than 5% of the capital stock of a corporation licensee, as a partner or
otherwise, in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a
corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business or firm in which
any such person is in any manner interested;
      (3)   A person not of good moral character and repute;
      (4)   A person who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer,
brewer or wholesaler; or
      (5)   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
issued.
   (B)   In addition, no new retail license may be issued to, and the Council
may refuse to renew the license of, a person who, within five years of the
license application, has been convicted of a felony or willful violation of a
federal or state law or local ordinance governing the manufacture, safe,
distribution or possession for sale or distribution of an alcoholic beverage.
The Alcohol and Gambling Enforcement Division or City Council may require that
fingerprints be taken and forwarded to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for
purposes of a criminal history check.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017)
§ 110.08 PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   General prohibition. No license shall be issued for any place or any
business ineligible for such a license under state law.
   (B)   Conviction or revocation.
      (1)   No license shall be granted for sale on any premises where licensee
has been convicted of the violation of this subchapter, or of the state liquor
laws, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause until one year
has elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
      (2)   Exceptions may be considered by the City Council after 90 days has
elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
   (C)   Six months prior eligibility. No on-sale license or special club
license shall be granted for a business or club which has not been in operation
and eligible to receive a license for at least six months immediately preceding
the application for license. Exceptions to this requirement may be considered
by the City Council.
   (D)   Delinquent taxes and charges. No license shall be granted for
operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims
of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (E)   Distance from school.
      (1)   No license shall be granted within 350 feet of any school. In
applying this restriction, the distance shall be measured between the main
front entrances following the route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
      (2)   If a school is established within 350 feet of an existing licensed
business, the licensed business may continue its operation until such time as
it becomes unlicensed for a period of 365 consecutive days, after which no
license permitted under this subchapter may be granted.
   (F)   Zoning district. No license shall be issued for any place or business
unless the same is located in a district zoned for such a business under
Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017)
§ 110.09 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   In general. Every license is subject to the conditions in the
following divisions and all other provisions of this subchapter and of any
other applicable ordinance, state law or regulation.
   (B)   Insurance. Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of
state law and of this subchapter is continuing condition of any license granted
pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   Licensee’s responsibility. Every licensee is responsible for the
conduct in the licensed establishment and the conditions of sobriety and order
in it. Any sale of alcoholic beverages by any employee authorized to sell such
beverages in the establishment is the act of the licensee for the purposes of
M.S. Ch. 340A, except §§ 340A.701, 340A.702 and 340A.703, as they may be
amended from time to time.
   (D)   Sales to minors or obviously intoxicated persons. No liquor shall be
sold or served to any obviously intoxicated person or to any person under 21
years of age.
   (E)   Consumption by minors. No person under the age of 21 years shall be
permitted to consume liquor on the licensed premises.
   (F)   Employment of minors.
      (1)   No person under the age of 18 may serve or sell intoxicating liquor
in a retail intoxicating liquor establishment (on-sale or off-sale).
      (2)   No person under the age of 18 may be employed in a retail 3.2% malt
liquor off-sale establishment.
      (3)   No minor under the age of 18 shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquors are
served or consumed or in any tasks involving the serving, dispensing or
handling of such liquors that are consumed on the premises; except that:
         (a)   Minors who have reached the age of 17 may be employed to perform
busing or dishwashing serviced in those rooms or areas of a restaurant, hotel,
motel or resort where the presence of intoxicating liquor is incidental to food
service of preparation;
         (b)   Minors who have reached the age of 17 may be employed to perform
busing or dishwashing services or to provide waiter or waitress service in
rooms or areas where the presence of 3.2% malt liquor is incidental to food
service or preparation;
         (c)   Minors who have reached the age of 16 may be employed to provide
musical entertainment in those rooms or areas where the presence of
intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor is incidental to food service or
preparation;
         (d)   Minors are not prevented from working at tasks which are not
prohibited by other parts of this subchapter, Minnesota Rules or the law in
establishments where liquor is sold, served, dispensed or handled in those
rooms or areas where no liquor is consumed or served; and
         (e)   A minor who has reached the age of 17 and has graduated from
high school shall be excluded from the prohibitions of divisions (F)(3)(a)
through (F)(3)(d) above.
      (4)   The prohibitions of divisions (F)(3)(a) through (F)(3)(d) above do
not apply to a minor working for a corporation totally owned by one or both
parents in which the daily corporate business is supervised by the parent or
parents.
   (G)   Gambling. No gambling or any gambling device, except for pull tabs or
other similar charitable gaming activities permitted by the state, shall be
permitted on any licensed premises.
   (H)   Intoxicating liquor prohibited at 3.2% malt liquor licensed
establishments. No 3.2% malt liquor licensee who is not also licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor and who does not hold a consumption and display permit may
directly or indirectly allow the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor
or knowingly serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating
liquor. The presence of intoxicating liquors on the premises of such a licensee
shall be prima facie evidence of possession of intoxicating liquors for the
purpose of sale; and the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with
intoxicating liquors shall be prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is
being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this subchapter.
   (I)   Display and storage of alcohol. A holder of a liquor license may not
store any liquor at any location other than the licensed premises, except with
the written permission of the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (J)   Inspections. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, Health
Officer or properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect and search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a
warrant.
   (K)   Display during prohibited hours. No on-sale establishment shall
display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is
prohibited.
   (L)   Prohibited hours.
      (1)   3.2% malt liquor. No sale of 3.2% malt liquor may be made between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday,
nor between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sunday.
      (2)   Intoxicating liquor on-sale. No licensee shall allow the display or
consumption of liquor between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days
of Monday through Saturday. Further, no person other than the licensee or an
employee of the licensee shall remain in the bar area of a licensed
establishment between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (3)   Special license for Sunday on-sale. No licensee shall allow the
display or consumption of liquor between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on Sundays. Further, no person other than the licensee or an employee of the
licensee shall remain in the bar area of a licensed establishment between the
hours of 1:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sundays.
   (M)   Alcohol serving/selling training. Before a license is renewed or
granted, each licensed establishment must certify to the city that it has
completed an alcohol serving/selling training aimed at the prevention of sales
to underage and intoxicated persons.
      (1)   The licensed establishment's owner or manager must offer and attend
the training triennially.
      (2)   All employees who have the responsibility of selling of or serving
an alcoholic beverage must receive the training.
      (3)   Notice of this requirement will be included in the renewal notice
sent to each licensee.
      (4)   Certification received by the city from the licensee must include
the name of the training course, who administered the training, date of
training and who received the training. Certification must be received prior to
the expiration date of the license.
      (5)   In the case of temporary license, the city’s Municipal Liquor Store
manager may administer the training.
   (N)   Outdoor patios and decks. Service and consumption of alcohol in
outdoor patios and decks in conjunction with an intoxicating liquor on-sale
license, an on-sale wine license, a special club license, a special license for
Sunday sales or a 3.2% malt liquor on-sale license is allowed under the
following conditions.
      (1)   The patio or deck must be compact and contiguous to the licensed
premises.
      (2)   The area surrounding a patio or deck must be fenced so as to not
allow entrance from outside the fenced area onto the patio or deck area unless
the patio or deck is constructed in such a way to prevent entrance from other
than the main premises.
      (3)   The maximum size allowed for the patio or deck area is 600 square
feet.
      (4)   Music, televisions, bands or any activity that would disturb the
peace of the surrounding areas is prohibited on outdoor patios or decks.
      (5)   Appropriate receptacles for rubbish, garbage, cigarette
paraphernalia and the like must be approved.
      (6)   Lighting must be sufficient to promote public safety, shall be
downward directional and shall be compatible with the surrounding area.
      (7)   The outdoor patio or deck area must be included in the required
liquor liability insurance for the premises.
      (8)   The licensee may allow smoking on the patio or deck, provided that
the patio or deck is in compliance with the state’s Freedom to Breathe Act of
2007, being M.S. § 144.397 et seq..
      (9)   Signs shall be posted in accordance with Minn. Rules part 4620.0500
to advise person of the existence of acceptable non-smoking and smoking-
permitted areas.
(Ord. 328, passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017; Ord. 417, passed 7-21-
2025) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.10 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   Liquor in unlicensed places. No person shall mix or prepare liquor for
consumption in any public place or place of business unless it has a license to
sell liquor on-sale or a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety under
M.S. § 340A.414 (Consumption and Display Permit), as it may be amended to from
time to time, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
   (B)   Consumption in public places. No person shall consume liquor on a
public highway, public park or other city property without prior permission
from the City Council.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.11 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Council may revoke the license or permit, suspend the license or
permit for up to 60 days, impose a civil penalty as set out in §
110.99 of this chapter for each violation or impose any combination of these
sanctions upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any
applicable statute, regulation, or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages.
Except in cases of failure of financial responsibility, no suspension or
revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an
opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69 of the
Administrative Procedure Act, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Lapse of required dram shop insurance or bond, or withdrawal of a
required deposit of cash or securities, shall affect an immediate suspension of
any license issued pursuant to this subchapter without further action of the
City Council. Notice of cancellation, lapse of a current liquor liability
policy or bond or withdrawal of deposited cash or securities shall also
constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license.
The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse or required insurance
or bond, or withdrawal of a required deposit, or of suspension or revocation of
a license, may request a hearing thereon and if such a request is made in
writing to the Administrator, a hearing shall be granted within ten days or
such longer period as may be requested. Any suspension under this division (B)
shall continue until the City Council determines the financial responsibility
requirements of this subchapter have again been met.
   (C)   Unless otherwise stated in this section, the City Council will impose
the following suspensions for the stated offense:
      (1)   First offense: suspension of one normal operating business day;
      (2)   Second offense within 24 months: suspension of seven normal
operating business days;
      (3)   Third offense within 24 months: 30-day suspension of normal
operating business days; and
      (4)   Fourth offense within 24 months: revoke license for one year and
review the circumstances before renewing the license.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017)
INTOXICATING AND 3.2% MALT LIQUOR
§ 110.25 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumptions, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made part of this ordinance as if set out in full. It is the intention of
the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if
they had been in existence at the time this subchapter is adopted.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.26 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in the ordinance,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.27 MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORE ESTABLISHED.
   As was previously established by Ordinance No. 132 dated July 1,1947, a
municipal liquor store for the off-sale of intoxicating liquor continues under
this subchapter. The municipal liquor store shall continue to be operated at
the discretion of the City Council. No liquor may be sold at retail elsewhere
in the city, except at such locations, establishments and clubs as may be
lawfully licensed to do so, pursuant to this subchapter.
   (A)   Location. The municipal liquor store shall be located at such suitable
places in the city as the Council determines, but no premises upon which taxes,
assessments or other public charges are delinquent shall be leased for
municipal liquor store purposes. The Council shall have the right to establish
additional off-sale stores at other locations as it may from time to time, by
motion, determine.
   (B)   Manager. The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge
of a liquor store manager selected by the City Council and paid such
compensation as is fixed by the Council. The Manager shall not be a person who
would be prohibited by law or any provision of this subchapter from being
eligible for an intoxicating liquor license. The Manager shall furnish a surety
bond to the municipality, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his or her
duties, in such sum as the Council specifies. The bond premium shall be paid by
the city or the Manager, at the discretion of the Council. The Manager shall
operate the municipal liquor store under the Council's discretion and shall
perform such duties in connection with the municipal liquor store as may be
imposed upon him or her by the Council. He or she shall be responsible to the
Council for the conduct of the municipal liquor store in full compliance with
this subchapter and with applicable Minnesota State Statutes.
   (C)   Other employees. The Council may also appoint additional employees as
may be required and shall fix their compensation. No person under the age of 18
shall be employed in the store. The Council may require the employees to
furnish surety bonds conditioned for the faithful discharge of their duties in
a sum as specified by the Council. The premium on the bond may be paid by the
city or the employees as the Council determines.
   (D)   Municipal liquor store fund created.
      (1)   Fund established. A Municipal Liquor Store Fund is hereby created
in which all revenues received from the operation of the municipal liquor store
shall be deposited and from which all ordinary operating expenses shall be
paid. Surpluses accumulating in the fund may be transferred to the General Fund
or to any other appropriate fund of the city by direction of the Council and
expended for any municipal purposes.
      (2)   Receipts and disbursements. The handling of Municipal Liquor Store
receipts and disbursement shall comply with the procedure prescribed by law for
the receipts and disbursements of city funds generally.
      (3)   Financial statement. The Council shall provide within 90 days of
the end of the calendar year for publication of a balance sheet using generally
accepted accounting procedures and a statement of operations of the municipal
liquor store for that year. The balance sheet and statement shall be published
in accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 471.6985, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (E)   Hours of operation. No off-sale shall be made in the Municipal Liquor
Store before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday or before
11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays. No off-sale shall be made Thanksgiving
Day; or Christmas Day, December 25; and no off-sale shall be made after 8:00
p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24. The Municipal Liquor Store shall not open
for business of any kind during the days and hours when sale of intoxicating
liquors are prohibited.
   (F)   Conditions of operation.
      (1)   No business other than the sale of liquor shall be carried on in
the Municipal Liquor Store, except the retail sale of cigars, cigarettes, all
forms of tobacco, soft drinks, ice, and other items incidental to the sale of
liquor.
      (2)   Gambling of any kind is prohibited on the premises except as
authorized by statute and further allowed by the City Council.
      (3)   No minor, except accompanied by an adult, shall be permitted to
remain on the premises of the municipal liquor store. No liquor or beer shall
be sold to a minor, directly or indirectly. No minor shall misrepresent his or
her age for the purpose of obtaining liquor.
      (4)   No liquor shall be sold to an intoxicated person.
      (5)   No person shall be permitted to loiter about the municipal liquor
store habitually.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.28 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   General requirement. No person, except a wholesaler or manufacturer to
the extent authorized under state license, shall directly or indirectly deal
in, sell, or keep for sale in the city any intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt
liquor without a license to do so as provided in this subchapter. Liquor
licenses shall be of eight kinds: intoxicating liquor “on-sale”, temporary
intoxicating liquor “on-sale”, “on-sale” wine, special Sunday license, club
license, 3.2% malt liquor “on-sale”, 3.2% malt liquor “off-sale”, and 3.2% malt
liquor temporary “on-sale”.
   (B)   Intoxicating liquor “on-sale” licenses. Subject to the approval of the
City Council, intoxicating liquor “on-sale” licenses shall be issued only to
hotel or restaurants and shall permit “on-sale” of liquor only. The number of
“on-sale” licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall not exceed four.
Exclusions from the license limits are allowed pursuant to M.S. 340A.413, subd.
4, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Intoxicating liquor temporary “on-sale” licenses. Subject to the
approval of the City Council, intoxicating liquor temporary “on-sale” licenses
shall be issued only to clubs or chartable, religious, or other non-profit
organizations in existence for at least three years. A temporary license
authorizes the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event
within the city sponsored by the licensee and subject to restrictions imposed
by the State Liquor Act. Said license may be issued for a period not to exceed
four consecutive days and may authorize on-sales on premises other than
premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies.
   (D)   “On-sale” wine licenses. With the approval of the Commissioner of
Public Safety and the City Council, “on-sale” wine licenses shall be issued
only to restaurants meeting the qualifications of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as
it may be amended from time to time, and shall permit only the sale of wine of
up to 24% alcohol by volume, for consumption on the licensed premises only, in
conjunction with the sale of food.
   (E)   Special club licenses. With the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety and the City Council, special club licenses shall be issued only to
incorporated clubs which have been in existence for five years or more or to
congressionally chartered veterans' organizations which have been in existence
for five years, and shall permit on-sale of liquor only to members and bona
fide guests.
   (F)   Special license for Sunday sales. With the approval of the City
Council, a special license authorizing sales on Sunday in conjunction with the
serving of food may be issued to any hotel, restaurant, or club which has
facilities for serving at least 30 guests at one time, and which has an on-sale
license. The sale of "on-sale" liquor on Sundays will be allowed from 8:00 a.m.
on Sundays until 1:00 a.m. on Mondays.
   (G)   3.2% malt liquor “on-sale”. With the approval of the City Council 3.2%
malt liquor “on-sale” licenses shall be granted only to clubs, restaurants,
hotels, golf courses, establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt
liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks, and bowling centers
where food is prepared and served for consumption on the premises. “On-sale”
licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2% malt liquor for consumption on the
premises only.
   (H)   3.2% malt liquor temporary “on-sale”. With the approval of the City
Council, 3.2% malt liquor temporary “on-sale” licenses shall be granted only to
clubs or charitable, religious, or non-profit organizations for the sale of
3.2% malt liquor at retail, in the original package for consumption on the
premises only.
   (I)   3.2% malt liquor “off-sale”. With the approval of the City Council,
3.2% malt liquor “off-sale” licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2% malt liquor
at retail, in the original package for consumption off the premises only.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 417, passed 7-21-2025)
§ 110.29 ON-SALE INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSES.
   An on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be issued only to hotels or
restaurants that conform to the following requirements:
   (A)   Minimum capacity of the 30 seated patrons at one time.
   (B)   Restaurants that comply with all rules and regulations of the State
Board of Health.
   (C)   Appropriate facilities adequate for the sale of food prepared on the
premises.
   (D)   There shall be adequate heating, cooling and ventilating facilities to
provide a comfortable and pleasurable surrounding for patrons.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.30 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license to sell liquor shall state the
name of the applicant, age, representations as to character (with such
references as the Council may require), citizenship, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the
business, how long he has been in that business at the place, and such other
information as the Council may require from time to time. Every application
shall also include a copy of each summons received by the applicant under M.S.
§ 340A.802, as it may be amended from time to time, during the preceding year.
(M.S. § 340.409, subd. 8, as it may be amended from time to time) In addition
to containing such information, the application shall be in the form prescribed
by the Department of Public Safety and shall be verified and filed with the
City Administrator. No person shall make a false statement in an application.
Proof of liquor liability insurance must accompany the application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. No liquor license may be issued, maintained,
or renewed unless the applicant demonstrates proof of financial responsibility
as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with
regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time (dram shop laws). Such proof shall be filed with the Department of Public
Safety and the City Administrator. Any liability insurance policy filed as
proof of financial responsibility under this subdivision shall conform to M.S.
§ 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, this section shall not apply to licensees who by affidavit establish
that:
      (1)   They are on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licensees with sales of less than
$25,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year;
      (2)   They are off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licensees with sales of less
than $50,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year;
      (3)   They are holders of an on-sale wine license with sales of less than
$25,000 for wine for the preceding year; or
      (4)   They are holders of temporary wine licenses issued under law.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.31 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Fees. The fee for a liquor license shall be as set forth in the Fee
Schedule in §
33.01.
   (B)   Payment. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the City Administrator for payment in full of the license fee and
the fixed investigation fee required under division (A), above, if any. All
fees shall be paid into the General Fund. If an application for a license is
rejected, the City Administrator shall refund the amount paid as the license
fee.
   (C)   Term; pro rata fee. Each license, except temporary licenses, shall be
issued for a period of one year except that if the application is made during
the license year, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a
pro rata fee, with an unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month.
Every license, except temporary licenses, shall expire on the last day of June.
   (D)   Refunds. No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by
statute.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.32 GRANTING OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation.
      (1)   On an initial application for any license issued pursuant to this
subchapter, and on application for transfer of existing license, the applicant
shall pay with the application an investigation fee as set forth in the Fee
Schedule in §
33.01.
         (a)   For intoxicating liquor on-sale, on-sale wine, on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor, intoxicating liquor temporary on-sale: an investigation fee as set
forth in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01;
         (b)   For off-sale 3.2% malt liquor, temporary on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor, and special club licenses: an investigation fee as set forth in the Fee
Schedule in §
33.01.
      (2)   The application in such case shall be made on a form prescribed by
§
110.30(A) and with such additional information as the Council may require. The
results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of
Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
or an on-sale wine license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the council,
a comprehensive background and financial investigation of the applicant is
necessary, the Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract
with the Commissioner of Public Safety or Bureau of Criminal Investigation. The
investigation fee for this comprehensive background and financial investigation
to be paid by the applicant shall be as set forth in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 for investigation conducted within the state; and in the amount as set
forth in §
33.01, if the investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance
of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is
denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount
actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the
application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be
sent to the commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license. No license shall be
issued, transferred, or renewed if the results show to the satisfaction of the
Council that issuance would not be in the public interest.
   (C)   Hearing and issuance. The City Council shall investigate all facts set
out in the application and not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive
background and financial investigation conducted. Opportunity shall be given to
any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the
investigation and hearing, the council shall, in its discretion, grant or
refuse the application. No license shall become effective until the proof of
financial security has been approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (D)   Person and premises licensed; transfer. Each license shall be issued
only to the applicant and for the premises described in the application. No
license may be transferred to another person or place without City Council
approval.
   (E)   Change in ownership of stock; report of transfer. Where a liquor
license is held by a corporation, a change in ownership of 10% or more of the
stock of the corporation must be reported in writing to the City Council within
ten days of the transfer. A transfer of stock without prior Council approval is
grounds for revocation of the license.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.33 PERSON INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   No retail license may be issued to:
      (1)   A person under 21 years of age;
      (2)   A person who has had an intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor
license revoked within five years of the license application or to any person
who at the time of the violation owns any interest, whether as a holder of more
than 5% of the capital stock of a corporation licensee, as a partner or
otherwise, in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a
corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business, or firm in which
any such person is in any manner interested;
      (3)   A person not of good moral character and repute;
      (4)   A person who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer,
brewer, or wholesaler;
   (B)   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
issued. In addition, no new retail license may be issued to, and the Council
may refuse to renew the license of, a person who, within five years of the
license application, has been convicted of a felony or willful violation of a
federal or state law or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale,
distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of an alcoholic beverage.
The Alcohol and Gambling Enforcement Division or City Council may require that
fingerprints be taken and forwarded to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for
purposes of a criminal history check.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.34 PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   General prohibition. No license shall be issued for any place or any
business ineligible for such a license under state law.
   (B)   Conviction or revocation. No license shall be granted for sale on any
premises where licensee has been convicted of the violation of this subchapter,
or of the state liquor laws, or where any license hereunder has been revoked
for cause until one year has elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
Exceptions may be considered by the City Council after 90 days has elapsed
after such conviction or revocation.
   (C)   Six months prior eligibility. No “on-sale” license or special club
license shall be granted for a business or club which has not been in operation
an eligible to receive a license for at least six months immediately preceding
the application for license. Exceptions to this requirement may be considered
by the City Council.
   (D)   Delinquent taxes and charges. No license shall be granted for
operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial
claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (E)   Distance from school.
      (1)   No license shall be granted within 350 feet of any school. In
applying this restriction, the distance shall be measured between the main
front entrances following the route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
      (2)   If a school is established within 350 feet of an existing licensed
business, the licensed business may continue its operation until such time as
it becomes unlicensed for a period of 365 consecutive days, after which no
license permitted under this ordinance may be granted.
   (F)   Zoning district. No license shall be issued for any place or business
unless the same is located in a district zoned for such a business under the
city’s zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.35 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   In general. Every license is subject to the conditions in the
following subdivisions and all other provisions of this subchapter and of any
other applicable ordinance, state law or regulation.
   (B)   Insurance. Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of
state law and of this subchapter is continuing condition of any license granted
pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   Licensee's responsibility. Every licensee is responsible for the
conduct in the licensed establishment and the conditions of sobriety and order
in it. Any sale of alcoholic beverages by any employee authorized to sell such
beverages in the establishment is the act of the licensee for the purposes of
M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, except M.S. §§ 340A.701,
340A.702, and 340A.703, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Sales to minors or obviously intoxicated persons. No liquor shall be
sold or served to any obviously intoxicated person or to any person under 21
years of age.
   (E)   Consumption by minors. No person under the age of 21 years shall be
permitted to consume liquor on the licensed premises.
   (F)   Employment of minors.
      (1)   No person under the age of 18 may serve or sell intoxicating liquor
in a retail intoxicating liquor establishment (“on-sale” or “off-sale”).
      (2)   No person under the age of 18 may be employed in a retail 3.2% malt
liquor off-sale establishment.
      (3)   No minor under the age of 18 shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquors are
served or consumed or in any tasks involving the serving, dispensing, or
handling of such liquors that are consumed on the premises except that:
         (a)   Minors who have reached the age of 17 may be employed to perform
busing or dishwashing serviced in those rooms or areas of a restaurant, hotel,
motel, or resort where the presence of intoxicating liquor is incidental to
food service of preparation;
         (b)    Minors who have reached the age of 17 may be employed to
perform busing or dishwashing services or to provide waiter or waitress service
in rooms or areas where the presence of 3.2% malt liquor is incidental to food
service or preparation;
         (c)   Minors who have reached the age of 16 may be employed to provide
musical entertainment in those rooms or areas where the presence of
intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor is incidental to food service or
preparation; and
         (d)   Minors are not prevented from working at tasks which are not
prohibited by other parts of this subchapter, Minnesota Rules, or the law in
establishments where liquor is sold, served, dispensed, or handled in those
rooms or areas where no liquor is consumed or served.
         (e)   A minor who has reached the age of 17 and has graduated from
high school shall be excluded from the prohibitions of this division (F)(3)(a
through d) above.
         (f)   The prohibitions of division (F)(3)(a through d) above do not
apply to a minor working for a corporation totally owned by one or both parents
in which the daily corporate business is supervised by the parent or parents.
   (G)   Gambling. No gambling or any gambling device, except for pull tabs or
other similar charitable gaming activities permitted by the State of Minnesota,
shall be permitted on any licensed premises.
   (H)   Intoxicating liquor prohibited at 3.2% malt liquor licensed
establishments. No 3.2% malt liquor licensee who is not also licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor and who does not hold a consumption and display permit may
directly or indirectly allow the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor
or knowingly serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating
liquor. The presence of intoxicating liquors on the premises of such a licensee
shall be prima facie evidence of possession of intoxicating liquors for the
purpose of sale; and the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with
intoxicating liquors shall be prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is
being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this subchapter.
   (I)   Display and storage of alcohol. A holder of a liquor license may not
store any liquor at any location other than the licensed premises except with
the written permission of the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (J)   Inspections. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health
officer, or properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours without
a warrant.
   (K)   Display during prohibited hours. No “on-sale” establishment shall
display liquor to the public during hours when they sale of liquor is
prohibited.
   (L)   Prohibited hours.
      (1)   3.2% malt liquor. No sale of 3.2% malt liquor may be made between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday,
nor between the hours of 1:00 am. and 8:00 a.m. on Sunday.
      (2)   Intoxicating liquor on-sale. No licensee shall allow the display or
consumption of liquor between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days
of Monday through Saturday. Further, no person other than the licensee or an
employee of the licensee shall remain in the bar area of a licensed
establishment between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (3)   Special license for Sunday on-sale. No licensee shall allow the
display or consumption of liquor between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on Sundays. Further, no person other than the licensee or an employee of the
licensee shall remain in the bar area of a licensed establishment between the
hours of 1:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sundays.
   (M)   Alcohol serving/selling training. Before a license is renewed or
granted, each licensed establishment must certify to the city that it has
completed an alcohol serving/selling training aimed at the prevention of sales
to underage and intoxicated persons.
      (1)   The licensed establishment's owner or manger must offer and attend
the training triennially.
      (2)   All employees who have the responsibility of selling of selling or
serving an alcoholic beverage must receive the training.
      (3)   Notice of this requirement will be included in the renewal notice
sent to each licensee.
      (4)   Certification received by the city from the licensee must include
the name of the training course, who administered the training, date of
training and who received the training. Certification must be received prior to
the expiration date of the license.
      (5)   In the case of temporary license, the Municipal Liquor Store
manager may administer the training.
   (N)   Outdoor patios and decks. Service and consumption of alcohol in
outdoor patios and decks in conjunction with an intoxicating liquor “on-sale”
license, an “on-sale” wine license, a special club license, a special license
for Sunday sales, or a 3.2% malt liquor “on-sale” license, is allowed under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The patio or deck must be compact and contiguous to the licensed
premises;
      (2)   The area surrounding a patio or deck must be fenced so as to not
allow entrance from outside the fenced area onto the patio or deck area unless
the patio or deck is constructed in such a way to prevent entrance from other
than the main premises;
      (3)   The maximum size allowed for the patio or deck area is six hundred
(600) square feet;
      (4)   Music, televisions, bands, or any activity that would disturb the
peace of the surrounding areas is prohibited on outdoor patios or decks;
      (5)   Appropriate receptacles for rubbish, garbage, cigarette
paraphernalia, etc. must be approved.
      (6)   Lighting must be sufficient to promote public safety, shall be
downward directional, and shall be compatible with the surrounding area;
      (7)   The outdoor patio or deck area must be included in the required
liquor liability insurance for the premises;
      (8)   The licensee may allow smoking on the patio or deck, provided that
the patio or deck is in compliance with the Minnesota Freedom to Breathe Act of
2007, M.S. § 144.391 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (9)   Signs shall be posted in accordance with Minn. Rule 4620.0500 to
advise persons of the existence of acceptable nonsmoking and smoking-permitted
areas.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 417, passed 7-21-2025)
§ 110.36 RESTRICTION ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   Liquor in unlicensed places. No person shall mix or prepare liquor for
consumption in any public place or place of business unless it has a license to
sell liquor “on-sale” or a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety under
M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, (consumption and
display permit) and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
   (B)   Consumption in public places. No person shall consume liquor on a
public highway, public park, or other city property without prior permission
from the City Council.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.37 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council may revoke the license or permit, suspend the license or
permit for up to 60 days, impose a civil penalty as set forth in §
10.98, or impose any combination of these sanctions upon a finding that the
licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statue, regulation, or
ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages. Except in cases of failure of
financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until
the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§
14.57 to 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, of the Administrative
Procedure Act.
   (B)   Lapse of required dram shop insurance or bond, or withdrawal of a
required deposit of cash or securities, shall affect an immediate suspension of
any license issued pursuant to this subchapter without further action of the
City Council. Notice of cancellation, lapse of a current liquor liability
policy or bond, or withdrawal of deposited cash or securities shall also
constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license.
The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse or required insurance
or bond, or withdrawal of a required deposit, or of suspension or revocation of
a license, may request a hearing thereon and if such a request is made in
writing to the City Administrator a hearing shall be granted within ten days or
such longer period as may be requested. Any suspension under this paragraph
shall continue until the City Council determines the financial responsibility
requirements of this subchapter have again been met.
   (C)   Unless otherwise stated in this section, the City Council will impose
the following suspensions for the stated offense:
      (1)   First offense: suspension of one normal operating business day;
      (2)   Second offense within 24 months: suspension of seven normal
operating business days;
      (3)   Third offense within 24 months: 30-day suspension of normal
operating business days:
      (4)   Fourth offense within 24 months: revoke license for one year and
review the circumstances before renewing the license.
(Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 110.38 INTOXICATING LIQUOR; OFF-SALE.
   No sale of intoxicating liquor may be made by an off-sale licensee:
   (A)   On Sundays;
   (B)   Before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;
   (C)   On Thanksgiving Day;
   (D)   On Christmas Day, December 25; or
   (E)   After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.S. § 340A.504, subd. 4
, being M.S. § 144.397 et seq.
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
110.01 through
110.11 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   The Council may, for violation of §§
110.01 through
110.11 of this chapter, revoke the license or permit, suspend the license or
permit for up to 60 days, impose a civil penalty as set forth in §
10.98 for each violation or impose any combination of these sanctions upon a
finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute,
regulation or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
110.25 through
110.37 is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 381, passed 1-9-2017; Ord. 382, passed 6-5-2017)
CHAPTER 111: TAXICABS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   License fee, term and transfer
   
111.04   Equipment
   
111.05   Granting license
   
111.06   License plates and numbers
   
111.07   Rates; meters
   
111.08   Taxicab drivers
   
111.09   Insurance policies
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATOR. Any person owning or having control of the use of one or more
taxicabs used for hire upon the streets or engaged in the business or operation
of a taxicab within the city.
   STREET. Any street, highway, alley, avenue, court, bridge, land or public
place in the city.
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle used to carry passengers for hire, but not
operating on a fixed route.
   TAXICAB DRIVER. Any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person be the
owner of such taxicab or be employed by a taxicab owner or operator.
   TAXIMETER. Any mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire
of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, whether by distance traveled or
waiting time or by both, and upon which such charge shall be indicated by
figures.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No operator shall operate a taxicab within the city without first
having obtained a taxicab license therefor under the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Each applicant for a taxicab license shall apply to the City
Administrator for such license upon a form to be provided by the city, and must
comply with the following provisions to the satisfaction of the City Council:
      (1)   Be at least 18 years of age and legally able to own and operate a
motor vehicle and, in case of any co-partnership, firm, corporation or limited
liability company, must be authorized to operate taxicabs and carry on business
in accordance with the laws of the state;
      (2)   Applicant for licensure having filed an application with the city
realizing that the city has need to investigate the background and history of
the applicant in order to better evaluate his or her application as set forth
in M.S. § 299C.72, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (3)   Must fill out upon the blank form provided by the city a statement
covering each vehicle to be licensed as follows:
         (a)   Giving the full name, address and telephone number of the owner;
         (b)   The class and passenger carrying capacity of each vehicle for
which a license is desired;
         (c)   The make and model of the vehicle;
         (d)   The vehicle identification number;
         (e)   The state license number;
         (f)   The name and address of the insurance company and the policy
number(s);
         (g)   The name, address and telephone number of holder of legal title
to said motor vehicle if other than the applicant;
         (h)   Whether said vehicle is leased, licensed or under any form of
contract permitted to be used and operated by some other person than the one
holding legal title thereto; and
         (i)   What person collects the revenues from the operation of said
taxicab and pays the expenses of operating the same.
   (C)   If application is made by an individual owner, the owner shall sign
and swear to the application; if it is by a partnership, by one of the parties;
and, if by a corporation, by one of the duly elected officers of the
corporation or by one of the duly elected managers of the limited liability
company.
   (D)   No license shall be granted to any operator who is addicted to the
excessive use of intoxicating liquors or narcotics.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 111.03 LICENSE FEE, TERM AND TRANSFER.
   (A)   The applicant for a taxicab license shall, before being issued the
license, pay an annual fee as set out in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances for each vehicle licensed. If the license is
denied for any reason, the aforesaid fee or fees shall be returned to the
applicant.
   (B)   All licenses expire on December 31 in each year.
   (C)   The licensee may not assign or otherwise convey the license to any
other party.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 111.04 EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall operate a taxicab within the city which does not comply with
the following requirements.
   (A)   A certificate must be presented to the City Council signed by a
competent and experienced mechanic attesting that the taxicab is in good
mechanical condition, that it is thoroughly safe for transportation of
passengers and that it is in neat and clean condition. Such similar
certification may be required from time to time during the license period.
   (B)   The vehicle must comply with all federal, state and local laws and
regulations pertaining to the condition and operation of a motor vehicle to be
operated on streets.
   (C)   It must display a lighted “taxicab” or “taxi” device on the outside
roof of the vehicle.
   (D)   It must display the designation “taxicab” or “taxi” in plain, visible
letters, not less than four inches in height, on each side of the taxicab.
   (E)   It must have an accurately functioning taximeter which is located so
as to be plainly visible and readable inside the taxicab by passengers.
   (F)   It must be equipped with two-way communication equipment of sufficient
capability to communicate anywhere within the city with any other place in the
city, to accommodate dispatching.
   (G)   It must display on the interior of the taxicab, at a place plainly
visible and readable to passengers, a card printed in plain, legible letters
stating the number of the taxicab license, the maximum rates of fare to be
charged and a statement that any package or article left in the taxicab must be
returned by the taxicab driver to the Police Department of the city, where it
may be identified and claimed.
   (H)   It must have four doors at a minimum.
   (I)   It must comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 GRANTING LICENSE.
   If the City Council is satisfied that the public convenience and good order
will be served thereby, it may grant a license to any applicant. Each license
granted shall be given a number and shall indicate the number and an adequate
description of the taxicabs licensed thereunder.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 111.06 LICENSE PLATES AND NUMBERS.
   There shall be delivered to the operator of each licensed taxicab a license
to be displayed on the dash or windshield of each and every taxicab so
licensed, so that the license is plainly visible from the outside front of the
taxicab. The license shall bear the license number of the taxicab and proper
descriptive words, including the year for which the license is issued and the
name of the licensee. In case any licensed operator shall lose a license, a
duplicate shall be secured by applying to the City Administrator and paying the
sum as set out in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances before conducting any further business with
the taxicab from which the license is lost.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 111.07 RATES; METERS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a taxicab within the city for the
transportation of persons for hire unless the taximeter is first cleared of any
prior charges and is then operated continuously during the passenger’s trip so
as to meter the fare.
   (B)   No person shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a greater
rate of fare than that which is displayed on the taximeter and is consistent
with the rates set forth on the card required to be displayed pursuant to §
111.06 of this chapter.
   (C)   The operator of a taxicab shall take the passenger to the passenger’s
destination by the most direct available route from the place where the
passenger enters the cab. No taxicab operator shall deceive any passenger or
prospective passenger as to the taxicab’s destination or the distance traveled
or to be traveled while transporting the passenger.
   (D)   No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger
without the consent of the passenger.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the operator of any taxicab to accept as a
passenger any person who seeks to use the taxicab; provided, such person
conducts himself or herself in an orderly manner and provided the taxicab is
not occupied by another passenger.
   (F)   No extra charge shall be made to a fare-paying passenger for baggage
or parcels accompanying the passenger so long as the size of the baggage or
parcels permits them to be carried in the taxicab or the trunk thereof.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 TAXICAB DRIVERS.
   (A)   No person, either the operator or employee of such operator, shall
drive a taxicab in the city without possessing a currently valid Minnesota
Class C driver’s license.
   (B)   No person shall operate a taxicab or solicit or accept passengers for
hire for a taxicab within the city unless the person has prominently displayed
at chest level a photographic identification card bearing the person’s
photograph, the person’s name, the words “Licensed Taxicab” in letters at least
one inch high and the name of the taxicab licensee in whose service the person
is acting.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.09 INSURANCE POLICIES.
   (A)   Taxicab. Before a license shall be delivered to any operator, he or
she shall deposit with the City Administrator a policy or policies of an
insurance company or companies licensed to transact business in the state
insuring the operator of the taxicabs against loss from the liability imposed
by law for damages on account of bodily injuries or death, or from damage to
property resulting from the ownership, maintenance or use of any taxicab owned
or operated under such license, and agreeing to pay any judgment creditor to
the extent of the amounts specified in such policy, and final judgment rendered
against the insured by reason of such liability. The limit in any such
insurance policy of such liability of the insurer on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such taxicab shall not be less than $300,000 combined
single limit, bodily injuries and property damage. There shall be no limitation
on the policy as to the distance the vehicle may travel from the city, nor
shall the policy be canceled by the insurance company without first notifying
the City Administrator at least 30 days before the policy is canceled.
   (B)   General liability. Before a license shall be delivered to any
operator, he or she shall deposit with the City Administrator a policy or
policies of an insurance company or companies duly licensed to transact
business in the state, insuring the operator of any taxicab from any and all
liability which he or she may incur as a result of bodily injuries or property
damage resulting to him or her other than the operation of the automobile or
taxicab. The limit of such insurance policy shall not be less than the city’s
maximum limits of liability as set forth in M.S. § 466.04, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any taxicab driver or taxicab operator who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition thereto, the City Council
may revoke or suspend the license to operate a taxicab.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-19-2015)
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
112.03   Licensing; registration; exemption
   
112.04   Registration suspension and revocation
   
112.05   Registration transferability
   
112.06   Prohibited activities
   
112.07   Exclusion by placard
Mobile Food Units
   
112.20   Purpose and intent
   
112.21   Definitions
   
112.22   Licenses and permit
   
112.23   Operational requirements
   
112.24   Location
   
112.25   Exempt persons and/or organizations
   
112.26   Investigation; granting, denial or revocation
   
112.27   Insurance
   
112.28   Violations and penalties
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to-door for the
primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social or other
ideological beliefs. For the purpose of this chapter, the term DOOR-TO-DOOR
ADVOCATE shall fall under the term “solicitor” and include door-to-door
canvassing and pamphleteering intended for non-commercial purposes.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or
otherwise transporting. For purpose of this chapter, the term PEDDLER shall
have the same common meaning as the term HAWKER.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or similar association.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the City Hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be considered REGULAR BUSINESS DAYS.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. For purposes of this
chapter, the term SOLICITOR shall have the same meaning as the term CANVASSER.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter or empty store front for
the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell,
and delivering goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property
and who does not remain in any one location for more than 14 consecutive days.
(Ord. 364, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 112.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR and
TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to:
      (1)   Farmers selling the products cultivated from their own farms;
      (2)   Non-commercial door-to-door advocates. Nothing within this chapter
shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict non-commercial door-to-door
advocates. Persons engaging in non-commercial door-to-door advocacy shall not
be required to register as a solicitor under §
112.03 of this chapter;
      (3)   Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods,
wares, products, merchandise or other personal property to a retail seller of
the items being sold by the wholesaler;
      (4)   Any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the
purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery
route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products, such as baked
goods or milk;
      (5)   Any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products
to the customers on his or her established delivery route;
      (6)   Any person making deliveries of newspapers, newsletters or other
similar publications on an established customer delivery route, when attempting
to establish a regular delivery route or when publications are delivered to the
community at large;
      (7)   Any person conducting the type of sale commonly known as garage
sales, rummage sales, yard sales or estate sales;
      (8)   Any person participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or
flea market;
      (9)   Any person conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer;
and/or
      (10)   Any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale.
   (B)   Exemption from these definitions shall not, for the scope of this
chapter, excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory
provision or requirement provided by another city ordinance.
(Ord. 364, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 112.03 LICENSING; REGISTRATION; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as may be required by
M.S. Ch. 329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a
license for the activity.
   (B)   City registration required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having registered with the City Administrator at City Hall.
   (C)   Registration form.
      (1)   A person wishing to conduct business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant within the city limits shall complete a form approved by the
City Council and available from the office of the City Administrator. All
registration forms shall be signed by the peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City
Administrator shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as
proof of the registration. Certificates of registration shall be non-
transferrable.
      (2)   All registration forms shall include the following information:
         (a)   The registrant’s full legal name;
         (b)   Any and all other names under which the registrant has or does
conduct business or to which the registrant will officially answer to;
         (c)   A physical description of the registrant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, any distinguishing marks or features and the like);
         (d)   Full address of registrant’s permanent residence;
         (e)   Telephone number of registrant’s permanent residence;
         (f)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned,
managed or operated by registrant, or for which the registrant is an employee
or an agent;
         (g)   Full address of registrant’s regular place of business, if any
exists;
         (h)   Any and all business-related telephone numbers of the
registrant, including cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines;
         (i)   The type of business for which the registrant is registering;
         (j)   The dates during which the registrant intends to conduct
business, with a maximum of 14 consecutive days;
         (k)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the registrant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up his or her business;
         (l)   A statement as to whether or not the registrant has been
convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor for violating any state or federal statute or any local ordinance,
other than minor traffic offenses;
         (m)   A list of the three most recent locations where the registrant
has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;
         (n)   Proof of any required county license;
         (o)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s
agent for any location to be used by a transient merchant;
         (p)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided;
         (q)   Any and all additional information as may be deemed necessary by
the City Council;
         (r)   The registrant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable
form of identification; and
         (s)   The license plate number, registration information, vehicle
identification number (VIN) and physical description for any vehicle to be used
in conjunction with the business operation.
   (D)   Fee. No fee is required to register with the city.
   (E)   Duration. Registration is valid only during the time period indicated
on the registration form, with a maximum of 14 consecutive days.
   (F)   Exemption. No registration shall be required for any person going from
house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street or any
other type of place-to-place movement for the primary purpose of exercising
that person’s state or federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of
speech, freedom of the press, freedom of religion and the like. This exemption
will not apply if the person’s exercise of constitutional rights is merely
incidental to what would properly be considered a commercial activity.
(Ord. 364, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 112.04 REGISTRATION SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any certificate of registration issued under this chapter
may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation
of any of the following:
      (1)   Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or
incorrect statements provided by an applicant on the registration form;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the registered activity;
      (3)   Engaging in any prohibited activity as provided under §
112.06 of this chapter; and/or
      (4)   Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any certificate of
registration issued under this chapter, the city shall provide a registrant
with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the registrant of his
or her right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered
in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the
registration form or, if no residential address is listed, to the business
address provided on the registration form.
   (C)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (B)
above, the registrant shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no
request for a hearing is received by the City Administrator within ten days
following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the suspension
or revocation. For the purpose of a mailed notice, service shall be considered
complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing
is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within
20 days from the date of the request for the public hearing. Within three
regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the
registrant of its decision.
   (D)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant registered under this chapter, the
City Council may immediately suspend the person’s certificate of registration
and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as
prescribed in division (B) above.
   (E)   Appeal. Any person whose certificate of registration is suspended or
revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in
court.
(Ord. 364, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 112.05 REGISTRATION TRANSFERABILITY.
   No certificate of registration issued under this chapter shall be
transferred to any person other than the person to whom the certificate was
issued.
(Ord. 364, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 112.06 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door
advocate or other person engaged in other similar activities shall conduct
business in any of the following manner:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or the items to be sold by
means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out or by any
other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure;
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian,
on any street, sidewalk, alleyway or other public right-of-way;
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any specific individual or the general public;
   (D)   Conducting business before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.;
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of registration and identification when
requested;
   (F)   Using the registration of another person;
   (G)   Alleging false or misleading statements about the products or services
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a certificate of registration to that person;
   (H)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave;
   (I)   Otherwise operating his or her business in any manner that a
reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive;
and/or
   (J)   Any signage used by a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall
comply with
Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 364, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 112.07 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   (A)   Unless specifically invited by the property owner or tenant, no
peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate or
other person engaged in other similar activities shall enter onto the property
of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor,
transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate or similar activity
when the property is marked with a sign or placard:
      (1)   At least four inches long;
      (2)   At least four inches wide;
      (3)   With print of at least 45-point in size; and
      (4)   Stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants”.
   (B)   No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface
or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.
(Ord. 364, passed 12-16-2013) Penalty, see §
112.99
MOBILE FOOD UNITS
§ 112.20 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, establish a
uniform set of regulations which are fair and equitable, ensure that persons
vending on private property do no impede on public space, provide a variety of
goods, services, and economic opportunities to the community at large, and
encourage active street level activity to enhance the urban environment.
(Ord. 391, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 112.21 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   BASE OF OPERATIONS. A licensed and approved catering establishment,
restaurant, commercial kitchen, or other approved place in which food,
containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored, and
which has also obtained approval from the State of Minnesota Health Department,
Minnesota Department of Agriculture or Aitkin County Environmental Services.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT (MFU). A food and beverage service establishment that is a
vehicle mounted unit, either motorized or trailered, and readily movable,
without disassembling, for transport to another location. The unit can operate
no more than 21 days annually at any one place unless it is operated at the
site of and in conjunction with a permanent business licensed under M.S.
Chapter 157 or Chapter 28A. All MFU must operate in compliance with the
Minnesota Food Code.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR (MFV). Any individual, company, restaurant, or
organization operating a mobile food unit unless specifically exempted in §
112.26.
(Ord. 391, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 112.22 LICENSES AND PERMIT.
   No person shall sell, or offer for sale, food of any type from a mobile food
unit as defined in §
112.21, within the city without first complying with the regulations contained
in this section unless specifically exempted in §
112.25. Mobile food units must obtain the following permits, licenses, and
approvals in order to legally operate.
   (A)   State or county license. An MFU shall hold a valid license from Aitkin
County Environmental Services, the State of Minnesota Department of Health or
Department of Agriculture. Any conditions of the State Health Department shall
be incorporated into the license issued under this subchapter, in addition to
any other conditions by the city.
   (B)   City permit.
      (1)   An MFV shall not operate an MFU without a permit issued by the city
authorizing such operation. The City Administrator shall prescribe the form for
application of permit for MFU. The City Council shall establish appropriate
fees for the MFU permit according to the adopted city fee schedule which may be
adjusted from time to time.
      (2)   Permits issued by the City Administrator shall be valid only for
the location and duration identified by the mobile food vendor on the
prescribed application and shall not be transferable.
(Ord. 391, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 112.23 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Mobile food units and vendors are required to operate under the following
requirements:
   (A)   The mobile food unit permit and all applicable health certificates
including food inspection reports, under which the unit is operating must be
firmly attached and visible to the public on the mobile food unit at all times.
   (B)   A mobile food unit shall not operate in the public right-of-way or on
private property unless a city-issued permit was first obtained in accordance
with this subchapter or is specifically exempted in §
112.25 of this subchapter.
   (C)   Mobile food units shall not operate on any private property without
the prior consent of the owner and must comply with all other location
restrictions set forth in §
112.24.
   (D)   Mobile food units shall not make sounds or announcements to call
attention to the food truck either while traveling on the public rights-of-way
or when stationary. At all times the food trucks and surrounding area shall be
in in compliance with the city’s Noise Control Ordinance.
   (E)   Mobile food units shall not be left unattended or stored on the site
when service is not underway.
   (F)   A person operating a mobile food unit shall not conduct business with
or accept orders from any patron or customers while such patrons or customers
are in their motor vehicles.
   (G)   Mobile food units shall not provide temporary seating for customers.
   (H)   Mobile food units shall be self-contained and shall not connect to any
public utilities, including but not limited to, water, sewer and electricity.
   (I)   Signage shall be displayed on the mobile food unit only. Directional
signage shall not be permitted.
   (J)   Each mobile food unit shall provide a receptacle for litter, which
shall be located within 15 feet of the unit and shall be maintained and emptied
regularly. The receptacle must be adequate in size, so waste does not begin to
overflow from the receptacle.
   (K)   The area within which a mobile food unit is operating shall, always,
be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, rubble and debris generated by the
MFU within a 50-foot radius.
   (L)   All waste shall be disposed of at the mobile food unit’s base of
operation or at a facility licensed to accept waste.
(Ord. 391, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 112.24 LOCATION.
   (A)   While in operation, a mobile food unit shall maintain a minimum
distance of 150 feet from any building housing an established and licensed
eating establishment. This distance will be measured from the main serving
window in a straight line to the property line of the nearest brick and mortar
food establishment. If a food truck operates less than 150 feet from any
building housing an established and licensed eating establishment, they must
have expressed and signed consent from all affected establishments in order to
operate. This consent must be updated annually and can be revoked by any
affected establishment by providing notice in writing to the owner of mobile
food unit and the city. This provision shall not apply to mobile food units
operating by invitation of an organization who has obtained a special event
permit approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Maintain a clearance of at least ten feet from buildings, structures,
vehicles and any combustible materials.
   (C)   Each location for the operation of any food truck must be approved in
advance by the city.
(Ord. 391, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 112.25 EXEMPT PERSONS AND/OR ORGANIZATIONS.
   The following persons and/or organizations shall be exempt from the
provisions of this subchapter. The City Administrator shall determine if a
person and/or organization falls within these exemptions, subject to appeal to
the City Council.
   (A)   Any organization associated with a public or private school, or youth
activity such as, but not limited to scouts, church groups, or athletic leagues
located in the Aitkin School District.
   (B)   Children conducting a neighborhood lemonade stand or similar type with
parent’s approval on their own property.
   (C)   Farmers or others selling homegrown produce.
   (D)   Any non-profit organization or government entity that currently has
tax-exempt status from either the state or federal government and can provide
immediate evidence of that status upon request.
   (E)   A mobile food unit that is operating by invitation of a person or
organization who has obtained a special event permit approved by the City
Council.
   (F)   A mobile food unit operating in conjunction with an auction sale.
(Ord. 391, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 112.26 INVESTIGATION; GRANTING, DENIAL, OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   All permit applications under this subchapter shall be made to the
office of the City Administrator and referred to the Chief of Police and such
other municipal departments or offices as the City Administrator deems
necessary for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the
application. The Chief of Police and other department heads of officers
consulted shall submit comments and/or recommendations to the City
Administrator who shall determine whether to issue the permit.
   (B)   The existence of any ground for denial or revocation does not mean the
city must deny or revoke the permit. If the permit is mistakenly issued to a
person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible
for the permit under this subchapter.
   (C)   The city shall have the discretion to consider, in granting, denying,
or revoking a permit, any reasonable facts or circumstances relating to public
health, safety, and welfare, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   The proximity of the proposed activities to churches, schools,
playgrounds, parks or other community facilities which might be adversely
affected.
      (2)   The proximity of the proposed activities in relation to traffic
congestion and parking which causes a threat to public safety, interference
with normal traffic flow, congestion, or inconvenience to the public.
      (3)   Past fraud, misrepresentation, or misstatement in the course of
carrying on business.
      (4)   Revocation within the preceding 12 months of past permit issued or
past violations of any provisions of the subchapter.
      (5)   Failure to provide any information required on the application or
providing false or misleading information.
      (6)   Denial or revocation of a mobile food unit permit by another city
or governmental entity with the preceding 12 months.
   (D)   Failure of any person to comply with any of the ordinances of the city
or the laws of the state, or any conditions/restrictions imposed on a permit,
shall be grounds for denying or revoking a mobile food unit permit.
   (E)   If a permit is denied by the office of the City Administrator, the
City Administrator shall notify the applicant of the determination in writing,
including the facts of which this determination was made, and their right to a
hearing before the City Council.
(Ord. 391, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 112.27 INSURANCE.
   A certificate of insurance, naming the city as certificate holder,
evidencing the following forms of insurance shall be provided with a complete
application to the City Administrator.
   (A)   Commercial general liability insurance, with a limit of not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence; not less than $2,000,000 annual aggregate. The
following coverages shall be included: premises and operation bodily injury and
property damage; personal and advertising injury; and products and completed
operation liability (including coverage for food products).
   (B)   Commercial automobile liability insurance with a limit of not less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence, combined single limit. The following coverages
shall be included: liability arising out of any auto, including owned, hired
and non-owned vehicles. Claims of damages for bodily injury and property damage
resulting from the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of all autos.
   (C)   Certificate of insurance must contain a provision requiring
notification to be sent to the city should the policy be cancelled before its
stated expiration date.
(Ord. 391, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 112.28 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A violation of this subchapter shall be an administrative offense and is
subject to the city penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and
penalties in §
10.98 of the city code. In the event a party charged with an administrative
offense fails to pay the penalty, a charge may be brought against the alleged
violator in accordance with applicable statutes. If the penalty is paid, no
further charge shall be brought by the city for the same violation.
(Ord. 391, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any individual found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
a guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 364, passed 12-16-2013)
CHAPTER 113: TOBACCO
Section
   
113.01   Purpose and intent
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   License
   
113.04   Fees
   
113.05   Basis for denial of license
   
113.06   Prohibitions
   
113.07   Self-service sales
   
113.08   Responsibility
   
113.09   Compliance checks and inspections
   
113.10   Other illegal acts
   
113.11   Exceptions and defenses
   
113.12   Violations
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device and
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, and the sales, possession, and use are
violations of both state and federal laws; and because studies, which the city
hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before
they have reached the age of 18 years and that those persons who reach the age
of 18 years without having started smoking are significantly less likely to
begin smoking; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several
serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all
levels of government; this chapter intends to regulate the sale, possession and
use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
cigarettes, electronic delivery device and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices
for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors
against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery
device and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, and to further the official
public policy of the state in regard to preventing young people from starting
to smoke as stated in M.S. § 144.391, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIGARS. Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in tobacco leaf or in any
substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or mouthpiece, that is not
a cigarette as defined in M.S. § 297F.01, subd. 3, as amended from time to
time.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices,
electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device and nicotine or lobelia
delivery devices are following and complying with the requirements of this
chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized by
this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors who attempt
to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices
for educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and
federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by other units of
government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local
laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device and nicotine or
lobelia delivery devices.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE and ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. Any product containing
or delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human
consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of
nicotine or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component part of a product, whether or
not marketed or sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include
any product that has been approved or certified by the United States Food and
Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for
such an approved purpose.
   HOOKAH. A pipe with a long, flexible tube by which the smoke is drawn
through a jar of water and thus cooled for the use of tobacco or tobacco
related products.
   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco
products shall include but not be limited to single cigarette packs, single
bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging
of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this definition shall not be
considered INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.
   INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50% of
the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of
the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other
physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent.
   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged
cigarette or any other tobacco product that has been removed from its packaging
and sold individually. The term LOOSIES does not include individual cigars with
a retail price, before any sales taxes, of more than $2 per cigar.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck,
van, automobile, kiosk, trailer or other type of vehicle or transportable
shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of
structure authorized for sales transactions.
   NICOTINE or LOBELIA DELIVERY DEVICES. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a
product, that is not tobacco as defined in this section, not including any
product that has been approved or otherwise certified for legal sale by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for tobacco use cessation, harm
reduction, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for that approved purpose.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed, indoor area used by the general public,
including, but not limited to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor
establishment; retail and other commercial establishments; educational
facilities; hospitals; nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; meeting rooms;
waiting rooms; and common areas of rental apartment buildings.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices are available for sale to the general
public. The phrase shall include but not be limited to grocery stores,
convenience stores, restaurants, and drug stores.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SAMPLING. The lighting of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices
or the activation of and inhaling of vapor from electronic cigarettes in a
retail establishment by a customer or potential customer for the purpose of
sampling the product or device before a purchase. Sampling shall not include
the activation of and inhaling of vapor from electronic cigarettes in a tobacco
product shop as defined in M.S.§ 144.4167, subd. 4 by a customer or potential
customer for the purpose of sampling the product or device before a purchase.
Sampling shall also not include any other use that is expressly permitted in a
tobacco products shop by M.S.§ 144.4167, subd. 4.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices in any manner where any person shall have
access to the tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices,
without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's
employee. The assistance or intervention shall  entail the actual physical
exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine
or lobelia delivery device between the customer and the licensee or employee.
Self-service sales are interpreted as being any sale where there is not an
actual physical exchange of the product between the clerk and the customer.
   SMOKING. Inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or heated cigar,
cigarette, pipe, hookah, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product or exhaling vapor from any electronic delivery device, such as vaping.
SMOKING also includes carrying a lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe,
hookah or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for
inhalation. SMOKING shall not include the activation of and inhaling of vapor
from electronic cigarettes in a tobacco product shop as defined in M.S.§
144.4167, subd. 4 by a customer or potential customer for the purpose of
sampling the product or device before a purchase. SMOKING shall also not
include any other use that is expressly permitted in a tobacco products shop by
M.S.§ 144.4167, subd. 4.
   SMOKING LOUNGE. A tobacco products shop which allows customers to be seated.
Vapor lounge shall not include a waiting or seating area in a tobacco product
shop as defined in M.S. § 144.4167, subd. 4. where customers of a tobacco
products shop are only waiting or sitting and are not using electronic
cigarettes, electronic delivery devices, or tobacco products as those terms are
defined by state law.
   TOBACCO or TOBACCO RELATED PRODUCTS. Cigarettes and any product containing,
made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether
chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by
any other means, including by vaping, or any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product; cigars; pipe tobacco, cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated,
plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff
flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos;
shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; dipping
tobaccos; and other kinds and forms of tobacco. TOBACCO excludes any tobacco
product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for such an approved purpose.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS SHOP. A retail establishment with an entrance door opening
directly to the outside that derives more than 90% of its gross revenue from
the sale of tobacco, tobacco related products, tobacco related devices and in
which the sale of other products is merely incidental. TOBACCO PRODUCTS SHOP
does not include a tobacco products department or section of any individual
business establishment with any type of food, liquor, or restaurant license.
   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling
papers, ashtray, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used
in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, smoking or vaping of tobacco
or tobacco products.
   VAPOR LOUNGE. A vapor products shop which allows customers to be seated.
   VAPOR PRODUCTS SHOP. A retail establishment with an entrance door opening
directly to the outside that derives more than 90% of its gross revenue from
the sale of electronic delivery devices, electronic cigarettes and related
products and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. VAPOR
PRODUCTS SHOP does not include a vapor products department or section of any
individual  business establishment with any type of food, liquor, or restaurant
license.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices
upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the
machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or
tobacco-related device.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 113.03 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco-related device, electronic cigarettes, electronic
delivery devices or nicotine or lobelia delivery device without first having
obtained a license to do so from the city. All licenses issued under this
section shall be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued
and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any
license to another location or person shall be valid.
   (B)   Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery
device or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices shall be made on a form provided
by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the
applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name
of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional information
the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City
Administrator shall forward the application to the City Council for action at
its next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. If the City Administrator
determines an application incomplete, he or she shall return the application to
the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application
complete.
   (C)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it
may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the
City Council approves the license, the City Administrator shall issue the
license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license, notice of the
denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's
right to appeal the City Council’s decision.
   (D)   Term. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid for one
calendar year from the date of issue.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this section may be
revoked or suspended as provided in §§
113.12 or
113.99.
   (F)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or
person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Council.
   (G)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible for
licensing under this section.
   (H)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premise.
   (I)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license
issued under this section represents a privilege and not an absolute right of
the applicant and does not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the
license.
   (J)   Smoking. Except as allowed under M.S. § 144.414 as it may be amended
from time to time, except as allowed under M.S. § 144.4167 as it may be amended
from time to time, and except the activation of and inhaling of vapor from
electronic cigarettes in a tobacco products shop as defined in M.S.§ 144.4167,
subd. 4 by a customer or potential customer for the purpose of sampling the
product or device before a purchase, smoking shall not be permitted, and no
person shall smoke within the indoor area of any establishment with a retail
tobacco license. Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco and tobacco
related products in a retail establishment generally is prohibited.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 FEES.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fee is paid in full. The fee for a license under this chapter shall be
established in §
33.01, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this
chapter include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices,
electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia
delivery devices.
      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of
the date of application.
      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application or provides false or misleading information.
      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license.
   (B)   Except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any
particular ground for denial, however, does not mean that the city must deny
the license.
   (C)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be
revoked upon the discovery of the ineligibility of the applicant for the
license under this chapter.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.06 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related
device, electronic cigarette, electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia
delivery device:
      (1)   To any person under the age of 18 years.
      (2)   By means of any type of vending machine.
      (3)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need
to a make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premise in
order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device,
electronic cigarette, electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia
delivery device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco,
tobacco product, tobacco-related device, electronic cigarette, electronic
delivery device, nicotine or lobelia delivery device between the licensee, or
the licensee's employee, and the customer.
      (4)   By means of loosies as defined in §
113.02.
      (5)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes
or other tobacco products.
      (6)   By any other means, to any other person, on in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation.
   (B)   Smoking and sampling prohibitions.
      (1)   Except for the exceptions listed in M.S. § 144.4167 as it may be
amended from time to time, smoking generally shall be prohibited and no person
shall smoke in public places and places of work, including outdoor and bar
areas of restaurants. Other than provided for in M.S.§ 144.4167, subd. 4, as it
may be amended from time to time, and other than the activation of and inhaling
of vapor from electronic cigarettes in a tobacco product shop as defined in
M.S. § 144.4167, subd. 4 by a customer or potential customer for the purpose of
sampling the product or device before a purchase, tobacco sampling, including
sampling of electronic delivery devices and products used in electronic
delivery devices, is specifically prohibited in the city.
      (2)   To ensure that tobacco smoke or vapor electronic delivery devices
does not enter public places and places of work and that persons entering such
places are not exposed involuntarily to smoke or vapor, smoking and the use of
electronic delivery devices are prohibited within 25 feet of entrances, exits,
open windows and ventilation intakes of public places and places of work. This
prohibition does not apply to entrances and exits used solely in the event of
an emergency and appropriately signed for that purpose.
   (C)   Smoking lounges. Smoking lounges, hookah lounges and vapor lounges are
prohibited.
   (D)   Cigars. No person shall sell, offer to sell or distribute cigars in an
original package containing fewer than five cigars. This restriction shall not
apply to any sales, offer to sell, or distribution of an original package
consisting of one, two, three, four, or five cigars, provided that each
original package has a retail sales price of at least $2.60 per cigar and after
any price promotions or discounts are taken into account and before the
imposition of sales tax, but excluding retail sales tax, and tobacco product
shops only accessible to those 18 years or older.
      (1)   This section shall not apply to premium cigars as defined in M.S. §
297F.01 subd. 13a, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   The minimum pricing established in this section shall be adjusted
periodically for inflation at least every three years.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.07 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes,
electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices by any means
where by the customer may have access to those items without having to request
the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not
a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery device between the licensee or his or her clerk
and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices,
electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device and nicotine or lobelia
delivery devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not
freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left
open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic
delivery device or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices at the time this
chapter is adopted shall comply with this section within 90 days following the
effective date of this chapter. A license holder who operates an establishment
or fully enclosed portion of an establishment that sells at least 90% of its
products in tobacco, or tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
delivery devices or electronic cigarettes, is exempt from the self-service
merchandising provision if the license holder prohibits anyone under 18 years
of age from entering the establishment or fully enclosed portion of an
establishment and the license holder conspicuously displays a notice
prohibiting persons under 18 years of age from entering the establishment.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.08 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of
their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-
related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine
or lobelia delivery devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of an item
by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting
the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this chapter, state or
federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.09 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or
other authorized city official during regular business hours. From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by
engaging, with the written consent of the appropriate parents or guardians,
minors over the age of 15 years but less than 18 years, to enter the licensed
premise to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine or
lobelia delivery devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks
shall be supervised by city designated law enforcement officers or other
designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be
guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine or
lobelia delivery devices when obtaining those items as a part of the compliance
check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false
identification misrepresenting the minor’s age, and all minors lawfully engaged
in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor’s age asked by
the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification, if
any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational,
research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular
state or federal law.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.10 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter:
   (A)   Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related
device, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine or
lobelia delivery device to any minor.
   (B)   Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-
related device, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine
or lobelia delivery device. This division (B) shall not apply to minors
lawfully involved in a compliance check.
   (C)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to
smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-
related device, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine
or lobelia delivery device.
   (D)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco,
tobacco product, tobacco-related device, electronic cigarettes, electronic
delivery device or nicotine or lobelia delivery device, and it shall be a
violation of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain those
items on behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to
coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain
or use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine or
lobelia delivery device. This division (D) shall not apply to minors lawfully
involved in a compliance check.
   (E)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.11 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery
device or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to a minor as part of a lawfully
recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.12 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice. A person violating this chapter may be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and
that informs the alleged violator of his or her right to a hearing on the
matter. The citation shall provide notice that a hearing must be requested
within ten business days of receipt and that hearing rights shall be terminated
if a hearing is not promptly requested. The citation shall provide information
on how and where a hearing may be requested, including a contact address and
phone number.
   (B)   Hearings.
      (1)   Upon issuance of a citation, a person accused of violating this
chapter may request in writing a hearing on the matter. Hearing requests must
be made within ten business days of the issuance of the citation and delivered
to the City Administrator or other designated city officer. Failure to request
a hearing within ten business days of the issuance of the citation will
terminate the person's right to a hearing.
      (2)   The City Administrator or other designated city officer shall set
the time and place for the hearing. Written notice of the hearing time and
place shall be mailed or delivered to the accused violator at least ten
business days prior to the hearing.
   (C)   Hearing officer. The city official designated by the City Council
shall serve as the hearing officer. The hearing officer must be an impartial
employee of the city or an impartial person retained by the city to conduct the
hearing.
   (D)   Decision.
      (1)   A decision shall be issued by the hearing officer within ten
business days. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this
chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer’s reasons for
finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under this section, shall be
recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the city and the
accused violator by in person delivery or mail as soon as practicable.
Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds
grounds for not imposing any penalty, those findings shall be recorded and a
copy provided to the city and the acquitted accused violator by in person
delivery or mail as soon as practicable.
      (2)   Costs. If the citation is upheld by the hearing officer, the city's
actual expenses in holding the hearing up to a maximum penalty shall be paid by
the person requesting the hearing.
      (3)   Decision final. The decision of the hearing officer is final.
   (E)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be
filed in the district court for the city in which the alleged violation
occurred within ten business days.
   (F)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Fine amounts, see §
10.98
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of
this chapter.
   (B)   City penalties.
      (1)   Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or
whose employee shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged a city fine
as set out in §
10.98. In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for
not less than seven consecutive days.
      (2)   Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated
by division (B)(3), below, found to be in violation of this chapter shall be
charged a city fine as set forth in §
10.98.
      (3)   Minors. Minors found in unlawful possession of or who unlawfully
purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine or
lobelia delivery devices, shall be subject to an city fine, or may be subject
to tobacco-related education classes, diversion programs, community services,
or another penalty that the city believes will be appropriate and effective.
The city fine or other penalty shall be established by City Council ordinance
upon the City Council's consultation with interested parties of the courts,
educators, parents and children to determine an appropriate penalty for minors
in the city. This city fine or other penalty may also be established from time
to time by the ordinance establishing fees and charges, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      (4)   Statutory penalties. If the city penalties authorized to be imposed
by M.S. § 461.12, as it may be amended from time to time, differ from those
established in this section, then the statutory penalties shall prevail.
(Ord. 388, passed 11-5-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Fine amounts, see §
10.98
CHAPTER 114: CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
   
114.01   Administration
   
114.02   Registration of cannabis businesses
   
114.03   Requirements for cannabis businesses
   
114.04   Temporary cannabis events
   
114.05   Lower-potency hemp edibles
   
114.06   Local government as a cannabis retailer
   
114.07   Use in public places
   
114.08   More restrictive regulations
§ 114.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The City of Aitkin makes the following
legislative findings:
      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S.
Ch. 342, as it may be amended from time to time, which authorizes the City of
Aitkin to protect the public health, safety, welfare of the City of Aitkin
residents by regulating cannabis businesses within the legal boundaries of the
City of Aitkin.
      (2)   The City of Aitkin finds and concludes that the proposed provisions
are appropriate and lawful land use regulations for the City of Aitkin, that
the proposed amendments will promote the community's interest in reasonable
stability in zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed provisions
are in the public interest and for the public good.
   (B)   Authority and jurisdiction. 
      (1)   The City of Aitkin has the authority to adopt this chapter pursuant
to the following:
         (a)   M.S. § 342.13(c), as it may be amended from time to time,
regarding the authority of a local unit of government to adopt reasonable
restrictions of the time, place, and manner of the operation of a cannabis
business provided that such restrictions do not prohibit the establishment or
operation of cannabis businesses.
         (b)   M.S. § 342.22, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding
the local registration and enforcement requirements of state-licensed cannabis
retail businesses and lower-potency hemp edible retail businesses.
         (c)   M.S. § 152.0263, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to
time, regarding the use of cannabis in public places.
         (d)   M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time,
regarding the authority of a local authority to adopt zoning ordinances.
      (2)   This chapter shall be applicable to the legal boundaries of the
City of Aitkin.
   (C)   Enforcement. The City of Aitkin is responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this
chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements constitutes a
misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by Minnesota law. Violations of this
chapter can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a
regulated activity listed in this chapter.
   (D)   Definitions. Unless otherwise noted in this section, words and phrases
contained in M.S. § 342.01 as it may be amended from time to time, and the
rules promulgated pursuant to any of these acts, shall have the same meanings
in this chapter.
      CANNABIS BUSINESS. Any of the following licensed operations: cannabis
microbusiness, cannabis mezzo business, cannabis cultivator, cannabis
manufacturer, cannabis retailer, cannabis wholesaler, cannabis transporter,
cannabis testing facility, cannabis event organizer, cannabis delivery service,
medical cannabis cultivator, medical cannabis processor, medical cannabis
retailer, and medical cannabis combination business.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATION. A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis
plants within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to
mature plant. Harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and label
immature plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis
businesses, transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the
same premises, and perform other actions approved by the office.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATOR. May grow cannabis plants within the approved amount
of space from seed to immature plant to mature plant, harvest cannabis flower,
package and label immature cannabis plants and seedlings and cannabis flower,
and transport cannabis flower to cannabis manufacturers.
      CANNABIS DELIVERY SERVICE. May purchase cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, and hemp-derived consumer products from
licensed cannabis microbusinesses with a retail endorsement, cannabis mezzo
businesses with a retail endorsement, cannabis retailers, medical cannabis
retailers, and medical cannabis combination businesses; transport and deliver
cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, and hemp-
derived consumable products to customers; and perform other actions approved by
the Office of Cannabis Management. Prior to completing a delivery, a CANNABIS
DELIVERY SERVICE must verify that the customer is at least 21 years of age or
is enrolled in the registry program. The Office of Cannabis Management shall
establish limits on the amount of cannabis and hemp products that a CANNABIS
DELIVERY SERVICE may transport. Cannabis and hemp must be stored in a locked,
safe, and secure storage compartment that is part of the cannabis delivery
vehicle.
      CANNABIS EVENT ORGANIZER. May organize a temporary cannabis event lasting
no more than four days. A CANNABIS EVENT ORGANIZER must receive local approval,
including obtaining any necessary permits or licenses issued by a local unit of
government before holding a cannabis event. If approved by the local unit of
government, a cannabis event may designate an area for consumption of adult-use
cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-
derived consumer products, or any combination of those items.
      CANNABIS MANUFACTURER. May purchase cannabis flower, cannabis products,
hemp plant parts, hemp concentrate, and artificially derived cannabinoids from
a cannabis business, purchase hemp plants and hemp concentrates, make cannabis
hemp concentrate, manufacture artificially derived cannabinoids, manufacture
adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, and hemp-derived
consumer products, and sell cannabis concentrate, hemp concentrate,
artificially derived cannabinoids, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, and hemp-derived consumer products to other cannabis businesses.
      CANNABIS MEZZO BUSINESS. May grow cannabis from seed or immature plant
for cannabis products or medical cannabis flower, make cannabis and hemp
concentrate, manufacture adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, and hemp-derived consumers products for public consumption, process
medical cannabinoid products, sell immature cannabis plants and seedlings, and
purchase cannabis concentrate, hemp concentrate, and synthetically derived
cannabinoids from another cannabis business. A CANNABIS MEZZO BUSINESS that
cultivates cannabis at an indoor facility may cultivate up to 15,000 square
feet of plant canopy. A CANNABIS MEZZO BUSINESS that cultivates cannabis at an
outdoor location may cultivate up to one acre of mature, flowering plants.
      CANNABIS MICROBUSINESS. May grow cannabis plants, make cannabis
concentrate, make hemp concentrate, manufacture artificially derived
cannabinoids, manufacture adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, and hemp-derived consumer products for public consumption, purchase
hemp or hemp concentrate parts, package and label cannabis and hemp products,
and sell cannabis plants and seedlings, adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp products, and hemp-derived consumer
products. A CANNABIS MICROBUSINESS that cultivates cannabis at an indoor
facility may cultivate up to 5,000 square feet of plant canopy. A CANNABIS
MICROBUSINESS that cultivates cannabis at an outdoor location may cultivate up
to one-half acre of mature, flowering plants. A CANNABIS MICROBUSINESS with the
appropriate endorsement may operate one retail location. A CANNABIS
MICROBUSINESS may permit on-site consumption of edible cannabis products and
lower-potency hemp edibles on a portion of its premises. CANNABIS MICROBUSINESS
must ensure that the display and consumption of any edible product or lower-
potency hemp edible is not visible from outside the licensed premises of the
business.
      CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESS. A retail location and the retail location(s) of
mezzo businesses with a retail operations endorsement, microbusinesses with a
retail operations endorsement, medical combination businesses operating a
retail location, (and/excluding) lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
      CANNABIS RETAILER. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and
not for the purpose of resale in any form. A CANNABIS RETAILER may purchase
immature cannabis plants and seedlings, cannabis flower, cannabis products, and
lower-potency hemp products, from cannabis businesses, and sell immature
cannabis plants and seedlings, adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived consumer products, and other
products authorized by law to customers.
      CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY. May obtain and test immature cannabis plants
and seedlings, cannabis flower, cannabis products, hemp plant parts, hemp
concentrate, artificially derived cannabinoids, lower-potency hemp edibles, and
hemp-derived consumer products from cannabis microbusinesses, cannabis mezzo
businesses, cannabis cultivators, cannabis manufacturers, cannabis wholesalers,
lower-potency hemp edible manufacturers, medical cannabis cultivators, medical
cannabis processors, medical cannabis combination businesses, and industrial
hemp growers.
      CANNABIS TRANSPORTER. May transport immature cannabis plants and
seedlings, cannabis flower, cannabis products, artificially derived
cannabinoids, hemp plant parts, hemp concentrate, lower-potency hemp edibles,
and hemp-derived consumer products from cannabis microbusinesses, cannabis
mezzo businesses, cannabis cultivators, cannabis manufacturers, cannabis
wholesalers, lower-potency hemp edible manufacturers, medical cannabis
retailers, medical cannabis processors, and industrial hemp growers to cannabis
microbusinesses, cannabis mezzo businesses, cannabis manufacturers, cannabis
testing facilities, cannabis wholesalers, cannabis retailers, lower-potency
hemp edible retailers, medical cannabis processors, medical cannabis retailers,
and medical cannabis combination businesses and perform other actions approved
by the Office of Cannabis Management.
      CANNABIS WHOLESALER. May purchase immature cannabis plants and seedlings,
cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, and hemp-
derived consumer products from cannabis businesses, and purchase hemp plant
parts and hemp concentrates. CANNABIS WHOLESALERS may sell immature cannabis
plants and seedlings, cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, and hemp-derived consumer products to cannabis microbusinesses,
cannabis mezzo businesses, cannabis manufacturers, and cannabis retailers, sell
lower-potency hemp edibles to lower-potency-hemp edible retailers, and import
hemp-derived consumer products and lower-potency hemp edibles that contain hemp
concentrate or artificially derived cannabinoids.
      COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the City of Aitkin uses to investigate and
ensure that those authorized to sell licensed products are following and
complying with the requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be
conducted by the City of Aitkin or other units of government for educational,
research, and training purposes or for investigating or enforcing federal,
state, or local laws and regulations related to licensed products.
      DAYCARE. A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human
Services to provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child's own
home for gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a 24-hour day.
      LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. Any product:
         (a)   That is intended to be eaten or consumed as a beverage by
humans;
         (b)   Contains hemp concentrate or an artificially derived
cannabinoid, in combination with food ingredients;
         (c)   Is not a drug;
         (d)   Consists of servings that contain no more than five milligrams
of delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, 25 milligrams of cannabidiol, 25 milligrams of
cannabidiol, or any combination of those cannabinoids that does not exceed the
identified amounts;
         (e)   Does not contain more than a combined total of one-half
milligram of all other cannabinoids per serving;
         (f)   Does not contain an artificially derived cannabinoid other than
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol;
         (g)   Does not contain a cannabinoid derived from cannabis plants or
cannabis flower; and
         (h)   Is a type of product approved for sale by the office or is
substantially similar to a product approved by the office, including but not
limited to products that resemble nonalcoholic beverages, candy, and baked
goods.
      LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE MANUFACTURER. May purchase hemp plant parts,
hemp concentrate, and artificially derived cannabinoids from cannabis
microbusinesses, cannabis mezzo businesses, cannabis manufacturers, cannabis
wholesalers, and lower-potency edible manufactures. LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE
MANUFACTURERS may also purchase hemp parts and hemp concentrate, make hemp
concentrate, manufacture artificially derived cannabinoids, manufacture lower-
potency hemp edibles for public consumption, package and label lower-potency
hemp edibles, and sell hemp concentrate, artificially derived cannabinoids, and
lower-potency hemp edibles to other cannabis businesses and hemp businesses.
      LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE RETAILER. May only sell lower-potency hemp
edibles to individuals who are at least 21 years of age. A LOWER-POTENCY HEMP
EDIBLE RETAILER may sell lower-potency hemp edibles that are obtained from a
licensed Minnesota cannabis microbusiness, cannabis mezzo business, cannabis
manufacturer, cannabis wholesaler, or lower-potency hemp edible manufacturer,
and meet all applicable packaging and labeling requirements.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS COMBINATION BUSINESS. May grow cannabis plants from seed
to immature plant to mature plant and harvest adult-use cannabis flower and
medical cannabis flower from a mature plant, make cannabis concentrate, make
cannabis and hemp concentrate, manufacture artificially derived cannabinoids,
manufacture medical cannabinoid products, package and label medical cannabis
and medical cannabinoid products for sale to medical cannabis processors,
medical cannabis retailers, other medical cannabis combination businesses, and
patients enrolled in the registry program, registered caregivers, and parents,
legal guardians, and spouses of an enrolled patient.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATOR. May grow cannabis plants within the approved
amount of space (60,00 square feet of plant canopy) from seed or immature
plant, harvest cannabis flower from a mature plant, package and label cannabis
flower as medical cannabis flower, sell medical cannabis flower to medical
cannabis processors and medical cannabis retailers, transport medical cannabis
flower to a medical cannabis processor located on the same premises, and
perform other actions approved by the Office of Cannabis Management. A MEDICAL
CANNABIS CULTIVATOR must verify that every batch of medical cannabis flower has
passed safety, potency and consistency testing at a cannabis testing facility
approved by the Office of Cannabis Management for the testing of medical
cannabis flower before the MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATOR may package, label, or
sell the medical cannabis flower to any other entity.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSOR. May purchase medical cannabis flower, medical
cannabinoid products, hemp plant parts, and hemp concentrate from medical
cannabis cultivators and other medical cannabis processors, purchase hemp plant
parts from industrial hemp growers, make cannabis and hemp concentrate from
medical cannabis flower, manufacture medical cannabinoid products, package and
label medical cannabinoid products for sale to other medical cannabis
processors and to medical cannabis retailers. A MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSOR must
verify that every batch of medical cannabis flower has passed safety, potency,
and consistency testing at a cannabis testing facility approved by the Office
of Cannabis Management for testing of medical cannabis flower before the
medical cannabis cultivator may package, label, or sell the medical cannabis
flower to any other entity.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS RETAILER. May purchase medical cannabis flower and
medical cannabinoid products from medical cannabis cultivators and medical
cannabis processors and sell or distribute medical cannabis flower and medical
cannabinoid products to any person authorized to receive medical cannabis
flower or medical cannabinoid products.
      OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as "OCM" in this chapter.
      PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
      PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL. OCM pre-approval for a cannabis business
license for applicants who qualify under M.S. § 342.17, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals;
nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
      RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. As defined under M.S. § 245.462, subd.
23, as it may be amended from time to time.
      RETAIL REGISTRATION. An approved registration issued by the City of
Aitkin to a state-licensed cannabis retail business.
      SCHOOL. A public school as defined under M.S. § 120A.05, as it may be
amended from time to time, or a nonpublic school that must meet the reporting
requirements under M.S. § 120A.24, as it may be amended from time to time.
      STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued by the State of Minnesota's
Office of Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business.
      YOUTH-ORIENTED FACILITY. Any facility with residents, customers,
visitors, or inhabitants of which 25% or more are regularly under the age of 21
or that primarily sells, rents, or offers services or products that are
consumed or used primarily by persons under the age of 21. A YOUTH-ORIENTED
FACILITY includes, but is not limited to schools, playgrounds, recreation
centers, athletic fields, and public parks.
(Ord. 412, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 114.02 REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Consent to registering of cannabis businesses.
      (1)   No individual or entity may operate a state-licensed cannabis
retail business within the City of Aitkin without first registering with the
City Administration Office.
      (2)   Any state-licensed cannabis retail business that sells to a
customer or patient without valid retail registration shall incur a civil
penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation per M.S. § 342.22, subd. 5(e), as it
may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state shall not issue
a license to any cannabis business to operate in Tribal Nations, as defined in
United States Code, Title 18, Section 1151, of a Minnesota Tribal government
without the consent of the Tribal government.
   (B)   Compliance checks prior to retail registration.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of a cannabis retail business registration, the
City of Aitkin may conduct a preliminary compliance check to ensure compliance
with local ordinances.
      (2)   Pursuant to M.S. § 342.13(f), as it may be amended from time to
time, within 30 days of receiving a copy of a state license application from
OCM, the City of Aitkin shall certify on a form provided by OCM whether a
proposed cannabis retail business complies with local zoning ordinances and, if
applicable, whether the proposed business complies with the state fire code and
building code.
   (C)   Registration and application procedure.
      (1)   Fees. The City of Aitkin shall not charge an application fee. A
registration fee, as established in the City of Aitkin Fee Schedule, shall be
charged to applicants depending on the type of retail business license applied
for. An initial retail registration fee shall not exceed $500 or half the
amount of an initial state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, as it may be
amended from time to time, whichever is less. The initial registration fee
shall include the initial retail registration fee and the first annual renewal
fee. Any renewal retail registration fee imposed by the City of Aitkin shall be
charged at the time of the second renewal and each subsequent renewal
thereafter. A renewal retail registration fee shall not exceed $1,000 or half
the amount of a renewal state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, as it may be
amended from time to time, whichever is less. A medical combination business
operating an adult-use retail location may only be charged a single
registration fee, not to exceed the lesser of a single retail registration fee,
defined under this section, of the adult-use retail business. All fees
collected by the City of Aitkin will be retained by the City of Aitkin.
      (2)   Registration submittal. The City of Aitkin's Administration Office
shall issue a retail registration to a state-licensed cannabis retail business
that adheres to the requirements of M.S. § 342.22, as it may be amended from
time to time.
         (a)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out a
registration form, as provided by the City of Aitkin's Administration Office.
Said form shall include, but is not limited to:
            1.   Full name, tax ID number, and address of the property owner;
            2.   Full name, tax ID number, and address of applicant;
            3.   Email address, and telephone number of the applicant and
property owner;
            4.   The address and parcel ID for the property which the retail
registration is sought;
            5.   Certification that property taxes are current on the property
listed above;
            6.   Certification that the applicant complies with the
requirements of local ordinances established pursuant to M.S. § 342.13, as it
may be amended from time to time.
               a.   Pursuant to M.S. Ch. 342, as it may be amended from time to
time, within 30 days of receiving a copy of a state license application from
OCM, the City of Aitkin shall certify on a form provided by OCM whether a
proposed cannabis retail business complies with local zoning ordinances and, if
applicable, whether the proposed business complies with the state fire code and
building code.
         (b)   The registrant shall include with the form:
            1.   The registration fee as required in division (C)(1) of this
section;
            2.   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM
license pre- approval; and
            3.   A copy of their current Workers' Compensation Certificate of
Compliance.
         (c)   Once a registration is considered complete; the City of Aitkin's
Administration Office shall inform the registrant as such and process the
registration fees. The registrant will then be eligible to proceed with the
interim use permit application process. Once the IUP application is deemed
complete, it will be scheduled for a public hearing before the Aitkin Planning
Commission for approval or denial.
         (d)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
      (3)   Registration approval.
         (a)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business registration shall not
be approved if the cannabis retail business would exceed the maximum number of
registered cannabis retail businesses permitted under division (F) of this
section.
         (b)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business registration shall not
be approved or renewed if the applicant is unable to meet the requirements of
this chapter.
         (c)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business registration that
meets the requirements of this chapter shall be approved.
      (4)   Annual compliance checks.
         (a)   The City of Aitkin may complete at minimum one compliance check
per calendar year of every cannabis business with a retail registration to
assess if the business meets age verification requirements, as required under
M.S. § 342.22, subd. 4(b) and M.S. § 342.24, as they may be amended from time
to time, and this chapter.
         (b)   The City of Aitkin shall conduct at minimum one unannounced age
verification compliance check per calendar year. Age verification compliance
checks shall involve persons at least 17 years of age but under the age of 21
who, with the prior written consent of a parent or guardian if the person is
under the age of 18, attempt to purchase adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products under the direct supervision of a law enforcement officer or an
employee of the local unit of government.
         (c)   Any failures under this section must be reported to the Office
of Cannabis Management.
      (5)   Location change.
         (a)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall be required to
submit a new application for registration under division (C)(2) of this section
if it seeks to move to a new location still within the legal boundaries of the
City of Aitkin.
         (b)   All registrations shall be valid only on the premises for which
the license was issued and only for the person to whom the registration was
issued. No transfer of the registration to another location or person shall be
allowed.
   (D)   Renewal of registration. The City of Aitkin's Administration Office
shall renew an annual registration of a state-licensed cannabis retail business
at the same time OCM renews the cannabis retail business' license. A state-
licensed cannabis retail business shall apply to renew registration on a form
established by the City of Aitkin's Administration Office. A cannabis retail
registration issued under this chapter shall not be transferred.
      (1)   Renewal fees. The City of Aitkin's Administration Office may charge
a renewal fee for the registration starting at the second renewal, as
established in the City of Aitkin's Fee Schedule.
      (2)   Renewal application. The application for renewal of a retail
registration shall include, but is not limited to: items required under
division (C)(2) of this section and any additional standards as requested by
the City of Aitkin's Administration Office.
   (E)   Suspension of registration.
      (1)   When suspension is warranted. The City of Aitkin may suspend a
cannabis business' registration if it violates this chapter or poses an
immediate threat to the health or safety of the public. The City of Aitkin
shall immediately notify the cannabis retail business in writing the grounds
for the suspension.
      (2)   Notification to OCM. The City of Aitkin shall immediately notify
the OCM in writing the grounds for the suspension. OCM will provide the City of
Aitkin and cannabis business retailer a response to the complaint within seven
calendar days and perform any necessary inspections within 30 calendar days.
      (3)   Length of suspension. The suspension of a cannabis retail business
registration may be for up to 30 calendar days, unless OCM suspends the license
for a longer period. The business may not make sales to customers if their
registration is suspended. The City of Aitkin's Administration Office shall
reinstate if it determines that the violations have been resolved, and if OCM
determines that the violation(s) have been resolved.
      (4)   Civil penalties. Subject to M.S. § 342.22, subd. 5(e), as it may be
amended from time to time, the City of Aitkin may impose a civil penalty, as
specified in the City of Aitkin's Fee Schedule, for registration violations,
not to exceed $2,000.
   (F)   Limiting of registrations. The City of Aitkin has elected to not limit
the number of cannabis retail businesses.
(Ord. 412, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 114.03 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Minimum buffer requirements.
      (1)   The City of Aitkin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business property line within 900 feet of a school property line.
      (2)   The City of Aitkin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business property line within 500 feet of a licensed daycare property line.
      (3)   The City of Aitkin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business property line within 500 feet of a residential treatment facility
property line.
      (4)   The City of Aitkin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
retail business property line within 500 feet of another cannabis retail
business property line.
      (5)   The City of Aitkin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business property line within 500 feet of any youth-orientated facility
property line.
      (6)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.367, subd. 14, as it may be amended from
time to time, nothing in this division (A) shall prohibit an active cannabis
business or a cannabis business seeking registration from continuing operation
at the same site if a (school/daycare/residential treatment facility/youth-
orientated facility) moves within the minimum buffer zone.
   (B)   Zoning and land use.
      (1)   Purpose and permit required. It is the purpose and intent of this
division to regulate zoning and land use of cannabis businesses within the City
of Aitkin, and to mitigate possible adverse impacts to the health, safety, and
welfare of surrounding properties, environments, and the general public well-
being. The following standards apply to any cannabis businesses (excluding low-
potency hemp edible businesses) in which the owner must apply for and receive
an interim use permit (IUP). The IUP will be valid for three years and must be
renewed every three years in order to determine the compliance level of the
owner with the conditions of approval. The applicant, owner, or authorized
agent shall be present at the scheduled City of Aitkin Planning Commission
meeting. The termination of the IUP will take place when there is a change in
ownership of the cannabis business.
      (2)   Zoning and land use application requirements. The application for
an interim use permit shall include at a minimum, but is not limited to:
         (a)   All information required for an IUP as found in §
152.271 of this code of ordinances.
         (b)   A to-scale site plan for the property which details the
locations and dimensions of all property lines, the structure intended for
licensing (building size shall not exceed as set forth in §
114.01(D) of this chapter), accessory structures, parking areas/plan.
         (c)   A contact person or system administrator shall be designated and
contact information be provided to the City of Aitkin at the time of
application.
         (d)   After a complete application is submitted and prior to the
approval of the IUP, the City of Aitkin may inspect the interior and exterior
of the proposed cannabis business in order to determine compliance with the
requirements of this section.
      (3)   Cannabis businesses permitted in zoning districts.
         (a)   Cannabis cultivation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed
for cultivation are only permitted as an interim use in the following zoning
districts: Industrial (I).
         (b)   Cannabis manufacturer. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed
for manufacturing are only permitted as an interim use in the following zoning
districts: Industrial (I).
         (c)   Low-potency hemp edible manufacturer. Businesses licensed or
endorsed for low-potency hemp edible manufacturers are only permitted as an
interim use in the following zoning districts: Industrial (I).
         (d)   Cannabis wholesaler. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed
for wholesale are only permitted as an interim use in the following zoning
districts:
            1.   Highway Commercial (C); and
            2.   Industrial (I).
         (e)   Cannabis retailer. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cannabis retail are only permitted as an interim use in the following zoning
districts:
            1.   Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU);
            2.   Light Industrial/Commercial Transition (LI-CT); and
            3.   Highway Commercial (C).
         (f)   Cannabis transporter. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed
for transportation are only permitted as an interim use in the following zoning
districts:
            1.   Highway Commercial (C);
            2.   Industrial (I); and
            3.   Light Industrial/Commercial Transition (LI-CT).
         (g)   Cannabis delivery service. Cannabis businesses licensed or
endorsed for delivery are only permitted as an interim use in the following
zoning districts:
            1.   Rural Residential (RR);
            2.   Urban/Rural Transition Residential (TR);
            3.   Urban Residential (UR);
            4.   Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU);
            5.   Highway Commercial (C);
            6.   Industrial (I); and
            7.   Light Industrial/Commercial Transition (LI-CT).
      (4)   General requirements for cultivation and manufacturing businesses.
         (a)   Security and (indoor/outdoor) lighting shall be in accordance
with M.S. § 342.25, subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time, and
subject to IUP conditions imposed by the City of Aitkin Planning Commission.
         (b)   Wastewater plan shall be in accordance with M.S. § 342.28, subd.
3, as it may be amended from time to time, and applicant must submit to OCM an
operating plan demonstrating the proposed size and layout of the cultivation
facility; plans for wastewater and waste disposal for the cultivation facility;
plans for providing electricity, water, and other utilities necessary for the
normal operation of the cultivation facility.
         (c)   Ventilation and filtration shall be in accordance with M.S. §
342.24, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time, and must maintain a
ventilation and filtration system sufficient to meet the requirements for odor
control established by state administrative rules.
         (d)   Solid waste shall be in accordance with M.S. § 342.25, subd. 4,
as it may be amended from time to time, and must prepare, maintain, and execute
a solid waste disposal plan. M.S. § 342.08, subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time, notes administrative rules will be created for appropriate
disposal of cannabis plant matter, packaging, and other solid waste of all
cannabis businesses.
         (e)   Other regulations imposed by the Planning Commission may include
conditions that will reduce impacts of the proposed use on neighboring
properties, public services, and public safety. Said conditions may include,
but not be limited to: fencing or vegetative screening, parking plan, pest
management plan, lighting, signage, and so forth.
      (5)   General requirements for cannabis retail, microbusiness, and mezzo
business. In addition to meeting the performance standards in the zoning
ordinance (
Ch. 152), the use must also meet the following requirements. In the event there
are contradictory standards, the most restrictive standard must be met.
         (a)   Security shall be in accordance with M.S. § 342.27, subd. 9, as
it may be amended from time to time, and shall maintain compliance with
security requirements established by the state, including both, but not limited
to, requirements for maintaining video surveillance records, using specific
locking mechanisms, establishing secure entries, and the number of employees
working at all times.
         (b)   Lighting shall be in accordance with M.S. § 342.27, subd. 10, as
it may be amended from time to time, and shall keep all lighting outside and
inside the dispensary in good working order and of sufficient wattage for
security cameras.
         (c)   Wastewater shall be in accordance with M.S. § 342.29, subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time, and applicant for a cannabis mezzo
business license must submit to the state an operating plan demonstrating the
proposed layout of the facility, including a diagram of ventilation and
filtration systems; plans for wastewater and waste disposal for any cultivation
or manufacturing activities; plans for providing electricity, water, and other
utilities necessary for the normal operation of any cultivation or
manufacturing activities.
         (d)   Ventilation and filtration shall be in accordance with M.S. §
342.24, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time, and must maintain a
ventilation and filtration system sufficient to meet the requirements for odor
control established by state administrative rules.
         (e)   Solid waste shall be in accordance with M.S. § 342.08, subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time, which notes administrative rules will
be created for appropriate disposal of cannabis plant matter, packaging, and
other solid waste of all cannabis businesses.
         (f)   Other regulations imposed by the Planning Commission may include
conditions that will reduce impacts of the proposed use on neighboring
properties, public services, and public safety. Said conditions may include,
but not be limited to fencing or vegetative screening, parking plan, pest
management plan, lighting, signage, and so forth.
      (6)   Zoning and land use enforcement/violations.
         (a)   For cannabis businesses with compliance issues during the term
of their IUP, investigations will be conducted by the City of Aitkin, and
information will be gathered for the future consideration by the Planning
Commission for subsequent renewals.
         (b)   Future compliance will be monitored through the regular review
of the IUP and annual inspections of the cannabis business by the City of
Aitkin. During the annual inspection, the cannabis business owner will be
assessed an annual re-inspection fee with payment due prior to annual
inspection. Non-compliance will be brought before the Planning Commission. The
annual re-inspection fee for a business determined to be in violation shall be
in accordance with §
114.02(E)(4) of this chapter.
         (c)   The conditions imposed by the Planning Commission and agreed
upon by the cannabis owner must be complied with during the term of the IUP.
         (d)   If substantial complaints/violations have occurred during the
term of the IUP, the IUP may be subject to a revocation hearing before the
Planning Commission.
         (e)   Any person, firm or corporation, or agent, employees or
contractors of such, who violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse to comply
with, or who resist enforcement of any provision of this chapter may be subject
to the forfeiture of their IUP. Violation of this chapter shall be deemed a
misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
      (7)   Appeals. Appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by city staff shall first be made to City Council in
accordance with §
152.272(R) of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Hours of operation.
      (1)   Cannabis businesses are limited to retail sale of cannabis,
cannabis flower, cannabis products, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday and 11:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Sunday. No retail
sale may be made on Thanksgiving Day, or after 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve
through Christmas Day.
      (2)   On-site consumption of cannabis products is prohibited from 1:30
a.m. to 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and from 1:30 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. on
Sundays.
   (D)   Advertising. It is the intent of this chapter to permit signs in
accordance with §
152.120 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 412, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 114.04 TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   (A)   A temporary cannabis event is permitted in the following zoning
districts:
      (1)   Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU); and
      (2)   Highway Commercial (C).
   (B)   License or permit required for temporary cannabis event.
      (1)   License required. A license or permit is required to be issued and
approved by the Aitkin City Council prior to holding a temporary cannabis
event.
      (2)   Registration and application procedure. A registration fee, as
established in the City of Aitkin's Fee Schedule, shall be charged to
applicants for temporary cannabis events.
      (3)   Application submittal and review. The City of Aitkin's
Administration Office shall require an application for temporary cannabis
events.
         (a)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the City of Aitkin. Said form shall include,
but is not limited to items required under §
114.02(C)(2).
         (b)   The applicant shall include with the form:
            1.   The registration fee as required in the fee schedule; and
            2.   A copy of the OCM cannabis event license application,
submitted pursuant to M.S. § 342.39, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to
time.
         (c)   The application shall be submitted to the City of Aitkin's
Administration Office, or other designee for review. If the designee determines
that a submitted application is incomplete, they shall return the application
to the applicant with the notice of deficiencies.
         (d)   Once an application is considered complete, the City of Aitkin
Administration Office shall inform the applicant as such and process the
application fees. The application will be submitted to the Aitkin City Council
for approval or denial at the next regular meeting, as long as the complete
application is received at least seven days before the meeting.
         (e)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
         (f)   The application for a license for a temporary cannabis event
shall meet the following standards:
            1.   Include the nature and purpose of the event, the proposed
beginning date and the period during which the event will be conducted, and a
detailed statement of the manner in which it will be conducted;
            2.   Include the maximum number of persons which the applicant will
permit to assemble on the premises at any time during the event, which number
shall be stated as a condition of any permit which may be issued;
            3.   The plans of the applicant to limit and control admission to
the premises to the maximum number of persons stated in the permit and for
controlling and parking vehicles of persons assembling on the premises;
            4.   Plans for maintenance of security and order on the premises,
including the proposed number, deployment, and hours of availability of
security guards upon the premises prior to, during, and immediately after the
close of the assembly. The plan must be approved by the City of Aitkin Police
Chief and/or designee;
            5.   Plans for the preparation and distribution of food and
refreshments upon the premises;
            6.   Plans for medical services, including buildings therefore, the
names and hours of availability of physicians and nurses, and provisions for
ambulance and other emergency services; and
            7.   The application shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal
sum of $25,000 with sureties to be approved by the City of Aitkin conditioned
that the permittee:
               a.   Carries out all of the plans and keeps and performs all of
the conditions of the application and permit;
               b.   Maintains order on the premises;
               c.   Leaves the premises in neat and respectable condition;
               d.   Indemnifies and holds harmless the City of Aitkin, its
officers, agents, and employees, from any liability or causes of action arising
in any way from the conduct of the assembly, evidenced by a certificate of
insurance in the minimum amounts of municipal tort limits and a named
additional insured;
               e.   The bond shall provide that any person damaged by the
breach of any condition of the bond may maintain an action within 90 days after
the event concludes in his own name to recover his damage, after first giving
written notice to the City of Aitkin, or the City of Aitkin may maintain an
action in its own name for the benefit of the persons damaged. In the event
that approval of the application shall be denied by the Aitkin City Council,
the fee shall be returned; and
               f.   If no action has been filed, the bond shall be released 90
days after the event concludes.
         (g)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that meets the
requirements of this section shall be approved.
         (h)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that does not meet the
requirements of this section shall be denied. The City of Aitkin Administration
Office shall notify the applicant of the standards not met and basis for
denial.
(Ord. 412, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 114.05 LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLES.
   (A)   Sale of low-potency hemp edibles. The sale of low-potency edibles is
permitted, subject to the conditions within this section.
   (B)   Zoning districts. Low-potency edibles businesses are permitted as a
permitted use in the following zoning districts:
      (1)   Downtown Mixed-Use (DMU);
      (2)   Light Industrial/Commercial Transition (LI-CT); and
      (3)   Highway Commercial (C).
   (C)   Additional standards.
      (1)   Sales within municipal liquor store. The sale of low-potency
edibles is permitted in a municipal liquor store.
      (2)   Storage of product. Low-potency edibles shall be stored and sold
behind a counter.
(Ord. 412, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 114.06 LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS A CANNABIS RETAILER.
   The City of Aitkin may establish, own, and operate one municipal cannabis
retail business subject to the restrictions in this chapter. The municipal
cannabis retail store shall not be included in any limitation of the number of
registered cannabis retail businesses under §
114.02(F). The City of Aitkin shall be subject to all same rental license
requirements and procedures applicable to all other applicants.
(Ord. 412, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 114.07 USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place or a place of
public accommodation unless the premises is an establishment or an event
licensed to permit on-site consumption of adult-use.
(Ord. 412, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 114.08 MORE RESTRICTIVE REGULATIONS.
   More restrictive federal and state regulations or standards shall take
precedence over the regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 412, passed 12-2-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   CURFEW
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Archery
   
130.02   Social hosting
   
130.03   Loitering
   
130.04   Solicitation
   130.05   City parks rules and regulations
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 ARCHERY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, BOW OR ARCHERY ACTIVITY
means a weapon or act of using a weapon for shooting arrows, typically made of
a curved material whose ends are joined by a taut string.
   (B)   Program elements. The program contains the following elements:
      (1)   The location and boundaries of the public and private lands where
the taking of deer or other animals with the use of archery hunting techniques
under the program is permitted. Minimum parcel size of ten acres is required
for archery hunting activities. Archery hunting may not occur within 500 feet
of any building. Archery hunting is restricted to the Rural Residential and
Open Space Zoning Districts;
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, an individual may allow and
permit the use of a firearm or shoot an arrow from a bow at a facility designed
for shooting and target practice; provided, the facility complies with state
rules and regulations and has been approved by the city to conduct such
business;
      (3)   The days and hours during which the taking of deer or other animals
is permitted under the program matches state regulation for hunting activities
as published by the DNR;
      (4)   Hunters must make every effort to make a quick and clean harvest
and recovery;
      (5)   Hunting on private property requires written permission from the
landowner and a special request permit from the city;
      (6)   Hunting on public property is allowed provided hunters are not
otherwise restricted from such activities by state statute or ordinance; and
      (7)   Persons permitted to participate in the program must follow all
applicable state hunting and conservation regulations.
   (C)   Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Council by and through
the city’s Police Department to enforce the provisions of this section and the
City Council may, by resolution, delegate to such other officers or agencies
power to enforce particular provisions of this section.
(Ord. 375, passed 10-20-2015) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 SOCIAL HOSTING.
   (A)   Purpose and findings. This section prohibits, and establishes
penalties for, any person hosting an event or gathering where alcohol is
present and being possessed or consumed by persons under 21 years of age. The
City Council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of
alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends
to hold persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where
persons under 21 years of age possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether
the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The City
Council finds that:
      (1)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 may be harmful
to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health;
      (2)   Prohibiting underage consumption protects underage persons, as well
as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as
alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic crashes;
      (3)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could
have adverse effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by
the actions of an irresponsible user;
      (4)   Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are times
when the parent(s) is/are present and condone the activity and, in some
circumstances, provide the alcohol;
      (5)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a
crime, this section is necessary to help further combat underage consumption;
and/or
      (6)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally
responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs.
   (B)   Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to M.S. § 145A.05, subd.
1, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, and which
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
      EVENT or GATHERING. Any group of three or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
      HOST. To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control or
permit a gathering or event.
      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
         (a)   As natural, adoptive parent or step-parent;
         (b)   As a legal guardian; or
         (c)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation or any
association of one or more individuals.
      RESIDENCE or PREMISES. Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented or used with or without permission or compensation.
      UNDERAGE PERSON, OF AGE. Any individual under 21 years.
   (D)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to:
         (a)   Host or allow an event or gathering;
         (b)   At any residence, premises or any other private or public
property;
         (c)   Where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;
         (d)   When the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage
person will or does:
            1.   Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
            2.   Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it.
         (e)   The person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession
or consumption by the underage person(s).
      (2)   A person is criminally responsible for violating division (D)(1)
above if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels or conspires
with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
      (3)   A person who hosts an event or gathering as described in division
(D)(1) above does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be
criminally responsible.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This section does not apply to conduct solely between an underage
person and his or her parent(s) while present in the parent’s household.
      (2)   This section does not apply to legally protected religious
observances.
      (3)   This section does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2%
malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores or bottle club permit holders
who are regulated by M.S. § 340A.503, subd. 1(a)(1), as it may be amended from
time to time.
      (4)   This section does not apply to situations where underage persons
are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course
and scope of their employment.
   (F)   Enforcement. This section can be enforced by any police officer or
Sheriff’s Deputy in the county.
(Ord. 358, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 LOITERING.
   A person must not lurk, loiter or prowl in any place, at a time or in a
manner not usual for law abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant
alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity.
   (A)   Circumstances causing alarm. The following are circumstances that may
be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted, but are not limited
to:
      (1)   The fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a
police officer;
      (2)   The fact that the person refuses to identify himself or herself;
and/or
      (3)   The fact that the person endeavors to conceal himself or herself or
an object.
   (B)   Authority to detain. A police officer may stop and briefly detain a
person suspected of violating the above if the person’s behavior reasonably
causes suspicion of criminal activity. The officer’s reasonable suspicion must
be based on objective, articulable facts and reasonable inferences drawn from
the circumstances surrounding the incident and the person’s behavior.
   (C)   Opportunity to dispel alarm. Unless flight by the person or other
circumstances make it impracticable, a police office must, prior to arrest for
the above violation, allow the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted by requesting that the person identify himself or
herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. If it can be determined by
the officer that there is a suitable explanation for the individual’s conduct,
no arrest shall be made. However, where lawful to do so, the officer, at his or
her discretion, may order the individual to leave the premises. The above
person, when requested, must provide the officer with some type of
identification that would allow the officer to positively identify said person.
   (D)   Obstructing public passage.
      (1)   A person may not loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any public
property, private sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, parking lot
or other portion of private property open for the public use, so as to
unreasonably block, obstruct or hinder free passage of the public.
      (2)   A person must not unreasonably block, obstruct or hinder free
access to the entrance of a building or part of a building open to the public
without the consent of the owner or occupant.
      (3)   A person may not be arrested or convicted under this provision
until after a police officer has informed the person that his or her action
violates this section. An arrest may be made if he or she refuses to terminate
the violation or if he or she commits the same violation, at the same premises,
within 30 days after being warned of the violation.
(Ord. 336, passed 1-20-2009) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 SOLICITATION.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION.
         (a)   Disturbing to residents and businesses and contributes to the
loss of access to enjoyment of public places and to a sense of fear,
intimidation and disorder;
         (b)   Approaching or following pedestrians, repetitive soliciting
despite refusals, the use of abusive or profane language to cause fear and
intimidation, unwanted physical contact or the intentional blocking of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
         (c)   The presence of individuals who solicit money from persons in
places that are confined, difficult to avoid or where a person might find it
necessary to wait is especially troublesome because of the enhanced fear of
crime.
      SOLICITATION. Any plea made in where:
         (a)   A person, by vocal appeals, requests an immediate donation of
money or other item from another person; or
         (b)   A person verbally offers or actively provides an item or service
of little or no value to another in exchange for a donation, under
circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the transaction
is, in substance, a donation.
   (B)   Intent. This section is intended to protect citizens from the
disruption, fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation
and not to limit constitutionally protected activity.
   (C)   Solicitation prohibited.
      (1)   It is unlawful to engage in aggressive solicitation anywhere within
the city.
      (2)   It is unlawful, in a public place, to engage in an act of
solicitation when the person being solicited is present at any of the following
locations:
         (a)   In a restroom;
         (b)   At a bus stop;
         (c)   At or within ten feet of any crosswalk;
         (d)   In a vehicle which is parked or stopped on a public street;
         (e)   In an area which could restrict access to any type of business;
         (f)   In a line waiting to be admitted to a commercial or government
establishment;
         (g)   Within 50 feet of any automatic teller machine or entrance to a
bank, other financial institution or check cashing business;
         (h)   On any park land, or in any park, playground or public
entertainment venue, including within 50 feet of any entry ways or exits
thereto; and
         (i)   Within ten feet of any direction of the property of any liquor
establishment that is licensed by the city.
(Ord. 336, passed 1-20-2009) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 CITY PARKS RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
      PARKS. A park, playground, athletic field, trail, nature area, open space
area or recreational facility, including adjacent parking areas, owned or
operated by the city for the purpose of recreation or open space use.
   (B)   Rules and regulations for park use.
      (1)   Park hours. All public parks will close at 10:00 p.m. each day and
shall remain closed to the public until 5:00 a.m. on the next day. No person
shall be in, remain in or enter any public park between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m., and no person shall drive into or remain in a public parking
area within a public park during the hours when such park is closed.
      (2)   Activities permitted after closing of parks. The following
activities may continue in parks
after the parks have closed:
         (a)   City-sponsored and city-supervised activities.
         (b)   Activities sponsored by any individual or group, association or
organization which has applied for and received a permit for such activity from
the city.
         (c)   Activities of custodial or maintenance personnel in the course
of their official duties.
      (3)   After-hours permits. Application for issuance of a permit to
conduct activities in a park after closing hours shall be submitted to the city
on the forms provided, at least two weeks prior to the date of the activity.
Permits shall be issued if it appears that the applicant can comply with the
city’s current regulations of the city governing parks.
2023 S-1
10   Aitkin - General Offenses
      (4)   Removing, defacing or destroying property prohibited. No person
shall remove, deface, destroy, diminish or impair the value of public property
located on or within any park, including buildings, structures, trees, shrubs,
grass, vegetation, signs, tables, benches, fireplaces, trash receptacles,
notices or placards, boundary markers or fences, or any other public property,
either real or personal.
      (5)   Erection of structures. No person shall construct or erect any
tent, building, or structure of any kind, whether permanent or temporary in
character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across any
park, except with a permit issued by the City Administrator’s office.
      (6)   Littering and dumping. No person shall litter or cast upon or allow
to remain any rubbish or trash of any kind or nature in or about any park.
      (7)   Motorized vehicles. Motorized vehicles shall be driven or parked
only in designated areas in any park and shall be driven therein at a maximum
speed of five miles per hour. Recreational vehicles shall not be operated in
any park except in areas specifically designated or posted for their operation,
or as required for maintenance or for police, fire or rescue purposes.
Overnight camping is prohibited, except with a permit issued by the City
Administrator’s office.
      (8)   Open fires prohibited. No person shall build a fire in any place in
any park at any time, except in fireplaces or receptacles provided therein by
the city or in privately owned grills that are not harmful to grass or other
vegetation.
      (9)   Sale of articles. No person shall sell any articles, or solicit for
the sale thereof, in any park without a permit issued by the City
Administrator’s office.
      (10)   Posting signs and placards. No person shall paste, glue, tack or
otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription, whatsoever the
same may be, in any park.
      (11)   Animals. No person shall allow any domestic animal, including dogs
and cats, to go unattended and without physical restraint in any park. Pet
owners and animal handlers are responsible for cleaning up their pet’s waste
and disposing of it in a sanitary manner.
      (12)   Climbing of trees and on buildings. No person shall climb any
trees or climb on any building or structure in any park.
      (13)   Other prohibited acts. It is unlawful in any park for any person
to:
         (a)   Disturb or interfere with any birds, animals, animal habitat, or
nesting area.
         (b)   Schedule and hold gatherings of more than 100 people without a
permit from the City Administrator’s office and after approval by the City
Council.
 
2023 S-1
   General Offenses   10A
         (c)   Discharge any gun, firearm, air gun, pellet gun, explosive, bow
and arrow, or other similar device, except for a peace officer in the discharge
of his or her duties.
         (d)   Discharge fireworks except when authorized in writing by the
City Council.
         (e)   Discharge any pollutants into any body of water in any park.
   (C)   Variances. Variances to the strict application of this section may be
granted only by the City Council and only in unusual circumstances. Nothing
herein shall prohibit the normal care, operation or
functions of the city or its authorized agents in or on any city park.
   (D)   Violations and penalties. A violation of this section shall be an
administrative offense and is subject to the city penalties set forth in the
schedule of offenses and penalties in § 10.98 of the city code. In the event a
party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the penalty, a charge
may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable
statutes. If the penalty is paid, no further charge shall be brought by the
city for the same violation.
(Ord. 389, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall fail to comply with any order made under the
provisions of §
130.01 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as set forth in §
10.98.
   (C)   Any violation of any provision of §
130.02 of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the City Council, by and through the
city’s Police Department, to enforce the provisions of §§
130.03 and
130.04 of this chapter and the City Council may, by resolution, delegate to
such other officers or agencies power to enforce particular provisions of §§
130.03 and
130.04 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any person who shall fail to comply with any order made under the
provisions of §§
130.03 and
130.04 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fineas set forth in §
10.98.
(Ord. 336, passed 1-20-2009; Ord. 358, passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 375, passed 10-
20-2015)
CHAPTER 131: CURFEW
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Restrictions
   
131.03   Exceptions
   
131.04   Enforcement
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS.
      (1)   For 14 year olds and under: any time between 10:00 p.m. on any
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. on the following
day; and any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on
the following day.
      (2)   For 15 and 17 year olds: any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. on the following day; and
any time between 12:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on the
following day.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT. A person who is:
      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person;
or
      (2)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN. To:
      (1)   Linger or stay; or
      (2)   Fail to leave a premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Ord. 275, passed 12-16-1996)
§ 131.02 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to
knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours. The term KNOWINGLY includes knowledge which a parent or guardian
should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in
the legal custody of that parent or guardian.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or any employee of an
establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
(Ord. 275, passed 12-16-1996) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the operation of
the curfew. If the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or has been married.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
131.02 of this chapter that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment
promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. 275, passed 12-16-1996)
§ 131.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in §
131.04 above is involved.
(Ord. 275, passed 12-16-1996)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of this chapter is a petty misdemeanor.
   (B)   The procedure will be as follows:
      (1)   First offense: oral warning to minor and parent/guardian;
      (2)   Second offense: written warning to minor and parent/guardian along
with an information sheet containing information regarding the safety of the
minor;
      (3)   Third offense: citation, in an amount as set forth in §
10.98, issued to parent/guardian along with an information sheet containing
information regarding the safety of the minor;
      (4)   Fourth offense: citation, in an amount as set forth in §
10.98, issued to the parent/guardian along with an information sheet containing
information regarding the safety of the minor;
      (5)   Fifth offense: citation, in an amount as set forth in §
10.98, issued to parent/guardian along with an information sheet containing
information regarding the safety of the minor; and
      (6)   Sixth offense, and any subsequent offense: citation, in an amount
as set forth in §
10.98, issued to parent/guardian along with an information sheet containing
information regarding the safety of the minor.
   (C)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted.
(Ord. 275, passed 12-16-1996)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
152.   ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Identification
   
150.01   Purpose
   
150.02   Building numbers
   
150.03   Location, size and shape
   
150.04   Time for compliance
Building Code
   
150.15   Codes adopted by reference
   
150.16   Application, administration and enforcement
   
150.17   Permits and fees
 
   
150.99   Penalty
BUILDING IDENTIFICATION
§ 150.01 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that, for the purpose of providing proper protection
of public and private property in the city, it is essential to require visible
approved addressing or identification for each separate public, residential,
commercial or industrial building.
(Ord. 356, passed 8-15-2011)
§ 150.02 BUILDING NUMBERS.
   Each new and existing primary structure within the city limits shall be
assigned an address by the City Administrator in accordance with the method
that is currently in place.
(Ord. 356, passed 8-15-2011)
§ 150.03 LOCATION, SIZE AND SHAPE.
   (A)   All owners or occupants of new and existing residential, commercial
and industrial structures within the city shall display their assigned address
numbers on the outside of their primary structures, near the front door, for
emergency purposes. The address number must be located on a primary structure
surface facing the public road clearly visible from the road. Address numbers
shall be no smaller than three inches and colors should be in strong contrast
with background.
   (B)   In those cases where the principal building’s address is obscured from
view from the street of address by accessory buildings, trees, shrubbery or
other visual obstructions, the numbers shall be displayed on the mailbox in
numerals not less than two inches high, of a light reflective material and of a
contrasting color to the background. In those cases where the principal
building is obscured from the view from the street address and the residence
does not have a mailbox, the numbers shall be displayed from a permanent
mounting on the property, clearly visible from the street, displayed
prominently in numerals not less than four inches high of contrasting color to
the background. The post should be within 50 feet of the road and ten feet of
the driveway. The bottom of the address sign shall be placed at a height that
is not less than four feet above the level of the surface of the ground.
(Ord. 356, passed 8-15-2011) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.04 TIME FOR COMPLIANCE.
   All owners of existing primary structures in the city shall comply with this
subchapter within 45 days of adoption. All owners of new primary structures in
the city shall comply with this subchapter upon completion of construction of
the primary structure.
(Ord. 356, passed 8-15-2011)
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.15 CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.
      (1)   The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner
of Administration pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194, including all of
the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from
time to time by the state’s Commissioner of Administration, through the
Building Codes and Standards Division, is hereby adopted by reference with the
exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this
subchapter.
      (2)   The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this
subchapter as if fully set out herein.
   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement.
      (1)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall
be in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be
enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 16B.62, subd.
1, as it may be amended from time to time, when so established by this section.
      (2)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the City
Administrator's office.
      (3)   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building
Official designated by this municipality to administer the code (M.S. § 16B.65,
subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time).
   (C)   Permits and fees.
      (1)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code fee schedule. In addition, a
surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by
this code in accordance with M.S. § 16B.70, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (D)   Violations and penalties. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor
(M.S. § 16B.69, as it may be amended from time to time).
(Ord. 305, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 350, passed 11-1-2004)
§ 150.16 APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The application, administration and enforcement of the code shall be
in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be
enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121, subd.
1, as it may be amended from time to time, when so established by this
subchapter.
   (B)   The code enforcement agency of the municipality is called the City
Administrator’s office.
   (C)   This code shall be enforced by the state’s Certified Building Official
designated by the city to administer the code (M.S. § 326B.133, subd. 1, as it
may be amended from time to time).
(Ord. 350, passed 11-1-2004)
§ 150.17 PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 326B.121, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code Fee Schedule. In addition, a
surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by
this code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 350, passed 11-1-2004)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of any provision of §§
150.01 through
150.04 of this chapter shall be considered a petty misdemeanor.
   (C)   A violation of §§
150.15 through
150.17 of this chapter is a misdemeanor, per M.S. § 16B.69, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 350, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 356, passed 8-15-2011)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Sidewalks
   
151.01   Permit required
   
151.02   Compliance with specifications
   
151.03   Duty of owner
   
151.04   Inspections
   
151.05   Repair by city
   
151.06   Supervision of repairs
   
151.07   Owner liability
   
151.08   Assessment of costs
   
151.09   Snow, ice, weeds, grass and rubbish removal
 
   
151.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Right-of-Way Management, see
Ch. 91
   Snow, Ice, Dirt and Rubbish, see §§
94.20 through
94.28
   Zoning and Subdivisions, see
Ch. 152
SIDEWALKS
§ 151.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk on any street, avenue
or other public property in the city without first obtaining a permit;
provided, however, that, no permit shall be required for any construction or
repair ordered by or made by the city. There shall be no charge for a sidewalk
permit.
   (B)   All applications for permits required by division (A) above shall be
made on forms approved by the Council. All applications shall state:
      (1)   The date construction or repair will begin; and
      (2)   The time for completion, and sufficiently describe the contemplated
construction or repair.
(Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.02 COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS.
   No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk in the city without fully
complying with the plans and specifications prepared by the city and set forth
in the permit issued under §
151.01 of this chapter. Expenses incurred by the city in establishing grades,
assisting and determining location and preparing basic engineering plans and
specifications may be paid in full or in part by the city or may be charged
against the applicant, in which case the expenses shall be payable by him or
her in full as a condition precedent to issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 DUTY OF OWNER.
   The owner of any property within the city abutting on a public sidewalk
shall keep the sidewalk in proper repair and safe for pedestrians at all times.
(Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 INSPECTIONS.
   The city’s Street Commissioner or any other official designated by him or
her shall periodically inspect the public sidewalks within the city to
determine that they are kept in proper repair and safe for pedestrians. If he
or she finds that a sidewalk abutting on private property is unsafe and in need
of repairs, he or she shall cause a notice to be served on the record owner of
the property and the occupant either by registered or certified mail or by
personal service. The notice shall order the owner to have the sidewalk
repaired and made safe within 30 days and shall state that if the owner fails
to do so the Administrator or other official will do so on behalf of the city,
and the expense thereof, if not paid by the owner, made a special assessment
against the property concerned.
(Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 151.05 REPAIR BY CITY.
   If a sidewalk is not repaired within 30 days after service of the notice
required in §
151.01 of this chapter, the Street Commissioner or his or her designee shall
report the fact to the Council and the Council shall, by resolution, order
repair of the sidewalk. The Administrator shall keep a record of the total cost
of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of property and report the
information to the Council.
(Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 151.06 SUPERVISION OF REPAIRS.
   The Council shall require inspection and supervision of all work done
whether by order of the Council or pursuant to permits issued under §
151.01 of this chapter. All work not done according to permit specifications
shall be corrected or removed at the owner’s expense and all unsatisfactory
work shall be stopped by the inspector when discovered.
(Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 151.07 OWNER LIABILITY.
   The owner of property on which, or adjacent to which, a sidewalk has been
constructed or repaired by the city shall be personally liable for the cost of
the construction or repair. As soon as the service has been completed and the
cost determined, the Administrator shall prepare a bill and mail it to the
owner and, thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the
office of the Administrator.
(Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 151.08 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   On or before September 1 of each year, the Administrator shall list the
total unpaid charges against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable under this subchapter. The Council may then spread the charges
against the property benefitted as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101,
as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes, for
certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with current taxes.
(Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 151.09 SNOW, ICE, WEEDS, GRASS AND RUBBISH REMOVAL.
   (A)   All snow, ice, dirt, weeds, grass and rubbish remaining on a public
sidewalk more than 24 hours after its deposit thereon is a public nuisance. The
owner and the occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use
due diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall
allow snow, ice, dirt, weeds, grass or rubbish to remain on the sidewalk longer
than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.
   (B)   The Street Commissioner shall cause to be removed from all public
sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt, grass, weeds and rubbish beginning 24 hours
after the matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to
fall. The Administrator shall keep a record showing the cost of the removal
adjacent to each separate lot and parcel and shall report the information to
the Council.
   (C)   The owner of property adjacent to a sidewalk from which snow, ice,
dirt, grass, weeds or rubbish has been removed by the city shall be personally
liable for the cost of the removal. As soon as the removal has been completed
and the cost determined, the Administrator shall prepare a bill and mail it to
the owner and, thereupon, the amount due shall be immediately due and payable
at the office of the Administrator.
   (D)   On or before September 1 of each year, the Administrator shall list
the total unpaid charges against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable under this subchapter. The Council may then spread the charges
against the property benefitted as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101,
as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes, for
certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with current taxes.
   (E)   No person shall deposit or cause the deposit of any leaves, grass
clippings or weeds upon any sidewalk, public street or alley way.
(Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
151.01 through
151.09 of this chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine as set forth in §
10.98 of this code, plus the cost of prosecution in any case.
(Ord. 225, passed 10-1-1984; Ord. 238, passed 11-20-1989)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Intent and purpose
   
152.003   Rules of construction; definitions
   
152.004   Application of chapter
   
152.005   Environmental documents and concurrent permits
   
152.006   Use of pre-existing lots
   
152.007   Non-conforming structures and uses
   
152.008   Building standards
   
152.009   Enforcement
   
152.010   Separability
   
152.011   Supremacy
   
152.012   Effectuation
   
152.013   Amendment
   
152.014   Notices
   
152.015   Fee schedule
   
152.016   Opt out: M.S. § 462.3593
Zoning Districts and District Provisions
   
152.030   General
   
152.031   Open Space (OS) District
   
152.032   Parks and Recreational (P&R) District
   
152.033   Rural Residential (RR) District
   
152.034   Urban/Rural Transition Residential (TR) District
   
152.035   Urban Residential (UR) District
   
152.036   Highway Commercial (C) District
   
152.037   Downtown Mixed Use (DMU) District
   
152.038   Light Industrial/Commercial Transition (LI-CT) District
   
152.039   Industrial (I) District
   
152.040   Land use matrix
Overlay Districts
   
152.055   General
   
152.056   Floodplain Overlay District
   
152.057   Mississippi Headwaters Overlay (MH) District
   
152.058   Shoreland Overlay (SH) District
   
152.059   Airport Overlay (AP) District
Urban Residential Planned Unit Development (PUD)
   
152.070   Purpose and intent
   
152.071   General
   
152.072   Design criteria
   
152.073   Density calculations
   
152.074   PUD common facilities; operation and maintenance
   
152.075   Covenants, easements and restrictions
General Performance Standards
   
152.090   Water quality protection standards
   
152.091   Fences
   
152.092   Storage
   
152.093   Visual standards; screening
   
152.094   Sanitation standards
   
152.095   Animal husbandry
   
152.096   Parking and loading
   
152.097   Drainage
   
152.098   Grading
   
152.099   Yard regulations
   
152.100   Pools
   
152.101   Campgrounds and campsites
   
152.102   Manufactured and pre-built housing development
   
152.103   Home occupations
   
152.104   Salvage yards
   
152.105   Utility substation
   
152.106   Traffic visibility
Signs
   
152.120   Findings, purpose and intent
   
152.121   Rules and regulations
   
152.122   Specific regulations by zoning district
   
152.123   Required permits
   
152.124   Non-conforming signs
   
152.125   Substitutions
Telecommunications Towers
   
152.140   Purpose and intent
   
152.141   Permits required
   
152.142   Tower and antenna design requirements
   
152.143   Tower setbacks
   
152.144   Tower location
   
152.145   Co-location requirements
   
152.146   Antennas mounted on existing buildings or towers
   
152.147   Accessory utility buildings
   
152.148   Tower lighting
   
152.149   Abandoned or unused towers
   
152.150   Public safety telecommunications interference
   
152.151   Signs and advertising
   
152.152   Non-conforming towers
   
152.153   Screening and landscaping
   
152.154   Additional submittal requirements
   
152.155   Towers not requiring a permit
Adult Uses
   
152.170   Purpose and intent
   
152.171   Application
   
152.172   Location
   
152.173   Hours of operation
   
152.174   Exhibition of sexually-explicit films, videos or live entertainment
in viewing rooms
   
152.175   Escort agencies
   
152.176   Public nudity
   
152.177   Minors in adult-oriented businesses
   
152.178   Operation
   
152.179   Alcoholic beverages; consumption or sale
   
152.180   License requirements
   
152.181   Exemptions
Pawnshops
   
152.195   Purpose and intent
   
152.196   Exemptions
   
152.197   Location
   
152.198   License requirements
   
152.199   Records required
   
152.200   Daily reports to police
   
152.201   Receipt required
   
152.202   Redemption period
   
152.203   Holding period
   
152.204   Police order to hold property
   
152.205   Inspection of items
   
152.206   Label required
   
152.207   Prohibited acts
   
152.208   Business at only one place
Transition Subdivisions
   
152.220   General
   
152.221   Applicability
   
152.222   Future growth parcel
   
152.223   Lot dimension and size criteria
   
152.224   Subdivision design
   
152.225   Application process
Subdivision Standards
   
152.240   General
   
152.241   Sketch plan
   
152.242   Preliminary plat, preliminary condominium plat or minor subdivision
resulting in at least one parcel less than ten acres
   
152.243   Final plat or final condominium plat
   
152.244   Minimum design layout standards
   
152.245   Survey standards
   
152.246   Street improvement standards
   
152.247   Sanitary provisions standards
   
152.248   Water supply standards
   
152.249   Drainage and grading standards
   
152.250   Dedication to the public standards
   
152.251   Improvements
Administration
   
152.265   Zoning Administrator
   
152.266   Board of Adjustment
   
152.267   Planning Commission
   
152.268   Park Committee
   
152.269   City Council
   
152.270   Conditional use permits
   
152.271   Interim use permits
   
152.272   Variances
   
152.273   Building permits; zoning permits
   
152.274   Subdivision
   
152.275   Fees
   
152.276   Financial requirements
   
152.277   Required decision making time frames
   
152.278   Non-conformities
 
   
152.999   Penalty
   Appendix A: Zoning Map
   Appendix B: Affected sections of land; maps
Cross-reference:
   Health and Sanitation; Nuisances, see
Ch. 94
   Noise Control, see
Ch. 92
   Right-of-Way Management, see
Ch. 91
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be referred to and cited as the “Aitkin Land Use, Zoning
and Subdivision Ordinance”, except herein, where it shall be cited as the
“chapter”.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is established pursuant to the authority granted by state
statutes, in particular the Municipal Planning Act, M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.364,
as they may be amended from time to time; the Municipal Shoreland Act, M.S. Ch.
103F, as it may be amended from time to time; the Land Subdivision and
Condominiums Acts, M.S. Ch. 462, 505, 515, 515A and 515B, as they may be
amended from time to time; M.S. Ch. 115 and 116, as they may be amended from
time to time. This chapter hereby repeals Ord. 169, Zoning Ordinance, and Ord.
189, Subdivision, and all amendments and revisions thereto, for the city.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of:
      (1)   Protecting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare;
      (2)   Inaugurating and effectuating the goals of the Comprehensive Plan;
      (3)   Promoting order in development by dividing the area of the city
into zones and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction,
alteration and use of the structures and land;
      (4)   Conserving the natural and scenic beauty and attractiveness of the
city, for the health and welfare of the public;
      (5)   Providing for adequate light, air and access to property by
regulating the use of the land and buildings and the bulk of structures in
relation to surrounding properties;
      (6)   Providing for the administration of the provisions of the ordinance
and defining the authority and duties of the Administrator, Planning
Commission, Board of Adjustment and City Council under this chapter; and
      (7)   Providing standards and criteria for shorelands to preserve and
enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural
environment values of shorelands and provide for the wise use of water and
related land resources for the city.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.003 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules. The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
      (1)   The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
      (2)   The masculine gender includes the feminine gender and the neuter
gender.
      (3)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      (4)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the
future includes the present.
      (5)   The word “may” is permissive. The word “shall” is mandatory.
Mandatory compliance with the chapter shall allow for variances thereto.
      (6)   All horizontal and vertical measured distances shall be expressed
to the nearest tenth of a foot and its metric equivalent, unless specifically
stated otherwise.
      (7)   The words “lot,” “plot,” “piece” and “parcel” of land are
interchangeable.
      (8)   The words “used for,” shall include the phrases “arranged for,”
“designed for,” “intended for,” “improved for,” “maintained for,” and “occupied
for.”
      (9)   Words defined below are typed in bold italics throughout the
document to remind the reader that a definition may apply. This formatting
technique is used solely for convenience of reference.
   (B)   Definitions. 
      (1)   The following words shall be defined as follows for the purpose of
this chapter.
         ABANDONED BUILDING. A building as defined hereinafter on public or
private property, which no longer serves a practical use and, due to its
location or structural condition, is considered a safety hazard in the opinion
of the Zoning Administrator.
         ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle as defined in M.S. §
168B.011, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time, that:
            1.   Has remained on public property in an inoperable condition for
more than 48 hours;
            2.   Has remained on private property for more than 48 hours
without the permission of the owner; or
            3.   Has remained on private property for more than thirty days and
is inoperable or is unlicensed unless kept in a garage or other storage
structure.
         ABUTTING. Making direct contact with or immediately bordering.
         ACCESSORY BUILDING or STRUCTURE. A building or other structure that is
supportive, secondary and subordinate in use and/or size to the principal
structure on the same parcel or lot which, because of the nature of its use,
can reasonably be located at or greater than minimum structure setbacks.
Includes all structures not considered the principal structure including, but
not limited to, TV tower antennas, dish antennas, outdoor swimming pools,
outdoor hot-tubs, detached garages, sheds, guest quarters, and boathouses.
         ACCESSORY USE. A use naturally and normally incident and subordinate
to the main use of the premises.
         ADDITION. A physical enlargement of an existing structure.
         ADJACENT. In close proximity to or neighboring, not necessarily
abutting.
         ADULT BOOK and/or MEDIA STORE. An establishment which has a
substantial portion (25% of utilized floor area) of its stock in trade or stock
on display books, magazines, films, videotapes, or other media which are
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
         ADULT CABARET. An establishment which provides dancing or other live
entertainment, and if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on the performance, depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
         ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. Any business which offers its patrons services,
entertainment, or the sale of merchandise characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Specifically included in the
term, but without limitation, are adult book and media stores, adult cabarets,
adult hotels or motels, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult modeling
studios, adult motion picture arcades, adult motion picture theaters, adult
novelty businesses, and other adult establishments.
         ADULT HOTEL or MOTEL. A hotel or motel wherein material is presented
which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
         ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.
            1.   A theater in an enclosed building, with a capacity for less
than 50 persons used for presenting motion pictures, including but not limited
to film and videotape, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
            2.   Any business which presents motion pictures, including films
and videotapes, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for viewing on the
premises, including but not limited to private booths, viewing by means of coin
operated or other mechanical devices, and the viewing of excerpt of motion
pictures offered for sale or rent.
         ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place wherein coin or token operated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still
or motor picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
         ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A theater in an enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting live
entertainment or motion pictures, including but not limited to film and
videotapes, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
         ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business which sells, offers to sell, or
displays devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed
for sexual stimulation.
         ADULT USE. Any of the adult activities and businesses described above
constitute “adult oriented businesses” which are subject to the regulation of
this chapter.
         AGENT.  Any person acting on behalf of a landowner in dealing with
activities under the jurisdiction of the chapter, including but not limited to
realtors, contractors or attorneys.
         AGRICULTURAL BUILDING or STRUCTURE. Any building or structure,
existing or erected, which is used principally for agricultural purposes.
         AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of land for agricultural purposes including
farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses
used for packing, treating or storing the product, provided, however, that the
operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal
agricultural activities.
         AIRPORT. Any premises used or intended for use for the landing and
taking off of aircraft including any structures used or intended for use for
aircraft services.
         ALTERATION. A change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in
the existing facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or
by increasing in height, or by moving from one location to another, of a
building or a structure.
         ANIMAL BOARDING FACILITY. An establishment that houses animals, other
than those belonging to the occupant, overnight or over an extended period of
time.
         ANIMAL GROOMING ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment principally engaged in
grooming animals in which overnight boarding is prohibited.
         ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. The care or breeding of domestic or farm animals
such as cattle, hogs, horses, poultry, sheep, goats, llamas, emus, dogs (more
than two) or cats (more than three) for the occupants of a property.
         ANIMAL UNIT. A unit of measure based on the approximate production of
wastes from 1,000 pounds of live weight of poultry or animals.
Animal Units
Animal Units
1 slaughter weight steer or heifer 1
1 mature dairy cow or horse        1.4
1 swine over 55 pounds             0.4
1 sheep                            0.1
1 goose                            0.1
1 duck                             0.05
1 turkey                           0.18
1 chicken                          0.1
 
         ANIMALS, DOMESTIC.  Common household pets, such as dogs, cats, pet
fish and caged reptiles kept for amusement, companionship, decoration or
interest.
         ANIMALS, FARM. Cattle, emus, fish, fowl, goats, llamas, swine, sheep,
horses, and other animals raised for the purposes of food consumption, for
conducting agricultural use or for the purposes of animal husbandry.
         ANIMALS, SPECIALTY. Goats, sheep and pigs kept as a household pet not
exceeding two per household and appropriate for urbanized land areas by not
creating any nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood in regards to safety,
noise, smell, disease, inappropriate size or other visual nuisance as
determined by a reasonable person. Residences must be free of excreta, and any
enclosure shall be kept clean and dry at all times and supplied with fresh, dry
hay or straw. Animals shall be controlled by a leash, harness or tether
whenever outside of a structure or fenced area.
         ANIMALS, WILD or EXOTIC. Animals, such as wolves, tigers, lions and
snakes, that are not normally a domestic animal or farm animal and would
ordinarily be confined in a zoo or found in the wild.
         ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
radiating electromagnetic waves including but not limited to directional
antennas such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and omni-
directional antennas such as whip antennas. Dishes under 36 inches are excluded
from the definition of antenna.
         APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms that is designed for, intended
for, or occupied as a residence by a family or individual, and is equipped with
sanitary facilities.
         APPEAL. An application for the review of an order, requirement,
decision, determination or interpretation of this chapter made by an
administrative officer in the application and/or enforcement of this chapter.
         AQUIFER. A geological unit in which porous and permeable conditions
exist and thus are capable of yielding usable amounts of water.
         ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION. A non-functional or ornamental feature on a
building or other structure that does not extend to, or from, the ground.
         ARTIST'S STUDIO. A fine arts workshop of a painter, sculptor, potter,
weaver, carver, jeweler, photographer or other similar art that requires
artistic skill, where the public is received or where the artist is engaging in
retail sales. Not generally utilitarian, related to personal hygiene or
adornment.
         ATTACHED. Two buildings or structures that combine to form one
building or structure through the use of at least one common wall, not
including a breezeway.
         ATTORNEY. The attorney duly appointed by the Council to represent the
city.
         AUTO REPAIR FACILITY. A commercial facility with the primary use being
automobile repair offering services including but not limited to oil changes,
vehicle alignment, tire rotation, brake services, engine repair, and automobile
painting.
         AUTO SALVAGE YARD. A lot or yard where four or more motor vehicles are
stored while parts are removed, where crushing occurs or where storage pending
crushing may occur.
         AUTO TRIP. Transport in a vehicle that includes both an arrival and a
departure from a location.
         AWNING. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass
and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment,
and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure primarily over a window,
walk, or the like. Any part of an awning which also projects over a door shall
be counted as an awning.
         BALCONY. Same as a deck.
         BANNER. A temporary sign constructed out of paper, plastic, cloth,
cardboard or some other non-permanent material and affixed to poles or the side
of a building in a manner than can be easily moved, modified or rearranged.
         BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the “regional flood.” The term
“base flood elevation” is used in the flood insurance survey.
         BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of the excavation below ground level.
         BATHROOM. A room containing a toilet with a shower or a bathtub or a
sink.
         BED AND BREAKFAST DWELLING. A dwelling, single family, licensed
through the Aitkin County Public Health Services, where, for compensation,
meals and lodging are provided for three or more unrelated persons, but not
exceeding eight persons. The owner of the parcel must live on the premises.
         BEDROOM. A portion of a dwelling unit intended to be used for sleeping
purposes, which may contain closets and may have access to a bathroom.
         BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS. A practice or combination of
practices for preventing or reducing diffuse or non-point source pollution to a
level compatible with water quality goals. BMPs are dependent on the best
available technology or information for resource management.
         BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction conducted by a
pawnbroker is a billable transaction except renewal, redemptions, or extensions
or existing pawns on items previously reported and continuously in the
licensee's possession, voided transactions, and confiscations.
         BILLBOARDS. A commercial sign which directs attention to a business,
activity, service, entertainment or a product not exclusively related to the
premises or property where such sign is located.
         BLOCK. An area of land bounded by streets, exterior boundary lines
and/or bodies of water.
         BLOCK, COMMON. A molded concrete polyhedron which is uniformly eight
inches in height, eight inches in depth and 16 inches in width, which is
commonly referenced as a block within the United States. All mortar applied
between blocks is included within the measurements of a common block for the
purposes of this chapter.
         BLUFF.
            1.   A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment
having all of the following characteristics:
               a.   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
               b.   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high
water mark of the water body;
               c.   The grade of the slope from the toe of bluff to a point 25
feet above the ordinary high water mark averages 30% or greater; and
               d.   The slope must drain towards the water body.
            2.   An area with an average slope of less than 18% over a distance
for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1077.jpg]
 
         BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and the land located within 30 feet inland
from the top of the bluff.
         BOARDING HOUSE. Same as bed and breakfast dwelling.
         BOAT ACCESS. A ramp, road or other conveyance which allows the
launching and removal of a boat with a vehicle and trailer.
         BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board, appointed by the City Council, to hear
appeals from actions of the Zoning Administrator, and variance requests.
         BOAT STORAGE STRUCTURE. A structure used for the storage of boats.
         BREW ON PREMISES STORE. The owner of a brew on premises store shall
not be considered a brewer, manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer of
intoxicating liquor if the owner complies with 27 C.F.R. part 25, subpart L, §§
25.205 and 25.206. A BREW ON PREMISES STORE is a facility that provides the
ingredients and equipment for a customer to use to brew malt liquor at the
store. Alcoholic beverages may not be sold or otherwise provided to customers
of a brew on premises store, unless the owner of the brew on premises store
holds the appropriate liquor license. Customers using the brew on premises
store must be of the minimum age required to purchase intoxicating liquor. Malt
liquor brewed by a customer in the store must not be sold and must be used by
the customer solely for personal or family use. (M.S. § 340A.33)
         BREW PUB.  A small distributor brewer, authorized to complete on-sale
or off-sale transactions of intoxicating liquors provided sales do not exceed
3,500 barrels produced by the brewer per year and no more than 500 barrels off-
sale are provided in one year. (M.S. § 340A.24)
         BREWERY, LARGE DISTRIBUTOR. A facility producing more than 20,000
barrels of malt liquor annually that may not offer distribution of growlers or
on-site sales.
         BREWER, SMALL DISTRIBUTOR. A brewer licensed under M.S. § 340A.301,
subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time, issued by a municipality for
off-sale of malt liquor at its licensed premises that has been produced and
packaged by the brewer. A brewer may only have one license under this
subdivision. The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed 500
barrels annually. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours
for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the jurisdiction in which the brewer
is located, and the malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises
before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores, except
that malt liquor in growlers only may be sold at off-sale on Sundays. Sunday
sales must be approved by the licensing jurisdiction and hours may be
established by those jurisdictions. Packaging of malt liquor for off-sale under
this subdivision must comply with M.S. § 340A.285, as it may be amended from
time to time.
         BUFFER. A vegetative feature as defined by M.S. § 103F.48.
         BUFFER STRIP. Land area used to visibly separate one use from another
or to shield or block structures, noise, lights, or other nuisances.
          BUILDABLE AREA. Any site, lot, parcel or any portion thereof that
does not contain designated flood plain, wetlands or areas in excess of 25%
slope.
         BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for storage, shelter or
occupancy.
         BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance between the highest adjoining
ground level at the building or ten feet above the lowest ground level,
whichever is lower, and the highest point of a flat roof or average height
between the eaves and the highest ridge of gable, hip or gambrel roofs or ten
feet below the peak, whichever is greater.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1079.jpg]
 
         BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high
water mark at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
         BUILDING PERMIT. A permit authorizing an Applicant under this chapter
to undertake construction or other development activity.
         CABIN. See DWELLING UNIT.
         CAMPGROUND. Any area, whether publicly or privately owned, consisting
of designated campsites with appropriate facilities and management services
designed for temporary occupation by tents or recreational vehicles.
         CAMPING. Habitation of a temporary structure.
         CAMPSITE. A parcel within a resort or campground designated for the
occupancy of one family on a periodic basis in a tent or recreational vehicle.
         CANOPY. A roof like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass on
a support, which provides shelter over a doorway.
         CARPORT. A shelter having one or more open sides primarily intended
for storing or providing shelter for one or more automobiles, recreational
vehicles, boats and similar vehicles. A CARPORT is an accessory structure for
the purposes of this chapter.
         CEMETERY, UNPLATTED. Any human remains or burials found outside of
platted, recorded or identified cemeteries pursuant to M.S. § 307.08, as it may
be amended from time to time.
         CHAIRMAN. The individual elected by the Planning Commission to chair
their meetings. A vice-chair may also be elected and would serve as chairman
when the elected chairman was absent.
         CHILD CARE, CENTER. A facility that is maintained, for the whole or
part of the day, for the care of five or more children who are 18 years of age
or younger and who are not related to the owner, operator or manager thereof,
whether such facility is operated with or without compensation for such care
and with or without stated educational purposes. The term shall not include any
facility licensed as a foster care home or any facility defined as a childcare,
family home.
         CHILD CARE, FAMILY HOME. A primary residence where, for the whole or
part of the day, an owner of the residence, licensed as a child care provider,
cares for 12 or fewer children who are 18 years of age or younger and who are
not related to the owner, whether such facility is operated with or without
compensation for such care.
         CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses,
where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building,
together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by
a religious body organized to sustain public worship and related community
activities.
         CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The appointed person responsible for
administration of the city affairs.
         CITY COUNCIL. The duly elected governing body of the city.
         CITY SEWER or WATER SYSTEM. A system of municipally maintained
utilities, approved by the State, and serving more than one building or
property.
         CLEAN FILL. Uncontaminated soil, sand, gravel, rock, or concrete.
CLEAN FILL does not consist of metal, drywall, asphalt, or any substance
containing petroleum, heavy metals, chemicals, or any substance with potential
to be soluble in water, migrate in water, and contaminate water.
         CLEAR CUTTING. See VEGETATION REMOVAL, CLEAR CUTTING.
         COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Speech advertising a business, profession,
commodity, service or entertainment.
         COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land or buildings for the sale,
lease, rental, trade of products, goods or services.
         COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. All commercial
wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal
communications services, specialized mobilized radio, enhanced specialized
mobilized radio, paging and similar services that are marketed to the general
public.
         COMMISSIONER. The commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources
(Shoreland) or Department of Transportation (Airport).
         COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY (CIC). The contiguous or noncontiguous real
estate within Minnesota that is subject to an instrument which obligates
persons owning a separately described parcel of real estate, or occupying a
part of the real estate pursuant to a proprietary lease, by reason of their
ownership or occupancy, to pay for (i) real estate taxes levied against; (ii)
insurance premiums payable with respect to; (iii) maintenance of; or (iv)
construction, maintenance, repair, or replacement of improvements located on
one or more parcels or parts of the real estate other than the parcel or part
that the person owns or occupies. Real estate subject to a master association,
regardless of when the master association was formed, shall not collectively
constitute a separate Common Interest Community unless so stated in the master
declaration recorded against the real estate, pursuant to M.S. § 515B.2-121,
subd. (f)(1). (Minnesota Common Interest Ownership Act, M.S. 515B.1-100 et
seq.).
         COMMUNITY PARK. A park designed to provide recreational opportunities
to serve the entire community.
         COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Also referred to as community plan. A compilation
of policy statements, goals, standards and maps for guiding the physical,
social and economic development, both private and public, of the city and its
environs and may include, but is not limited to, the following items:
statements of policies, goals, standards, a land use plan, a community
facilities plan, a transportation plan and recommendations for plan execution.
         CONDITIONAL USE. A land use or development as defined by this chapter
that would not be appropriate without restriction, but may specifically be
allowed with restrictions of conditions as determined by the Planning
Commission and the Council upon a finding that:
            1.   The use or development is an appropriate conditional land use
in the land use zone;
            2.   The use or development, with conditions, conforms to the
comprehensive land use plan;
            3.   The use, with conditions, is compatible with the existing
neighborhood; and
            4.   The use, with conditions, would not be injurious to the public
health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance or
prosperity of the city.
         CONDOMINIUM. A form of individual ownership with a multi-family
building or development with joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs.
In a condominium, each apartment or townhouse is owned outright by its
occupant, and each occupant owns a share of the land and other common property
of the building.
         CONSERVATION PARCEL. A parcel of land set aside from development in a
rural conservation subdivision.
         CONTIGUOUS. The sharing of a common border at more than a single
point. Lots, parcels or boundaries may be considered contiguous where separated
by rights-of-way, rivers or streams.
         CONTROLLED ACCESS LOT. Any lot which is designated for the exclusive
use by non-riparian landowners within a subdivision as a means to gain access
to a lake, river or stream.
         COUNCIL. The City Council, as established by state law.
         CRAWL SPACE. The space below the first story of a structure not more
than four feet high and not intended for human habitation.
         CRITICAL FACILITIES. Facilities necessary to a community's public
health and safety, those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-
reactive materials, and those that house occupants that may be insufficiently
mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of critical facilities include
hospitals, correctional facilities, schools, daycare facilities, nursing homes,
fire and police stations, wastewater treatment facilities, public electric
utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities, and waste handling and
storage facilities.
         CUL-DE-SAC. A short local street terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
         DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached
railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related
to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than three feet
above ground.
         DENSITY. The number of dwelling units residing upon, or to be
developed upon, an acre of land.
         DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.
         DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The width of a tree or shrub as
measured at four and a half feet above the ground surface.
         DISTILLERY, COCKTAIL ROOM. A property authorized to produce distilled
spirits and offer on-site/on-sale consumption on or adjacent to the distillery
location not to exceed 15 milliliters per variety per person and no more than
45 milliliters in total spirits per person per day. (M.S. § 340A.22, subd. 2)
         DISTILLERY, OFF SALE. A distillery may be licensed to sell one off-
sale 375 milliliter bottle per customer per day of a distilled spirits product
manufactured on-site. (M.S. § 340A.22, subd. 4)
         DOCK. A platform extending water ward from the shoreline intended for
ingress and egress for moored watercraft or to provide access to water for
swimming, fishing or other water orientated activities.
         DORMITORY. A building, or portion thereof, providing group sleeping
accommodations in one room, with shared bath and toilet facilities.
         DUPLEX, TRIPLEX or QUAD. A structure on a single lot having two, three
or four dwelling units respectively being attached by common walls, and each
being equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living and sanitation
facilities.
          DWELLING, GUEST QUARTERS. A structure, not for sale or lease, used as
a dwelling unit that may contain sleeping spaces and kitchen and bathroom
facilities in addition to those provided in the primary dwelling on the lot.
Any accessory structure with kitchen or bathroom facilities shall be considered
a dwelling, guest quarters.
         DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. Two or more dwelling units attached together
by any point including duplexes, triplexes, townhouses and multi-level units
regardless of type of ownership.
         DWELLING, MULTI-LEVEL. A type of multi-family housing consisting of
dwelling units stacked one above the other, creating a party floor or floors
between units.
         DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling unit totally separated from any
other dwelling unit.
         DWELLING SITE. A designated location for residential use by one or
more persons using temporary or movable shelter including camping and
recreational vehicle sites.
         DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A type of multi-family housing consisting of
dwelling units attached by common party walls. Ownership may be defined by plat
or condominium plan.
         DWELLING UNIT. A structure or portion of a structure or other shelter
designed as a short or long term living quarters for one or more persons
including rental or time share accommodations such as a motel, hotel, resort
rooms and resort cabins.
         DWELLING WIDTH. The smallest horizontal dimension of the major portion
of a dwelling.
         EARTH TONE. A shade of color that, when viewed from a distance, blends
with the colors of the surrounding landscape.
         EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land
for the purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities, including, but not
limited to, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines,
storm sewer or storm drainage ways, and gas lines. An easement may also be
granted for such uses as recreational trails, vehicular access, natural
resource protection or management, limiting development, and similar uses.
         ENGINEER. The Engineer duly appointed by the Council to perform
technical services for the city.
         EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
         ERECT. Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling,
placing, affixing, attaching, creating, painting, drawing or any other way of
bringing into being or establishing.
         ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Means the provision of services to individual
parcels by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, or
underground or overhead gas, electrical, communication, steam or water
transmissions or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, towers, and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith (but not including buildings or transmission services)
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public
utilities or entities for the public health, safety, or general welfare. This
does not include wireless communication.
         EXTERIOR STORAGE. Storage of goods, materials, equipment, manufactured
products outside a fully enclosed building. Exterior storage includes open
storage and outside storage.
         EXTRACTIVE USE.  The use of land for removal of sand, gravel, rock,
industrial minerals, soil, other non-metallic minerals or peat not regulated
under M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as it may be amended from time to time.
         FAMILY. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, adoption, or a relationship legally recognized in Minnesota, or not
more than five unrelated persons maintaining a common household.
         FARM FENCE. A fence as defined by M.S. § 344.02, subd. 1(a) through 1
(d), as it may be amended from time to time. An open type fence of posts and
wire is not considered to be a structure under this chapter. Fences that have
the potential to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid
walls, are regulated as structures under this chapter.
         FEE SCHEDULE. The official schedule of land use related fees and
penalties adopted by the City Council.
         FEEDLOT. A lot or building or combination of lots and buildings
intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising, or holding of animals and
specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or
where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be
maintained within the enclosure. Open lots used for the feeding and rearing of
poultry (poultry ranges) shall be considered to be animal feedlots. Pastures
shall not be considered animal feedlots.
         FENCE. A constructed barrier, including berms, intended to prevent
escape or intrusion, or to mark a boundary, to shield or screen view, or to
perform any similar function.
         FILLING. The act of depositing any fill material.
         FILTER STRIP. The use of land topography and native vegetation to
provide runoff, erosion, and sedimentation control.
         FINAL CONDOMINIUM PLAT. A drawing prepared by a registered architect,
licensed engineer or licensed surveyor depicting the condominium subdivision of
real estate and related information conforming to the requirements of M.S. §
515A.2-110, as it may be amended from time to time.
          FINAL FLOOR PLAN. A drawing prepared by a Registered Architect,
Licensed Engineer, or Licensed Surveyor depicting the condominium subdivision
of real estate and related information conforming to the requirements of M.S. §
515A.2-110, as it may be amended from time to time.
         FINAL PLAT. A drawing, in final form, showing a proposed subdivision
containing all information and detail required by state statutes and by the
subdivision ordinance to be presented to the Planning Commission and the City
Council for approval, and which, if approved, may be duly filed with the Aitkin
County Recorder.
         FISH HOUSE. A structure placed on a lake during the winter for use in
fishing. A structure will only be considered a fish house if it is 160 square
feet or less, is moveable and has a current license.
         FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the
stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.
         FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
         FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.
FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the flood
insurance study for the city
         FLOOD PLAIN. The areas adjoining a water course, intermittent or
permanently flowing, which have been or will be covered by the runoff waters of
a storm with a 1% chance of occurrence any year (100-year storm).
         FLOOD PROOF, FLOOD PROOFED, FLOOD PROOFING. A combination of
structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures
subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood
damages.
         FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source. (See FLOOD).
         FLOOD, REGIONAL. A flood which can be expected to occur on an average
frequency of once in a 100-year interval or a flood having a one percent chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The term REGIONAL FLOOD shall
be synonymous with the term base flood as defined used within the flood
insurance study for the city.
         FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a water
course and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably
required to carry and store the regional flood discharge (100-year chance of
occurrence.)
         FOOTPRINT. The horizontal extent to which a structure covers the
ground plane as represented in a plan view including cantilevered building
elements but excluding eaves and similar architectural projections of the roof
plane.
         FOREST LAND CONVERSION. The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare
for a new land use other than the re-establishment of a subsequent forest land.
         FORESTRY. The management of land for forest, woodland, or plantation
uses for one or more of the following purposes:
            1.   To establish and maintain timber resources;
            2.   To harvest timber, including the selling of firewood;
            3.   To establish and maintain healthy and well-balanced forest;
            4.   To establish and maintain wildlife diversity and habitat for
game and non-game species;
            5.   To provide outdoor recreation activities; and
            6.   To protect soil and water resources.
         FRONTAGE. The uninterrupted front boundary line of a lot, or the
length of such line, that abuts on a street or protected water.
         GARAGE, ATTACHED. A part of the principal structure designed for the
storage of motor vehicles.
         GARAGE, DETACHED. An accessory structure not attached to the principal
structure on the property designed and used for storage.
         GRADING. The movement of dirt, by mechanical means, so as to alter the
existing topography of a property.
         GREEN SPACE. Privately owned property permanently dedicated by
covenant or deed restriction to vegetate ground coverage with allowance for use
as recreational facilities, tree coverage, water course, sewage disposal or
similar uses. Public property permanently dedicated to park, vegetative buffer,
tree coverage or water courses.
         GROUP CARE FACILITIES. A facility which provides residential services
for individuals that may require assistance due to age, disability, medical or
mental health conditions, substance use recovery, or other special needs. This
includes, but is not limited to, group homes for persons with physical or
developmental disabilities, substance use recovery residences, foster care
homes, maternity shelters, and transitional housing such as halfway houses.
         GROWLER. Sixty-four-ounce or 750-milliliter containers provided for
off-sale distribution at a taproom. (M.S. § 340A.285)
         HAZARDOUS MATERIAL or SUBSTANCE.
            1.   Any material solid, semi-solid, liquid, gaseous which, because
of its quantity, concentration, or chemical, physical or infectious
characteristic may:
               a.    Cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or
illness;
                b.   Pose a hazard to human health of the environment when
improperly treated, stored, used, or managed.
            2.   Categories include explosive, flammable, or combustible
liquids or infectious solids, or compressed radioactive gas, or oxidizers, or
poison or toxic liquids or solids, irritants, corrosives, or any other item as
defined in 49 C.F.R. Ch. 1, Part 172.
         HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any refuse, sludge, or other waste material or
combination of refuse, sludge, or other waste material in solid, semi-solid,
liquid, or contained gaseous form which, because of its quantity,
concentration, or chemical, physical, or infectious characteristics may:
            1.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
            2.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
Categories of hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, explosives,
flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants, and corrosives. Hazardous waste does
not include source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
         HEADWATERS LAKES. These are the nine lakes within the Mississippi
Headwaters Corridor: Carr, Cass, Irving, Bemidji, Stump (impoundment),
Winnibigoshish, Little Winnibigoshish, Wolf, and Andrusia.
         HOME OCCUPATION. A use of commercial nature conducted by an occupant
entirely within the dwelling or accessory buildings which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes
and does not change the residential character thereof.
         HOME OCCUPATION, TYPE I. A home occupation, the commercial nature of
which involves providing a service to a limited number of people who are
predominantly acquaintances. Generates less than ten auto trips per week. No
employees beyond owner. No signage or other advertising done either on or off-
premise. Would include businesses that are similar in nature to tutoring or
music lessons performed on an individual basis.
         HOME OCCUPATION, TYPE II. A home occupation, the commercial nature of
which involves providing a service to people or organizations that do not
receive the service at the property from which is it being provided. Generates
less than 25 auto trips per week, including deliveries and employees. No more
than two employees, in addition to the owner, working on site. No signage done
either on or off-premise. Would include businesses that are similar in nature
to telephone sales, consulting, or web design.
         HOME OCCUPATION, TYPE III. A home occupation, the commercial nature of
which involves providing a service or product to people or organizations within
the home. Generates less than sixty auto trips per week, including deliveries.
No more than two employees, in addition to the owner working on site. May
include on-premise signage. May include retail sales of items manufactured on-
premise. Would include businesses that are similar in nature to chiropractic
service, artist studio or craft shop.
          HOME OCCUPATION, TYPE IV. A home occupation, the commercial nature of
which involves providing a service or product to people or organizations off
site. Generates less than 60 auto trips per week, including deliveries. All
employees do the majority of their work off-premise. May include on-premise
storage or warehousing of work related materials. Would include businesses that
are similar in nature to lawn care services and off-premise sandblasting
services.
         HOTEL. A building containing three or more individual rooms, without
kitchens, used for overnight lodging by the general public on a short-term
basis for a fee, with or without meals, and which has common reservation and
cleaning services, combined utilities, and on-premise management and reception
services.
         HOUSE OF WORSHIP. Same as church.
         IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A constructed hard surface that prevents or
retards entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in
greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development,
including rooftops; decks; sidewalks; patios; swimming pools; parking lots;
concrete, asphalt, or gravel driveways; and other similar surfaces.
         INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A sewage treatment system, or part
thereof, serving a dwelling, or the establishment, or group thereof, and using
sewage tanks or advanced treatment followed by soil treatment and disposal.
Individual sewage treatment system includes holding tanks and privies.
         INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage or transfer of goods, products, commodities
or other wholesale items.
         INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees or shrubs
in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.
         INTERIM USE. A temporary use of property until a particular date,
until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no
longer permit it.
         ISTS. Individual sewage treatment system.
         JUNK YARD. An area where used waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleared, parked, disassembled or
handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags,
rubber products, bottles, and used building materials. Storage of materials in
conjunction with the construction of a manufacturing process shall not be
included. Three or more automobiles without current licenses constitute a junk
yard. Such use shall not include putrid wastes such as garbage.
         LANDFILL. A method of solid waste disposal in which refuse is buried
between layers of dirt.
         LANDSCAPING. Plantings such as trees, grass, shrubs, and decorative
timbers, arbors, rocks and water displays.
         LICENSED ENGINEER. A person licensed as a professional engineer by the
State of Minnesota.
         LICENSED SURVEYOR. A person licensed as a professional land surveyor
by the State of Minnesota.
         LIGHT POLLUTION. The upward and outward distribution of light either
directly from fixtures or from reflection off of the ground of other surfaces.
         LITTER. Waste materials including but not limited to, cans, bottles,
plastic and paper wrappings or containers.
         LIVESTOCK. Farm animals, such as cattle, sheep, swine, horses, mules,
goats, llamas or camels raised for home use or for profit, especially on a
farm.
         LOT. A parcel, piece or portion of land described by metes and bounds,
registered land survey, auditor's plat, or subdivision plat and separated from
other parcels or portions of land by said description for purposes of sale,
lease, mortgage, building or separation.
         LOT AREA. The horizontal area of a lot bounded by the lot lines and
above the ordinary high water mark if bounded by water.
         LOT CONSOLIDATION. The removal of lot lines between two or more
properties with one or more common lot lines and not separated by a right-of-
way, street or ally that results in one parcel.
         LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or
more intersecting streets or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of
one street with the internal angle less than 135 degrees.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1081.jpg]
 
         LOT, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts on a public right-of-
way, or if a corner lot, the shortest of the two boundaries.
         LOT LINE. The property lines bounding a lot except that where the
description extends into a public right-of-way, the right-of-way line shall be
considered the lot line.
         LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT. A legal transfer of ownership and minor
relocation of property boundaries between adjacent properties with one or more
common lot lines that do not create additional lots or an increase in a non-
conforming use or create an unbuildable lot on either parcel.
         LOT, PRE-EXISTING. A lot which is one unit of a subdivision plat
heretofore duly approved and filed or one unit of an auditor's subdivision, or
registered land survey, or a lot created by metes and bounds that has been
recorded in the office of the Aitkin County Recorder prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
         LOT TIER DEPTH. The lot depth of a normal lot conforming to the
shoreland requirements.
 
All rivers 300 feet
 
         LOT TIERS. Successive strips of land parallel with the ordinary high
water mark, each one tier depth wide, and extending across the parcel.
         LOT WIDTH. The minimum distance between:
            1.   Side lot lines measured at the midpoint of the building line;
and
            2.   Side lot lines at the ordinary high-water level, if
applicable.
         LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building's lowest floor.
         MAINTENANCE. The normal upkeep of a structure including the
replacement of windows, siding, roofs, nonbearing walls or interior remodeling
that does not expand the footprint of the existing structure, add volume to the
usable living space or intensify a non-conforming use.
         MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body
feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 640 or more square feet,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure
which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements
and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification
required by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) and complies with the standards established under this chapter; and
except that such term shall not include any self-propelled recreational
vehicle.
         MARINA. A dock or set of docks on a single parcel that contains more
than three slips or more slips than first tier dwelling units, whichever is
greater.
         MARQUEE. Any permanent roof like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
         MATERIAL ADVERSE EFFECT. The real or potential, acute or chronic
negative impact of a use which, in the opinion of the city, may result in a
negative effect on the environment. The Applicant may be required to
demonstrate the nature and extent of an adverse effect.
         MATURE TREE. A living tree greater than four inches in diameter.
         MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY. A building or structure and
the associated premises used to grow the marijuana plant or incorporate into
consumable/edible goods or similar products by means of cooking, blending, or
incorporation; a facility may include accessory storage and processing of
medical marijuana grown on premises.
         MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A distribution center guided by M.S. Ch.
152, as it may be amended from time to time, that sells, distributes,
transmits, gives, dispenses, or otherwise provides medical marijuana to
qualifying patients.
         METES AND BOUNDS. A method of property description utilizing
directions and distances commencing from and terminating at an identifiable
point.
         MICRODISTILLERY. A distillery operated within the state producing
premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons
in a calendar year as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 17A, as may be amended.
         MINOR LOT SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of land into not more than three
lots in one year that do not require any new street, require any public
improvements and result in a buildable lot area for each of the subsequent
parcels.
         MISSISSIPPI HEADWATERS BOARD (MHB). The Board composed of one county
commissioner from Clearwater, Hubbard, Beltrami, Cass, Itasca, Aitkin, Crow
Wing, and Morrison Counties, formed as a joint powers board pursuant to M.S. §§
471.59 and 103F.367, subd. 1, as they may be amended from time to time.
         MISSISSIPPI HEADWATERS COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (PLAN). The comprehensive
land use plan adopted pursuant to M.S. § 103F.369, as may be amended from time
to time.
         MISSISSIPPI HEADWATERS CORRIDOR (CORRIDOR). The lands and waters
contained within the Mississippi River and Headwaters Lakes Zoning Districts
and identified in the Mississippi Headwaters Board Comprehensive Plan maps. The
Mississippi Headwaters Corridor is generally 500 feet (Scenic River) or 1,000
feet (Wild River and Headwaters Lakes) on either side of the Mississippi River,
as measured from the ordinary high water mark.
         MISSISSIPPI RIVER RESOURCES INVENTORY. The list of recreational sites,
endangered species, and important archaeological sites in the Mississippi
Headwaters Corridor and made available at the Mississippi Headwaters Board.
         MODULAR HOME. A non-mobile housing unit that is basically fabricated
at a central factory, or other site which is not the property where final
construction or installations are made, and transported to a building site
where final installations are made, permanently affixing the module to the
site. A modular home does not have a permanent chassis affixed to it and is
constructed in such a way as to conform to the building code adopted by the
city and is not subject to registration as a manufactured home by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
         MOTEL. A building containing guest rooms or units, each of which has a
separate entrance directly from the outside of the building, or corridor, with
parking space reserved for each unit, and which is designed, used or intended
to be used primarily for the accommodation of transient guests.
         NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY. All land surface areas which, by nature of their
contour or configuration, collect, store and channel surface or runoff water.
         NEIGHBORHOOD. The area adjacent to or surrounding existing or proposed
development characterized by common use or uses, density, style and age of
structures and environmental characteristics.
         NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Dissemination of messages not classified as
Commercial speech which include, but are not limited to messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational
topics.
         NON-CONFORMING. The building, structure or land lawfully existing
prior to and not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
         NUISANCE. By authority and direction of M.S. § 412.221, subd. 23 and
24, as it may be amended from time to time; and defined by §§
94.01 to 94.07, as amended, revised or renumbered, NUISANCE is anything that
interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers personal health or
public safety, or is offensive to the senses such as excessive smoke, odor,
noise, heat, vibration, glare, traffic generation, visual impact and other
similar interferences or offenses.
         NURSERY. A retail business growing and selling trees, flowering or
decorative plants and shrubs.
         NURSING HOME. Any institution or facility required to be licensed as
such under M.S. §§ 144.50 to 144.56, as they may be amended from time to time,
by the State Board of Health.
         OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which
may impede, retard, or change direction of the flow of water, either in itself
or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
         OFFICIAL MISSISSIPPI HEADWATERS CORRIDOR MAP. The MHB corridor map
established in the Mississippi headwaters comprehensive plan.
         OFF-STREET PARKING. A designated space or area of land with a paved or
all-weather surface not within a public street or right-of-way and used for the
parking of vehicles.
         OPEN DISTRICT. A zoning district defined by natural features to be
unsuitable for any dwelling and unsuitable for any other development except in
accordance with the conditional use permit process. Corresponds to the DNR
Special Protection District.
         OPEN SPACE, RECREATIONAL USES. Any recreation use particularly
oriented to and utilizing the outdoor character of an area including hiking and
riding trails, primitive campsites, campgrounds, waysides, parks, and
recreation areas.
         ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHW). The boundary of public waters and
wetlands consisting of an elevation delineating the highest water level which
has been maintained for sufficient period of time to leave evidence on the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For water courses the
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water mark is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
         OVERLAY MAP. An official map of the city that describes the location
of an overlay zone.
         OWNER. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having proprietary interest in the
land and/or building.
         PARKING SPACE. A ten-foot by 20-foot site off public right-of-way,
maintained and sized to accommodate the parking of one automobile
         PARTY WALL or PARTY FLOOR. A common wall which divides two independent
dwelling units or businesses.
         PASTURE. Areas where grass or other growing plats are used for grazing
of domestic livestock and where the concentration of animals is such that
vegetation cover is maintained during the growing season except in the
immediate vicinity of temporary supplemental feeding, temporary holding
facilities, or watering devices.
         PATIO. An unenclosed impervious surface adjoining to a structure
located at grade.
         PAWNBROKER. Any natural person, partnership, or corporation, either as
principal, or agent, or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge
of personal property, or other valuable item, or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property, or other valuable items, on condition of selling the same
back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel
mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part
thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker's business includes
buying personal property previously used, rented, or leased, or selling it on
consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.
         PERMANENT FOUNDATION. The structural supports of a building that allow
the building to be physically attached to the ground consisting of concrete,
concrete and concrete block, or treated wood portion of a structure that
supports the bearing loads of the superstructure and penetrates the ground
providing frost protection. Must meet the provisions of the building code
adopted by the State of Minnesota.
         PERMITTED USE. A land use conforming to the character of a zoning
district which is permitted by ordinance requiring only a zoning permit issued
by the Zoning Administrator.
         PET. An animal commonly associated with human habitation, not
considered under animal units and not raised for production of income.
         PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, COMMERCIAL. Uses that provide transient,
short-term lodging spaces, rooms, or parcels in which the operation is
essentially service orientated. These shall include but not be limited to
hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks and
other primarily service oriented activities.
         PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A land use characterized by a unified
site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel,
whether for sale, rent, or lease, and also usually involving clustering of
these units or sites to provide areas of common green space, density increases,
and mix of structure types and land uses. Does not include a duplex where
specifically allowed in a zoning district on a single parcel of land.
         PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, RESIDENTIAL. A use where the nature of
residency is non-transient and the major or primary focus of the development is
not service-oriented. For example, residential apartments, manufactured home
parks, townhouses, cooperatives and full fee ownership residences would be
considered as residential planned unit developments. Includes time share
condominiums not part of a resort.
         PLANNING COMMISSION. The body duly appointed by the City Council to
determine the development of the city and make recommendations to the City
Council on comprehensive plans, zoning district boundaries, conditional use
permits, subdivision of land and capital improvements.
         PORCH. A covered platform attached to a structure.
         PORCH, ENCLOSED. A covered platform attached to a structure with more
permanent enclosures than those described in “porch”.
         PORTABLE. Capable of being transferred or moved from one place to
another.
         PRELIMINARY PLAT or PLAN. A plan prepared in accordance with the
subdivision ordinance depicting the proposed subdivision of property by final
plat or final floor plan.
         PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE or USE. The single primary structure or use on a
lot, as distinguished from accessory uses or structure. To be considered a
principal structure, the structure must be at least 400 square feet.
         PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Restrictions placed on the property by the owner
and duly filed with the County Recorder. These may also be used in planned unit
developments to establish homeowners associations, restrict shoreline
development and provide for common facilities.
         PUBLIC LAND. Land owned or managed by a municipality, school district,
county, state, federal, or other unit of government.
          PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, subd. 15 and
15a, as may be amended from time to time. However no lake, pond or flowage of
less than ten acres in size in municipalities need be regulated for the
purposes of the shoreland management rule. A body of water created by a private
user where there was no previous shoreline may, at the discretion of the local
government, be exempted from the shoreland management. The official
determination of the size and physical limits of drainage areas of rivers and
streams should be made by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources.
         QUAD. See DUPLEX, TRIPLEX or QUAD.
         REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe the longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a REACH.
         RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Equipment, both motorized and non-motorized,
that is subject to licensing by the State of Minnesota and is designed
primarily for recreational use.
         RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Vehicles for recreational use that can be
driven, towed or hauled. These vehicles are designed to be temporary living
space for camping or travel use. RVs shall include travel trailers, camper
trailers, truck campers, self-propelled motor homes and other similar vehicles.
         REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 1%
chance or 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the
term “base flood” used in a flood insurance study.
         REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (RFPE). An elevation not less
than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.
         REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
         RESORT. Any buildings, structures or enclosures kept, used, maintained
or advertised as, or held out to the public to be an enclosure where sleeping
accommodations are furnished to the public and primarily to those seeking
recreations, for periods of one day, one week or longer, and having for rent
three or more cottages, rooms or enclosures along with any related facilities
such as restaurants, bars, golf courses or other recreational amenities.
         RESTAURANT. An establishment where the principal business is the
preparation, service and sale of food and beverages to be consumed by customers
at tables or counters located within the building on the premises.
          RETAIL SALES/SERVICES. Firms involved in the sale, lease or rent of
new or used products to the general public. They may also provide personal
services or entertainment, or provide product repair or services for consumer
and business goods.
         RIGHT-OF-WAY. A parcel of property dedicated to the public, connecting
to other public right-of-ways, which affords primary access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties.
         RIPARIAN LOT. A property that is abutting a body of water listed in §
152.030 of this chapter.
         RIVER CLASSIFICATION, SCENIC. River segments which are generally
located in the middle reaches of river systems. Common land uses include
forests with riparian development strips and mixtures of cultivated, pasture,
and forested land beyond. Some seasonal and year-round residential development
exists, particularly within commuting distances of major towns. The types and
intensities of recreational uses within this class vary widely.
         RIVER CLASSIFICATION, WILD. River segments which are located in
forested, sparsely populated areas. Predominant land uses include multiple use
forestry, some recreation facilities, seasonal residential, and, within
commuting distance of major towns, some year-round residential uses. Low
intensity recreational uses of these rivers and adjacent lands are common.
         RURAL CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION. A method of subdividing land that
provides for preservation of open space and clustering of individual lots.
         SCREENING. Fencing, an earthen berm or vegetative growth that visually
separates one object from another.
         SEMI-PUBLIC USE. The use of land by private non-profit organizations
to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the
regular constituency of the organization.
         SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and management of
areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such
as shallow soils over ground water or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive
soils, steep slopes, acceptability to flooding or occurrence flora or fauna in
need of special protection.
         SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage
treatment system or other facility and an ordinary high water mark, sewage
treatment system, top of bluff, road, highway, property line or other facility.
Three feet of roof overhang, stoops not exceeding 30 square feet and steps and
ramps from stoop to ground not over four feet wide may protrude into the
setback.
         SETBACK, INTERIOR LOT. In a Planned Unit Development, the closest
horizontal distance between the lot line and the foundation or wall of a
structure when the lot line is not the exterior boundary of the development.
Three feet of roof overhang, stoops not exceeding 30 square feet and steps and
ramps from stoop to ground not over four feet wide may protrude into the
setback.
          SETBACK, ROAD. The closest horizontal distance between the road
right-of-way line and the foundation or wall of a structure. Three feet of roof
overhang, stoops not exceeding 30 square feet and steps and ramps from stoop to
ground not over four feet wide may protrude into the setback.
         SETBACK, SIDE, EXTERIOR. The closest horizontal distance between the
exterior boundary side lot line and the foundation or wall of a structure. This
setback takes precedence over setback, interior lot, where any conflict exists.
Three feet of roof overhang, stoops not exceeding 30 square feet and steps and
ramps from stoop to ground not over four feet wide may protrude into the
setback.
         SETBACK, WATERFRONT. The closest horizontal distance between the
ordinary high water mark and the foundation or wall or edge of a structure.
Three feet of roof overhang, stoops not exceeding 30 square feet and steps and
ramps from stoop to ground not over four feet wide may protrude into the
setback.
         SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. Has the meaning given under Minn. Rules, part
7080.1100, subp. 82.
         SEWER SYSTEM. Pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations and force main
and all other constructions, devices, appliances or appurtenances used for
conducting sewage or industrial waste or other waste to a point of ultimate
disposal.
         SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high water mark
of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the normal
structure setback.
         SHORELAND. Land located within the following distances from public
water: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond or flowage;
and 300 feet from a river or stream, or landward extent of a flood plain
designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits
of SHORELANDS may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by
topographic divides which extend landward from the water for lesser distances
and when approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
         SHORELINE. Property directly abutting a public water, generally
located in the first lot tier adjoining the public water.
         SIGN. Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading
matter or representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message
or visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or
constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires and
structures, which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
         SIGN FACE. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the
message of the sign is exhibited.
         SIGN HEIGHT. The height of a sign shall be computed as the vertical
distance measured from the grade immediately below the sign to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign.
         SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure including the supports, uprights,
bracing and framework which supports or is capable of supporting any sign.
         SIGN, ABANDONED. Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which
remains without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period
of one year or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose
which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Signs
applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership
or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the
property remains vacant for a period of one year or more. Any signs remaining
after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be abandoned.
Signs which are present because of being legally established nonconforming
signs or signs for which a conditional use permit or a variance have been
approved shall also be subject to the definition of abandoned sign.
         SIGN, AWNING. A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion
attached directly to the awning material.
         SIGN, BALLOON. A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material
supported by helium, hot, or pressurized air which is greater than 24 inches in
diameter.
         SIGN, BUILDING. Any sign attached or supported by any structure used
or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
         SIGN, CANOPY. Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made
of fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A
canopy sign is not a marquee and is different from service area canopy signs.
         SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. Changeable copy signs do not include signs
upon which characters, letters or illustrations change or rearrange only once
in a 24-hour period.
         SIGN, DIRECTORY. A sign erected at an intersection that lists the
residences or businesses that reside along the intersecting roadway.
         SIGN, FLASHING. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign which
exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide
intermittent illumination which includes the illusion of intermittent flashing
light by means of animation. Also any mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
twinkling, or sparkling.
         SIGN, FREESTANDING. Any sign which has a supporting framework that is
placed on, or anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any
building or other structure.
         SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL. A sign erected and maintained by or on behalf of
the United States, the state, the county, or the city for the purpose of
regulating traffic or for other civic purposes; the size, location, and height
of which is dictated by the applicable agency to fulfill the intended civic
purpose..
          SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which contains an element designed to
emanate artificial light internally or externally.
         SIGN, LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING. Any sign and its support
structure lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this chapter which
fails to conform to the requirements of this chapter. A sign which was erected
in accordance with a variance granted prior to the adoption of this chapter and
which does not comply with this chapter shall be deemed to be a legally
established nonconforming sign. A sign which was unlawfully erected shall be
deemed to be an illegal sign.
         SIGN, MARQUEE. Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or
attached in any manner, on a marquee.
         SIGN, OFF-PREMISE. A sign which directs the attention of the public to
a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a location not on
the same premises where such sign is located. For purposes of this chapter,
easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to be outside such
platted parcel of land and any sign located or proposed to be located in an
easement of other appurtenance shall be considered an OFF-PREMISE SIGN.
         SIGN, ON-PREMISE. A sign which identifies an establishment, person,
activity, goods, products or services located on the premises where the sign is
installed.
         SIGN, POLE. See PYLON SIGN.
         SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign which is manifestly designed to be
transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels
of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted
to another sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this
characteristic is based on the design of such sign.
         SIGN, PROJECTING. A double-sided sign that is either supported in a
cantilever fashion by a bracket, pole or beam from the side of a building or
hanging from the underside of a roof or overhang so that the sign hangs over
and is positioned perpendicular to a pedestrian walkway and viewable in both
directions of the walkway.
         SIGN, PYLON. Any freestanding sign which has its supportive structure
(s) anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground
level by pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area below the sign face open.
         SIGN, ROTATING. A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an
axis.
         SIGN, SANDWICHBOARD. A sign placed near the entrance of a business,
usually on the public or private sidewalk, advertising particular aspects of
the business goods or services.
         SIGN, SHIMMERING. A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes
distorted visual image.
         SIGN, WALL. Any building sign attached parallel to, but within two
feet of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within
the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported
by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
          SIGN, WINDOW. Any building sign, pictures, symbol, or combination
thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the
window or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
         SIGNIFICANT HISTORICAL or CULTURAL SITE. Any archeological site,
standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility
to the National Register of Historical Places, or is listed in the State
Register of Historical Sites or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that
falls under the provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time to
time. An HISTORICAL SITE meets this criterion if it is presently listed on
either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing
after review by the Minnesota State Archeologist or the Director of the
Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically
considered to be SIGNIFICANT HISTORICAL SITES.
         SKETCH PLAN. A plan drawn to scale used for planning and discussion
purposes only.
         SLAUGHTER. Killing of animals; specifically, the butchering of
livestock for market. SLAUGHTER includes evisceration, the removal of the
internal organs from a carcass.
         SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. A term used for flood insurance purposes
synonymous with 100-year floodplain.
         SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS (ADULT USE). Include any less than
completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair,
buttocks and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
         SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES (ADULT USE). Any of the following
conditions:
            1.   An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being and an
animal.
            2.   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or
upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or
the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on
the part of one so clothed.
            3.   Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any
explicit, close-up presentation of a human genital organ clothed or unclothed.
            4.   Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the
clothed or unclothed pubic area or buttocks of a human male or female, or the
breasts of a female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
         STEEP SLOPE. Lands having average slopes over 12% as measured over
horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, but which are not bluffs.
         STOOP. An entry platform into a structure.
         STORAGE CONTAINER or POD. A movable container used for the purposes of
storing or accumulating goods or personal property to be moved to an offsite
location for storage or disposal.
         STORAGE SHED. Refer to accessory structure.
         STREET. A public right-of-way that provides primary vehicular access
to abutting property and shall include avenue, road or highway. Street
classifications are defined in the comprehensive plan unless defined in a
roadway classification plan or other similar road specific plan.
         STREET, ARTERIAL. A street that has the primary function of rapidly
moving traffic to or through the city. May provide access to abutting land.
Arterial streets are, in general, county or state highways that begin and
terminate outside of the city limits or connect to other arterial streets
within the city.
         STREET, COLLECTOR. A street that has the primary function of receiving
and distributing traffic to and from local streets and providing distribution
of traffic within. May provide access to abutting lots. In general, collector
streets begin and terminate at arterial streets or other collector streets.
         STREET, LOCAL. A street, the function of which is to provide localized
access to individual parcels. Does not normally carry through traffic. Traffic
volumes and traffic speeds are expected to be low.
         STRUCTURE. Any building, appurtenance including any deck or other
facility, constructed, placed or erected by man except aerial or underground
utility lines such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, gas lines and
except walks or steps on grade not more than four feet wide outside of the
Shore Impact Zone, stoops not exceeding 30 square feet, temporary furniture,
planter, or decorative material and retaining walls consisting of wood or
decorative block.
         SUBDIVIDER. The owner, agent, person, corporation, partnership or
legal entity proposing to subdivide property under his control.
         SUBDIVISION. The division of real estate into two or more parcels for
the purpose of sale, rent or lease, including planned unit development.
         SUBDIVISION BY CONDOMINIUM PLAN. The subdivision of a building or the
subdivision of real estate into two or more spaces or parcels of any size by
the authority of M.S. Ch. 515A, as it may be amended from time to time with
documents prepared by a licensed surveyor and duly approved by the Planning
Commission and Council.
         SUBDIVISION BY METES AND BOUNDS. Any division of real estate resulting
in two or more parcels which are not platted but divided by description
prepared and signed by a licensed surveyor.
         SUBDIVISION BY PLAT. The subdivision into two or more parcels of any
size by the authority of M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time,
with documents prepared by a licensed surveyor and duly approved by the
Planning Commission and Council.
         SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
         SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
            1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
            2.   Any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
“historic structure.” For the purpose of this chapter, “historic structure” is
as defined in 44 C.F.R. Part 59.1.
         SUBSTANDARD LOT. A lot that is non-conforming.
         SUBSTANDARD USE. A use that does not conform to this chapter.
         SUITABILITY ANALYSIS. An evaluation of land to determine if it is
appropriate for the proposed use. The analysis considers factors relevant to
the proposed use and may include the following features; susceptibility to
flooding; existence of wetlands; soils, erosion potential; slope steepness;
water supply sewage treatment capabilities; water depth, depth to groundwater
and bedrock, vegetation, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-
based recreation; fish and wildlife habitat; presence of significant historic
sites; or any other relevant feature of the natural land.
         SURFACE WATER ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for commercial
purposes where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part
of the normal operation of business. Marinas, resorts and restaurants with
transient docking facilities are examples of such use.
         TAPROOM. AA facility authorized to perform on-sale malt liquor sales
produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one
brewery location owned by the brewer. The TAPROOM may provide growler off-sale
distribution of malt liquor so long as the facility produces less than 20,000
barrels annually, in which case the facility may not distribute on-sale or
growlers.
(M.S. § 340A.26)
         TEMPORARY. A use or structure that lasts longer than three days and is
discontinued within 14 days. Any use or structure existing longer than 14 days,
except where specifically provided for in this chapter, shall be considered
permanent unless a specific date of discontinuation, agreeable to the Zoning
Administrator and the Planning Commission, has been submitted, in writing, to
the city.
         TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure of a temporary character including
but not limited to house boats, fish houses, recreational vehicles and tents.
         TOE OF BLUFF. The lower point of a 50-foot segment with an average
slope exceeding 18%.
         TOP OF THE BLUFF. The higher point of a 50-foot segment with an
average slope exceeding 18%.
         TOW YARD. A lot or parcel designated for the temporary storage of
vehicles which have been impounded or towed by a public or private towing
company, but which does not include permanent vehicle storage, vehicle repair,
or dismantling of vehicles.
         TOWER. A structure situated on a site that is intended for
transmitting or receiving television, radio, telephone, cellular or wireless
communications.
         TOWER HEIGHT. Determined by measuring the vertical distance from the
point of contact with the ground to the highest point of the tower including
all antenna or other attachments.
         TRAVEL TRAILER. Refer to recreational vehicle.
         TREE. A woody plant four inches or more in diameter or eight feet or
more in height.
         TRIPLEX. See DUPLEX, TRIPLEX or QUAD.
         UTILITY SUBSTATION. A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-
public utility agency to store, distribute, generate electricity, gas,
telecommunications, and related equipment, or to pump or chemically treat
water. This does not include storage or treatment of sewage, solid waste or
hazardous waste.
         VARIANCE. The means by which an adjustment is made in the application
of zoning regulations to a particular piece of property, which property,
because of practical difficulties applicable to it, is deprived of privileges
commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district, and which
adjustment remedies the disparity in privileges. See M.S. § 394.22, subd. 10.
         VEGETATION REMOVAL. The removal of a stand of trees and brush over ten
feet in height on a lot or parcel of land.
         VISIBLE. Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity
(whether legible or not) without visual aid.
         WALKWAY. A parcel of property dedicated to the public for non-
vehicular access purposes.
         WAREHOUSING. The principal use is the storage of materials or
equipment within an enclosed building.
         WAREHOUSING, COMMERCIAL. The rental or sale of warehousing space.
         WATER ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY. A small above ground
building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks and retaining
walls, which because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature
is located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples
of such structures and facilities include boat houses, gazebos, screen houses,
fish cleaning houses and detached decks.
         WETLAND. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems
where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered
by shallow water. Lands identified as wetland by the National Wetland Inventory
(NWI), NRCS Soil Survey of Aitkin County, Aitkin County Soil and Water
Conservation District, Army Corps of Engineers or other agency having
jurisdiction to identify or delineate wetlands shall be considered a wetland
under this chapter. For the purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the
following three attributes:
            1.   Have a predominance of hydric soils;
            2.   Are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
            3.   Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such
vegetation.
         WINEMAKING ON PREMISES STORE. A commercial establishment in which
individuals make wine on the premises for personal and family use only and not
for resale, using ingredients or materials or both supplied by the
establishment. This business is not required to be licensed under this chapter
if the establishment is operated in accordance with 27 C.F.R.§ 24.75. No person
under the age of 21 years may participate in the making of wine in such an
establishment. Alcoholic beverages may not be sold or otherwise provided to
customers of an establishment described in this section unless the
establishment holds the appropriate license for such sale or provision. (M.S. §
340A.34)
         WINERY. A building or property that produces wine, or is involved in
the production of wine, such as a wine company that may include warehouses,
bottling lines, laboratories, and large expanses of tanks known as tank farms.
         WINERY, DISTILLERY. Farm Wineries licensed to manufacture distilled
spirits which may exceed 25% alcohol by volume may not produce more than 5,000
gallons in distilled spirits which shall be part of the 75,000-gallon total
limit for the farm winery (M.S. § 340A.101).
         WINERY, FARM. Farm Wineries permitted to manufacture wine products as
defined under section State Statute 340A.315 and authorized to produce up to
75,000 gallons in a calendar year.
         YARD. A required green space occupied and unobstructed by a structure
or portion of a structure provided that fences, signs, utility poles, lawn
lights, antenna and related minor equipment may be permitted in any yard
provided that they do not create a safety hazard or constitute a nuisance.
         ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The duly appointed person responsible for the
enforcement and administration of this chapter.
         ZONING DISTRICT. An area of the city defined on the zoning map, having
uniform zoning provisions.
         ZONING DISTRICT OVERLAY. A zoning district containing regulations
superimposed upon other zoning district regulations and superseding the
underlying zoning district regulations.
         ZONING MAP. The map of the city, amended from time to time, which
defines the boundaries of the zoning districts.
         ZONING PERMIT. A permit issued by the zoning administrator to allow
the construction of a structure or to allow a land use when the provisions of
this chapter have been met, when approval of any conditional use permits or
variances have been granted and when the fees are paid. A zoning permit may
have administrative conditions specific to the subject site when called for by
this chapter.
      (2)   Words not defined by division (B)(1) above shall be subject to
interpretation by the Planning Commission. Any such word shall then be added to
division (B)(1) above, as provided for within §
152.013 of this chapter.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 337, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 347, passed 7-6-
2010; Ord. 354, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 359, passed 8-6-2012; Ord. 372, passed
12-15-2014; Ord. 394, passed 8-5-2019; Ord. 405, passed 4-4-2022; Ord. 406,
passed 4-4-2022; Ord. 418, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 152.004 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the maintaining of the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Where the provisions of this chapter are either more restrictive or
less restrictive than applicable provision of other laws, ordinances, statutes,
resolutions, covenants or regulations of any kind, the more restrictive
condition, standard or requirement shall prevail, except as authorized by the
more restrictive agency.
   (C)   Except as this chapter specifically provides, no structure shall be
erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered and no structure or land
shall be used for any purpose or in any manner which is not in conformity with
this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   Any existing structure or use of property subject to conditions
of approval for a variance, conditional use permit or other land use
application must have a land use certificate of compliance issued within 12
months of the approval, unless an extension is granted under §§
152.265 through
152.278 of this chapter.
      (2)   The land use certificate of compliance, when issued, shall state
that the building or use appears to be in compliance with the conditions of
approval.
   (E)   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any subdivision
of property within the city after the effective date of this chapter.
   (F)   Ambiguities in this chapter shall be resolved by interpretation of the
Zoning Administrator. If an applicant wishes to appeal the interpretation of
the Administrator, an appeal can be made through a hearing of the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.005 ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTS AND CONCURRENT PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to secure
necessary concurrent permits such as Pollution Control Agency, state waste
disposal permits; Health Department permits; Corps of Engineers permits,
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) public water permits, DNR water
appropriation permits; and the county. Approval by the city does not imply
approval by other agencies.
   (B)   The city will prepare an environmental assessment worksheet (EAW)
where a proposed project exceeds the limits defined in the Environmental
Quality Board’s Rules and Regulations for Environmental review program, as
requested by the Planning Commission, or as successfully petitioned by the
public. Costs for preparation of the EAW shall be paid by the property owner as
per the provisions in §
152.276 of this chapter.
   (C)   The administration of an EAW or environmental impact statement (EIS)
shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state’s
Environmental Quality Board. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible to
the City Council and shall have the authority to administer the environmental
document. The Planning Commission shall review each document and make
recommendations to the City Council, whose decision on the matter shall be
final.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.006 USE OF PRE-EXISTING LOTS.
   (A)   Any lot within the city for which a deed, recorded contract for deed,
or other legal conveyance or plat has been executed prior to the effective date
of this chapter shall be deemed a buildable lot without requiring a variance;
provided that, it has at least 80% of the required lot area and lot width and
that all the required setbacks can be maintained.
   (B)   Any lot in the Rural Residential Zoning District for which a deed,
recorded contract for deed or other legal conveyance or plat has been executed
prior to the effective date of this chapter which does not qualify as a
buildable lot under division (A) above shall also be deemed buildable provided
following conditions are met.
      (1)   The proposed structure and all associated development shall not
require any variances from city code provisions.
      (2)   The proposed structure and all associated development shall not
create a potential impediment to foreseeable public infrastructure extensions
as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   The proposed structure and all associated development can be shown
to easily integrate into a future development of the subject property under
urban residential development standards.
   (C)   If two or more contiguous lots in total could not be divided into two
or more lots meeting the requirements of division (A) above, and are held by
the same owner on the effective date of this chapter, they will be considered
one lot for building and zoning purposes. A covenant, duly filed and recorded,
shall be required before a building permit is issued thereon.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 340, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 152.007 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES.
   Any structure or use legally existing upon the effective date of the
adoption of this chapter and which does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter may be continued subject to the following.
   (A)   No such structure or use shall be expanded, enlarged or intensified
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and division (B)
below, with consideration for variances.
   (B)   A one-time addition to a non-conforming principal structure shall be
permitted provided all of the following are met:
      (1)   The non-conformity is due solely to setbacks;
      (2)   The addition is not within the Shore Impact Zone;
      (3)   The addition will not encroach further into any setback;
      (4)   The size of the addition shall not exceed 50% of the size of the
structure to which it is being added;
      (5)   The total first floor footprint of the structure, once the addition
is completed, shall not exceed 2,500 square feet, including decks, porches,
patios and other projections;
      (6)   For reasons of structural integrity, the foundation under the
addition should match the existing structure. Further, a basement may be
allowed under the addition only where a basement already exists in the original
structure;
      (7)   A storm water management plan is implemented that directs storm
water away from adjacent properties and surface waters;
      (8)   The height of the addition shall not exceed the average height of
the existing development on the block the structure is located on;
      (9)   No permits shall be granted under this provision for homes
constructed after 5-13-2008, or where a previous variance has been approved;
and
      (10)   All other provisions of this chapter must be complied with.
   (C)   If a non-conforming structure is damaged, by any cause, to an extent
where the repair costs exceed 50% of its assessed value immediately prior to
damage, the structure may be replaced with a structure of exact dimensions;
provided that, a permit is applied for within 180 days of when the property was
damaged. Where no land use permit has been applied for within 180 days of when
the property was damaged, then the structure or its replacement shall
thereafter conform to this chapter.
   (D)   Any non-conformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or
premises existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, may be continued,
including through repair, restoration, maintenance or improvement so long as
the structure or use is not expanded.
   (E)   A lawful non-conforming use of a building may not be replaced when the
use has been discontinued for a period of one year or more.
   (F)   A lawful non-conforming use may be changed to lessen the non-
conformity of use. Once a non-conforming use has been changed, it shall not
thereafter be altered to increase the non-conformity.
   (G)   Any structural repairs or replacement of non-conforming structures
shall require a building permit.
   (H)   Sewage treatment systems shall be upgraded to a conforming status in
conformance with the County Planning and Zoning Department standards.
   (I)   Upon availability of a community sewer system to the property,
connection to that system shall be made in accordance with city policy
regardless of the conformance or non-conformance of the individual system.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.008 BUILDING STANDARDS.
   (A)   All structures shall be constructed in accordance with the Building
Code adopted, enforced and administered by the city.
   (B)   Buildings constructed less than five feet from any other structure
must be constructed with fire resistant walls requirements of the state’s
Building Code. Building separation requirements of zoning districts shall still
apply in addition to the fire wall separation requirements.
   (C)   All permanent structures have a foundation that complies with new
State Building Code.
   (D)   Manufactured homes and modular homes shall be installed by a licensed
installer and a copy of the installation compliance certificate shall be
submitted to the city’s Building Inspector prior to occupancy of the dwelling.
   (E)   The following architectural requirements shall apply to the Rural
Residential (RR), Urban/Rural Transition Residential (TR), Urban Residential
(UR) Districts, and Downtown Mix Use (DMU).
      (1)   All dwelling units shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide, with a
minimum footprint of 960 square feet in area. Single level dwelling units
require a minimum roof slope of five units vertical on 12 units horizontal and
a minimum 12-inch overhang.
      (2)   The side of the structure facing the street should include a
functional front entry and window.
   (F)   All dwellings being moved into the city shall meet all applicable
building codes and conform to the land use ordinance building standards as
described in this section prior to being moved into the city.
   (G)   All dwellings should be connected to city sewer system or, if located
on an individual septic treatment system, shall conform to the state’s
Pollution Control Agency Standards, Minn. Rules Ch. 7080.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 337, passed 12-21-2009)
§ 152.009 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Liability of city officials. The failure of any officer of the city,
member of the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment or employees of the city
to act pursuant to this chapter, except as an individual acting in his or her
own behalf, shall not be an offense and shall not subject the officer, board or
employee to any penalty. The city shall not be liable for the problems arising
from reliance on lot corners, legal descriptions or other information provided
by the property owner.
   (B)   Equitable relief. In the event of a violation or threatened violation
of any provision of this chapter or the conditions of any permit issued
pursuant to the ordinance, the city, in addition to other remedies, may act or
institute action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation or
threatened violation.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.010 SEPARABILITY.
   Every section, provision or part of this chapter or any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter is declared separable from every other section,
provision or part thereof to the extent that if any section, provision or part
of this chapter or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not invalidate any other
section, provision or part thereof.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.011 SUPREMACY.
   When any condition imposed by this chapter on the use of land or buildings
is more restrictive or less restrictive than applicable conditions imposed by
statute, rules and regulations, other city ordinance or regulation or other
jurisdiction, the more restrictive shall apply. This chapter does not abrogate
any easements, restriction or covenants imposed on the land by private
declaration or agreement, but where the provisions are less restrictive than an
applicable provision of this chapter, this chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.012 EFFECTUATION.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by
the City Council and subsequent publication.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.013 AMENDMENT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The City Council may adopt amendments to either this chapter,
zoning map or overlay maps in relation to the land uses within a district or
the boundaries of the district(s) by the most restrictive majorities allowed by
state statute.
      (2)   The amendments shall not be issued indiscriminately but shall only
be used as a means to reflect changes in the goals of the community or changes
in the conditions of the city.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   An amendment may be initiated by the Council, the Planning
Commission or by any property owner.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed changes and make
a recommendation to the Planning Commission.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall make a reasonable attempt to cause
all property owners within a minimum of 350 feet of the proposed zoning
district change to be notified by regular mail and shall publish a hearing
notice for either a zoning district change or zoning ordinance change in the
legal section of the official newspaper and shall provide notice to the DNR at
least ten days ahead of the public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold
the hearing and make a timely recommendation to the City Council. Adoption of a
new zoning map shall require published notice only. The Planning Commission
shall consider the criteria for land use categories, §
152.030(F) of this chapter, in its decision.
      (4)   The City Council shall review the recommendations and shall make a
timely decision. An amendment requires a majority vote to be enacted, except
where all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district is to be
zoned from residential to either commercial or industrial. In that instance, a
two-thirds majority is required.
      (5)   The City Administrator shall publish a summary of the text of the
change or description of boundary change or a new zoning map, whichever is
appropriate, in the official newspaper within 30 days after action by the
Council.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 394, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 152.014 NOTICES.
   Failure to receive notice called for by this chapter shall not invalidate
any action taken by the city so long as the city acted reasonably in its
attempt to provide the notice.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.015 FEE SCHEDULE.
   Please see the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 354, passed 11-1-2010)
§ 152.016 OPT OUT: M.S. § 462.3593
   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, subd. 9, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city opts-out of the requirements of M.S. §
462.3593, as it may be amended from time to time, which defines and regulates
Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
(Ord. 379, passed 7-5-2016)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT PROVISIONS
§ 152.030 GENERAL.
   (A)   The city is hereby divided into zoning districts as shown on the
official zoning district map, which may be subsequently amended by the
procedures of §§
152.010 through
152.014 of this chapter.
   (B)   The zoning district boundaries are generally on the center of the
streets, on lot lines, on the center of streams or rivers, and follow the
contour of the land.
   (C)   The following districts are hereby established:
Downtown Mixed-Use                     DMU
Highway Commercial                     C
Industrial                             I
Light Industrial/Commercial Transition LI-CT
Open Space                             OS
Parks and Recreational                 P&R
Rural Residential                      RR
Urban Residential                      UR
Urban/Rural Transition Residential     TR
 
   (D)   The rivers in the city have been classified as follows:
                            §
Mississippi River Scenic    152.057, Mississippi Headwaters Overlay (MH)
                            District
Ripple River                §
                            152.058, Shoreland Overlay (SH) District
                            From confluence with Mississippi River to the
Ripple River      Forested  southern boundary of the NE quarter of the SW
                            quarter of S24-T47N-R27W
                            From southern boundary of NE quarter of the SW
Ripple River      Urban     quarter of S24-T47N-R27W to western boundary of the
                            NE quarter of the NE quarter of S26-T47N-R27W
                            From the western boundary of the NE quarter of the
Ripple River      Forested  NE quarter of S26-47N-27W to the western boundary
                            of the NE quarter of the SE quarter of S26-T47N-
                            R27W
                            From the western boundary of the NE quarter of the
                            SE quarter of S26-T47N-R27W to the southern
Ripple River      Urban     boundary of the SW quarter of the SW quarter of
                            S25-T47N-R27W, 2018 city side only (county side is
                            forested)
                            From southern boundary of the SW quarter of the SW
Ripple River      Forested  quarter of S25-T47N-27W to southern boundary of
                            S36-T47N-R27W
Unnamed Stream    Tributary S36-T47N-R27W to S1-T46N-27W
 
   (E)   The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all land within the
municipal boundaries of the city.
   (F)   Criteria for land use categories:
      (1)   Preservation of natural sensitive areas;
      (2)   Present ownership and development;
      (3)   Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities;
      (4)   Topographic characteristics;
      (5)   Vegetative cover;
      (6)   Road and service center accessibility;
      (7)   Socio-economic development needs of the public;
      (8)   Availability of public or city sewer and water systems;
      (9)   The necessity to reserve and restore certain areas having
significant historical or ecological value;
      (10)   Conflicts between land uses and impacts of commercial uses or
higher densities on adjacent properties;
      (11)   Alternatives available for desired land use;
      (12)   Prevention of spot zoning;
      (13)   Conformance to the city’s Land Use Action Plan; and
      (14)   Conformance to the city’s Future Land Use Map and any other
official maps of the city.
   (G)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning
Map, which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map,
which shall be located in the office of the City Administrator, shall be the
final authority as the current zoning status of land and water areas, building
and other structures in the city.
      (1)   District boundaries. The location and boundaries of the districts
established by this chapter are set forth on the Official Zoning Map. District
boundary lines as indicated on the Zoning Map follow lot lines, property lines,
right-of-way or centerlines of streets or alleys, right-of-way or centerlines
of streets or alleys projected, the city limit lines, shorelines, all as they
exist upon the effective date of this chapter. If the boundary lines do not
follow any of the above, the district boundary lines are established as drawn
on the Zoning Map.
      (2)   Vacated ways. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is
vacated in the manner authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each
side of the street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the
center of the vacation and all included in the vacation shall then and
henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
      (3)   Appeals. Appeals concerning the exact location of a zoning district
boundary line shall be heard by the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 394, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 152.031 OPEN SPACE (OS) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To provide a zoning classification for
preservation of sensitive areas, unique resources and designated non-
developable property. Areas such as wetlands, bluffs, threatened and endangered
species habitat, historic sites and lands set-aside as part of the development
process should be zoned as open space.
   (B)   Compatibility. The Open Space Zone is compatible with every other
zoning classification and any property that meets the purpose and intent of
this zoning classification may be zoned open space.
   (C)   Lot and density requirements. There is no minimum lot size associated
with the open space zoning classification. Setbacks established for the
adjacent zoning district shall apply.
   (D)   Mixed zone lots. For a lot crossing, an open space zoning boundary
into another zoning classification, the minimum buildable lot area shall be the
same as the non-open space zoning classification with no area credit given for
areas zoned open space.
   (E)   Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to
all development in this zone.
      (1)   Walking, hiking, biking. Recreational activity uses are allowed if
not completed on private property. Appurtenances to the allowed use shall also
be allowed if constructed greater than ten feet from a neighboring property
line.
      (2)   Hunting. Hunting activities on property is an allowed use given all
other state statutes and rules are obeyed including complying with DNR hunting
and trapping regulations, and permission granted to complete hunting
activities. Permission includes complying with §
130.01 of this code of ordinances. Only portable hunting stands are permitted
in this district.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.032 PARKS AND RECREATIONAL (P&R) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The parks and recreational zoning district is intended to
preserve, protect and enhance land set aside for public parks and for public
recreational facilities and uses. The areas and facilities provide many
benefits to village residents and visitors. They provide recreational and
cultural opportunities; preserve natural and scenic areas; and offer refuge
from the built, urban environment. The Parks and Recreational District is
intended to be applied exclusively to public-owned lands.
   (B)   Compatibility. Parks and Recreational Zone is compatible with every
other zoning classification and any property that meets the purpose and intent
of this zoning classification.
   (C)   Lot and density requirements. There is no minimum lot size associated
with the Parks and Recreational Zoning classification. Setbacks established for
the adjacent zoning district shall apply.
   (D)   Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to
all development in this zone.
      (1)   Walking, hiking, biking. Recreational activity uses on are allowed
if not completed on private property. Appurtenances to the allowed use shall
also be allowed if constructed greater than ten feet from a neighboring
property line.
      (2)   Preserved natural areas. Preservation of open land for the
preservation of open space and for the enjoyment of the public shall be
permitted.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.033 RURAL RESIDENTIAL (RR) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To provide a zoning classification that allows for
low-density residential development. Development in this zone is without
municipal utility service and with only limited demand for accessibility. Rural
residential zoning should be used to preserve rural character and those areas
difficult to serve with municipal services.
   (B)   Compatibility. The Rural Residential Zone must be adjacent to land
zoned Rural Residential (RR), Urban/Rural Transition Residential (TR) and
Highway Commercial (C).
   (C)   Lot and density requirements.
Accessory structure size - square feet, 2,000 for first 2.5 acres
max, cumulative                         1,000 for each additional 2.5 acres
Buildable lot area - acres, minimum     10
Lot width - feet, minimum               500
Maximum animal unit per acre            0.5
Maximum building height - feet          25
Maximum impervious coverage             15%
Setback, corner side - feet, minimum    40
Setback, right-of-way, collector and    50
arterial streets - feet, minimum
Setback, right-of-way, local streets -  50
feet, minimum
Setback, side - feet, minimum           25
Setback, sign - feet, minimum           1
Setback, wetland - feet, minimum        50
 
   (D)   Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to
all development in this zone.
      (1)   Exterior storage. Storage of a recreational vehicle is allowed if
stored not less than ten feet distance from any property line.
      (2)   Fences. Fences not exceeding six feet in height may be constructed.
Under no circumstances shall a fence be constructed closer than ten feet from
the surface of a public road or within public right-of-way. Materials shall
consist of usual fencing materials with posts and fence of metal, wood,
concrete, brick, vinyl or smooth wire. Barbed or electrified wire shall not be
used where frequent human contact is anticipated.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.034 URBAN/RURAL TRANSITION RESIDENTIAL (TR) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To provide a residential zoning classification
that serves as a medium-density buffer between areas of higher-density and
areas of lower-density. The Urban/Rural Transition Residential Zone may be
utilized on the edge of the municipal utility service area. The zone may or may
not be served by city sewer and water systems, but must be within the projected
utility service area. Development in this zone should facilitate future utility
extensions.
   (B)   Compatibility. The Urban/Rural Transition Residential Zone is
compatible with and may be established next to the Urban Residential, Downtown
Mixed Use, Highway Commercial and Light Industrial Zones. The Urban/Rural
Transition Residential Zone may be established next to the Rural Residential so
long as the RR Zone does not surround the Urban/Rural Transition Residential
Zone. The Urban/Rural Transition Residential Zone should not be established
where the zones surrounding it all have similar density characteristics.
   (C)   Lot and density requirements.
Accessory structure size - square feet, max, 1,280 for first 2.5 acres
cumulative
Accessory structure size - square feet, max,  1,280 for first 2.5 acres
cumulative                                    640 for each additional 2.5 acres
Buildable lot area - acres, minimum           10
Lot width - feet, minimum                     300
Maximum accessory structure height - feet     15
Maximum animal unit per acre                  0.5
Maximum impervious coverage                   25%
Maximum principal structure height - feet     25
Setback, corner side - feet, minimum          20
Setback, right-of-way, collector and arterial 35
streets feet, minimum
Setback, right-of-way, local streets - feet,  30
minimum
Setback, side - feet, minimum                 10
Setback, sign - feet, minimum                 1
Setback, wetland - feet, minimum              50
Transition subdivision maximum density        2 unit/acre
 
   (D)   Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to
all development in this zone.
      (1)   Exterior storage. Storage of a recreational vehicle is allowed if
stored not less than ten feet distance from any property line.
      (2)   Connection to municipal utilities. Where municipal utilities are
provided or reasonably close in the opinion of the City Engineer or within an
area or within a distance in which connection is required by any city ordinance
or plan, the property shall be connected to the municipal system. All other
properties shall be designed and constructed so as to facilitate future
connection to the municipal utility systems.
      (3)   Animal husbandry. Animal husbandry and farm animals shall only be
allowed in the Urban/Rural Transition Residential District on lots with a
minimum of five acres.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 403, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 152.035 URBAN RESIDENTIAL (UR) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To provide a residential zoning classification
that contains an urban development pattern characterized by traditional grid-
style lot-block layouts. Parcels are either served by or designed for city
sewer and water systems, an urban road section with sidewalks and a boulevard,
and are generally within walking distance of the Downtown Mixed Use (DMU)
District.
   (B)   Compatibility. The Urban Residential District is compatible with and
must be established next to the Downtown Mixed Use (DMU) District. The Urban
Residential District may be established in areas abutting Urban/Rural
Transition Residential (TR), Highway Commercial (C) or Industrial (I)
Districts.
   (C)   Lot and density requirements.
 
                                        1,280 square feet for the first 15,000
Accessory structure size - square feet, square feet; 500 square feet for each
max, cumulative                         additional 15,000 square feet (possible
                                        with CUP approval); maximum of 1,000
                                        additional square feet
Buildable lot area (sewered) - square   6,250
feet, minimum
Lot width - feet, minimum               50
Maximum accessory structure height -    15
feet
Maximum impervious coverage             40%
Maximum principal structure height -    30
feet
Minimum lot area for animal husbandry   5 acres
and farm animals
Maximum animal unit per acre            0.5
Residential maximum density (sewered)   1 units per 5,000 square feet
Setback, accessory structure from alley 4
- feet
Setback, corner side - feet, minimum    14
Setback on blocks with less than 2      Determined by the average setback of
existing dwellings                      nearest established block as the
                                        minimum standard
Setback on blocks with 2 or more        Determined by the average setback of
existing dwellings                      existing buildings facing the same
                                        street on the block
Setback, side - feet, minimum           6 (minimum of 10-foot separation
                                        required between buildings)
Setback, sign - feet, minimum           1
 
   (D)   Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to
all development in this zone.
      (1)   Exterior storage. Storage of a recreational vehicle is allowed if
stored not less than ten feet distance from any property line.
      (2)   Impervious coverage. Impervious coverage may be increased by 20%
through a conditional use permit if the following is provided:
         (a)   A storm water retention plan showing containment of the five-
year, 24-hour storm event on the parcel; and
         (b)   Elimination of direct runoff of storm water to adjacent water
bodies, including wetlands and adjacent parcels through the use of berms or
other permanent means.
      (3)   Sidewalks. Properties shall accommodate the safe and comfortable
sidewalks for pedestrians. Sidewalks and paths shall connect the development to
adjacent land uses and provide connections through the development to the
public street right-of-way. When replacement or installation of a sidewalk is
required, sidewalks shall be constructed of materials required by, and to the
specifications previously adopted by the City Council.
      (4)   Boulevards. Boulevards, strips of grass or any areas between
streets and sidewalks, or streets and property lines in cases where a sidewalk
does not exist, shall be kept in a manner which is consistent among adjoining
properties. All deviations from this consistency shall require a conditional
use permit which must consider the following in addition to criteria considered
under the conditional use permit review:
         (a)   The deviation will improve the aesthetic value of the
neighborhood or vicinity of the improvement; and
         (b)   The deviation will improve the general public safety of the area
in which the improvement is made.
      (5)   Animal husbandry. Animal husbandry and farm animals shall only be
allowed in the Urban Residential District on lots with a minimum of five acres.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 403, passed 12-6-2021; Ord. 418, passed 10-
20-2025)
§ 152.036 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (C) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To provide a zoning classification for commercial
uses oriented around the automobile. Parcels are larger than in the Downtown
Mixed Use Zone in order to provide on-site parking and on-site storm water
facilities, as well as on-site water supply and sewage treatment where
municipal utilities are not immediately available.
   (B)   Compatibility. The Commercial District should be established as a
transition zone between the Downtown Mixed Use (DMU) District, the Light
Industrial/Commercial Transition (LI-CT) District or the Industrial (I)
District and the surrounding residential districts. The district may not be
established in an area where it is completely surrounded by residential
districts.
   (C)   Lot and density requirements.
Buildable lot area (sewered) - square feet, minimum        10,000
Buildable lot area (unsewered) - square feet, minimum      20,000
Building height - feet, maximum                            45
Impervious surface - percent, maximum                      50%
Lot width- feet, minimum                                   100
Setback, between buildings - feet, minimum                 10
Setback, parking from lot line - feet, minimum             10
Setback, rear - feet, minimum                              10
Setback, right-of-way, feet, minimum                       50
Setback, side next to residential district - feet, minimum 30
Setback, side yard - feet, minimum                         10
Setback, sign - feet, minimum                              1
Setback, wetland - feet, minimum                           25
 
   (D)   Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to
all development in this district.
      (1)   Impervious coverage. Impervious coverage may be increased by up to
25%, not to exceed 75% of the property area, through a conditional use permit
if the following is provided and approved by the city:
         (a)   A storm water retention plan showing containment of the ten-
year, 24-hour storm event on the parcel; and
         (b)   Elimination of direct runoff of storm water to adjacent
properties and wetlands through the use of berms, infiltration ponds, swales,
filtration strips or other permanent means.
      (2)   Compatibility of use. Use shall be compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood. Uses shall not present noise, odor, light nuisances or any other
nuisances.
      (3)   Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as per §
152.096 of this chapter. On-street parking is not allowed under any
circumstances. To reduce the visual impacts, landscaping between parking lots
and all adjacent sidewalks, roads, lots and buildings is recommended. A
landscaping plan should be submitted with the permit application.
      (4)   Screening. All sites shall be heavily landscaped to provide 80%
screening to adjacent residential parcels. Percentages shall be determined by
amount of structure that can be seen during leaf-on conditions. A landscaping
and screening plan must be submitted with any permit application.
      (5)   Lighting. Lighting shall be minimal, but sufficient to promote
public safety. Lighting shall be downward directional and shall be compatible
with the surrounding development and, where appropriate, follow the historic
light fixture style used for the downtown.
      (6)   Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall remain unobstructed at all times.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 345, passed 7-6-2010)
§ 152.037 DOWNTOWN MIXED USE (DMU) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To provide a zoning classification for a mix of
high-density residential and commercial uses. Development in this district
relies less on automobile traffic and more on walking, biking and other similar
modes of transportation. Infrastructure must be in place to provide on-street
parking and walkways as well as connection to city sewer and water systems.
Downtown Mixed Use Districts should be clustered to provide the maximum amount
of interaction and accessibility between the different establishments.
   (B)   Compatibility. The Downtown Mixed Use District is most compatible with
and should be established next to the Urban Residential (UR) District, but it
also may be adjacent to the Urban/Rural Transition Residential (TR), Highway
Commercial (C) and Industrial (I) Districts.
   (C)   Lot and density requirements.
Buildable lot area - square feet, minimum                  2,250
Building height - feet, maximum                            45
Impervious coverage with storm sewer available             100%
Lot width - feet, minimum                                  25
Maximum density (units per acre)                           20
Setback, parking from building or lot line - feet, minimum 0
Setback, rear - feet, minimum                              10
Setback, right-of-way, city road - feet, minimum           0
Setback, right-of-way, county or state road, feet, minimum 0
Setback, side yard - feet, minimum                         0
Setback, sign - feet, minimum                              0
 
   (D)   Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to
all development in this zone.
      (1)   Parking. Commercial developments within the DMU District are exempt
from the parking standards of §
152.096 of this chapter. Residential development within the DMU District is not
exempt. Developments shall minimize the appearance of parking areas.
         (a)   Location. Parking and vehicle drives shall be located away from
building entrances and street corners, and not between a building entrance and
the street. Surface parking shall be oriented behind or to the side of a
building when possible.
         (b)   Landscape buffering. Suitable trees and shrubs shall be planted
between parking lots and all adjacent sidewalks and buildings.
         (c)   Maximum parking ratio. Surface parking shall not exceed 125% of
the minimum parking requirement for the subject land use(s).
      (2)   Pedestrian amenities. Proposed developments shall provide for safe
and comfortable sidewalks, paths and resting areas for pedestrians. Sidewalks
and paths shall connect the development to adjacent land uses and provide
connections through the development to the public street right-of-way.
      (3)   Lighting.
         (a)   All lighting shall be sufficient to promote safety with a
pedestrian scale.
         (b)   Where appropriate, lighting should complement the historic
downtown lighting theme.
   (E)   Use of public sidewalk in the Downtown Mixed Use (DMU) zoning
district. Any restaurant that is state licensed or retail store may expand
their operation onto a part, and only that part of the public sidewalk directly
in front of the property under the control of the business owner’s premises
(hereafter referred to as the “premises”). All the requirements and
restrictions of this section shall apply; provided, however, that city staff
may without adverse hearing procedures impose additional reasonable
restrictions or withdraw the operation of the outdoor dining where necessary in
their judgment to protect the public health, safety, or welfare or to prevent a
nuisance from developing or continuing. Withdrawal of approval may be for
either a specified time or an indefinite period, within which or after which no
such persons shall use the public sidewalk for outdoor dining. Such additional
restrictions or withdrawal of approval shall be effective upon delivery of
written notice thereof to the person, or an employee of the person at the
business premises involved.
      (1)   This section applies to and permits only outdoor dining activity
and the sale and display of merchandise and goods, and does not permit the
sale, display or provision of services on the public sidewalk. This section
does not apply to or allow the sale and display of merchandise and goods on
public sidewalks by transient vendors, mobile food units other persons who do
not operate a restaurant or retail business in a building on the private
property adjoining the public sidewalk where the sales and display take place.
      (2)   The use of public sidewalks for outdoor dining or sidewalk sales is
only allowed April 1 to November 1 each year.
      (3)   The location of outdoor dining or sidewalk sale areas shall
consider the placement of existing public infrastructure and be located
adjacent to the building, allowing pedestrian traffic to flow closest to the
curb.
      (4)   At minimum a 48-inch clear zone for pedestrian traffic shall be
maintained at all times, not including the curb.
      (5)   Tables, chairs, display racks or any other furnishings, shall be
allowed overnight in the area used for the outdoor dining or sidewalk sales
when the restaurant or business is closed. However, umbrellas or temporary
canopies shall be removed upon closing each night. All furniture placed on the
sidewalk shall be suitable for and manufactured for outdoor use and shall be
maintained in good condition.
      (6)   The use of a portion of the public sidewalk for outdoor dining or
sidewalk sales shall not be an exclusive use nor shall it be construed as
authorizing any permanent installation to be placed in the public right-of-way.
All public improvements, including but not limited to, trees, light poles,
traffic signals, pull boxes or manholes, or any public-initiated sidewalk use
and/or maintenance procedures, shall take precedence over said use of the
public sidewalk at all times.
      (7)   No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in the outdoor dining area
except with the appropriate on-sale liquor license issued by the city. The
license holder shall, in addition to all other requirements of law, take
reasonable steps to ensure that alcoholic beverages are consumed only by
patrons of the establishment who are of age, and not by passersby or persons
who are not of age or who are obviously intoxicated, and ensure that alcoholic
beverages served to patrons remain on the licensed premises.
      (8)   No outdoor dining areas or sidewalk sales shall become operational
until the business owner has filed with the city evidence of general liability
insurance covering the restaurant or retail business and the city, its
officers, and employees, against liability imposed by law arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, or operation of such outdoor dining activity in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence. The city shall be named as
additional insured in the policy, providing that such insurance policy may not
be canceled except upon 30 days written notice to the city. A certificate of
insurance shall be provided to the city showing proof that the insurance
requirements have been met. The “Description of Operations” portion of the
certificate must identify and acknowledge the sidewalk area where outdoor
dining or sidewalk sales are being conducted.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 369, passed 10-20-2014; Ord. 408, passed 1-3-
2023)
§ 152.038 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL TRANSITION (LI-CT) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To provide a zoning classification for a mix of
light industrial and commercial uses. The areas included in this district have
traditionally seen light industrial uses but as traffic patterns and business
practices are changing, the demand for industrial uses and appropriate
intensity of the uses in relation to neighboring uses has changed. The intent
of this district is to promote adaptive re-use of older industrial buildings
and prevent blight by allowing a mix of commercial and light industrial uses
that are compatible.
   (B)   Compatibility. The Light Industrial/Commercial Transition (LI-CT)
District is most compatible with and should be established next to the Downtown
Mixed Use (DMU) District.
   (C)   Lot and density. Lot and density requirements shall be the same as
those listed in §
152.037(C) of this chapter.
   (D)   Performance standards. Performance standards shall be the same as
those listed in §
152.037(D) of this chapter.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.039 INDUSTRIAL (I) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To provide a zoning classification for industrial
and heavy commercial uses. Development in this district requires high
automobile accessibility, city sewer and water systems, and municipal storm
water treatment facilities. Industrial districts should be clustered to control
negative impacts of industrial activities and to efficiently facilitate maximum
interaction between industrial and heavy commercial enterprises.
   (B)   Compatibility. The Industrial District is most compatible with and
should be established adjacent to the Highway Commercial (C) District, but in
some circumstances may be compatible with the Downtown Mixed Use (DMU), Urban
Residential (UR) and Urban/Rural Transition Residential (TR) Districts. The
district may not be established in an area where it is completely surrounded by
residential districts.
   (C)   Lot and density requirements.
Buildable lot area - square feet, minimum                  20,000
Building above highest ground water level - feet, minimum  3
Building height - feet, maximum                            45 ft
Impervious surface - percent, maximum                      50%
Lot width - feet, minimum                                  100
Setback, between accessory buildings - feet, minimum       10
Setback, parking from lot line - feet, minimum             10
Setback, rear - feet, minimum                              30
Setback, right-of-way, minimum                             30
Setback, side next to residential district - feet, minimum 30
Setback, side yard - feet, minimum                         30
Setback, sign - feet, minimum                              1
 
   (D)   Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to
all development in this district.
      (1)   Impervious coverage. Impervious coverage may be increased to up to
90% through a conditional use permit on properties where municipal storm water
is available if the following is provided:
         (a)   A vegetation plan for the perimeter of the property that
increases vegetation within the setbacks; and
         (b)   Direct runoff of storm water to adjacent properties and wetlands
shall be eliminated through the use of berms, infiltration ponds, swales,
filtration strips or other permanent means.
      (2)   Compatibility of use. Use shall be compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood. Uses shall not present noise, odor, light nuisances or any other
nuisances.
      (3)   Parking. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided as specified
in §
152.096 of this chapter. On-street parking is not allowed under any
circumstances. In addition, suitable trees and shrubs shall be planted between
parking lots and all adjacent sidewalks, roads, lots and buildings.
      (4)   Lighting. Lighting shall be minimal but sufficient to promote
safety. Lighting shall be downward directional and shall be compatible with the
surrounding development.
      (5)   Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall remain unobstructed at all times.
      (6)   Screening. All sites shall be heavily landscaped to provide 80%
screening to adjacent residential parcels. Percentages shall be determined by
amount of structure that can be seen during leaf-on conditions. A landscaping
and screening plan must be submitted and approved by the Planning Commission
with each conditional use permit.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.040 LAND USE MATRIX.
   (A)   The land use matrix shown in the following table establishes the
allowable, permitted, accessory, conditional and excluded uses within the city.
   (B)   All uses are considered prohibited unless specifically allowed in this
chapter, even if they are not listed specifically under excluded uses.
   (C)   All accessory uses require a permit, and include a principal use on
the parcel, unless otherwise indicated or allowed by the city.
Land Use Matrix
A - Denotes “Allowed without a Permit”
PAC - Denotes “Accessory Use (Permit Required)”
P - Denotes “Allowed use with Permit”
E - Denotes “Excluded Use”
C - Denotes “Conditional Use”
I - Denotes “Interim Use Permit”
Use District
    OS P&R RR TR UR DMU LI-C T C I
Land Use Matrix
A - Denotes “Allowed without a Permit”
PAC - Denotes “Accessory Use (Permit Required)”
P - Denotes “Allowed use with Permit”
E - Denotes “Excluded Use”
C - Denotes “Conditional Use”
I - Denotes “Interim Use Permit”
                                              District
Use                                           OS P&R RR  TR  UR  DMU LI- C  I
                                                                     C T
Abandoned building                            E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  E
Abandoned motor vehicle                       E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  E
Accessory structure                           P  PAC PAC PAC PAC PAC PAC PA PA
                                                                         C  C
Adult use                                     E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  C
Agricultural use                              A  C   C   E   E   E   E   E  E
Airport                                       E  C   E   E   E   E   E   E  C
Animals, domestic                             E  C   A   A   A   A   A   A  A
Animals, farm                                 A  C   A   P   AP  E   E   E  E
Animals, specialty                            E  C   A   A   A   A   A   A  A
Animals, wild                                 A  A   E   E   E   E   E   E  E
Animal boarding facility                      E  E   C   E   E   C   E   C  C
Animal grooming establishment                 E  E   C   C   C   A   A   A  A
Animal husbandry                              E  E   C   P   P   E   E   E  E
Artist’s studio                             E  E   C   C   C   A   A   A  A
Auctions (more than one in a calendar year)   E  C   C   E   E   A   A   A  A
Auto repair facility                          E  E   E   E   E   C   C   C  C
Auto sales                                    E  E   E   E   E   C   C   C  C
Bed and breakfast (in definition state that   E  E   C   C   C   E   E   E  E
this is an accessory use)
Billboards                                    E  E   E   E   E   E   E   P  P
Brew on-premises store (6)                    E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  E
Brew pub (6)                                  E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  E
Brewery, large distributor (6)                E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  C
Brewery, small distributor (6)                E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  C
Campground                                    E  C   C   C   E   E   E   C  E
Cannabis business (7)
   Cannabis cultivation (7)                E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  I
   Cannabis delivery service (7)           E  E   I   I   I   I   I   I  I
   Cannabis manufacturer (7)               E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  I
   Cannabis retailer (7)                   E  E   E   E   E   I   I   I  E
   Cannabis transporter (7)                E  E   E   E   E   E   I   I  I
   Cannabis wholesaler (7)                 E  E   E   E   E   E   E   I  I
   Lower-potency hemp edible manufacturer (E) E   E   E   E   E   E   E  I
   Lower-potency hemp edible retailer (7)  E  E   E   E   E   A   A   A  E
   Temporary cannabis event (7)            E  E   E   E   E   P   E   P  E
Cemetery                                      C  C   C   C   E   E   E   E  E
Child care center                             E  E   E   E   C   C   C   C  E
Child care, family home (definition will      E  E   A   A   A   E   E   E  E
state that this is accessory use)
Church                                        E  E   C   C   C   C   C   P  C
Clinic                                        E  E   C   C   C   P   P   P  P
Community park                                A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A  A
Deck                                          P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P
Distillery (6)                                E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  C
Dwelling, multi-family, 2-4 units             E  E   E   C   P   P   E   E  E
Dwelling, multi-family, 5 units or more       E  E   E   C   C   C   E   C  E
Dwelling, single-family                       E  E   P   P   P   P   E   E  E
Exterior storage                              E  E   E   E   E   E   C   C  E
Feedlot                                       E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  E
Fence                                         P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P
Forest land conversion                        E  E   A   A   A   A   A   A  A
Garage, detached                              E  P   PAC PAC PAC PAC PAC PA PA
                                                                         C  C
                                                 A/P A/P A/P A/P A/P A/P A/ A/P
Grading                                       C  (   (   (   (   (   (   P  (
                                                 3)  3)  3)  3)  3)  3)  (  3)
                                                                         3)
Group care facilities                         E  E   A   A   A   E   E   E  E
Hen chickens                                  E  E   P   P   P   E   E   E  C
Home occupation, Type I                       E  E   A   A   A   A   E   A  E
Home occupation, Type II                      E  E   A   A   A   A   E   A  E
Home occupation, Type III                     E  E   C   C   C   A   E   E  E
Home occupation, Type IV                      E  E   C   C   C   P   E   E  E
Hospital                                      E  E   E   E   E   E   E   P  P
Hotel                                         E  E   E   E   E   P   E   P  E
Industrial use                                E  E   E   E   E   E   P   E  P
Junk yard                                     E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  E
Landfill                                      E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  E
Manufactured home park                        E  E   C   E   C   E   E   E  E
Medical marijuana cultivation facility        E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  C
Medical marijuana dispensary                  E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  C
Microdistillery (6)                           E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  C
Motel                                         E  E   E   E   E   P   E   P  E
Nursery                                       E  E   C   C   E   E   A   A  E
Nursing home                                  E  E   C   C   C   E   E   P  E
Off-street parking                            A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A  A
Office, professional                          E  E   C   C   C   A   A   A  PA
                                                                            C
Patio                                         E  P   PAC PAC PAC PAC PAC PA PA
                                                                         C  C
Pawn shop                                     E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  E
Planned unit development, commercial          E  E   E   E   E   C   C   C  E
Planned unit development, residential         E  E   C   C   C   C   E   C  E
Porch                                         P  P   PAC PAC PAC PAC PAC PA PA
                                                                         C  C
Resort                                        E  E   C   E   E   E   E   C  E
Restaurant                                    E  E   E   E   E   A   E   P  E
Retail use                                    E  E   E   E   E   A   A   A  E
Salvage yard                                  E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  C
                                                                            (1)
Sign, balloon                                 E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  P
Sign, banner                                  E  E   E   E   E   A   A   A  A
Sign, canopy                                  E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  P
Sign, digital display                         E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  P
Sign, directory                               E  C   C   C   C   A   A   A  A
Sign, awning                                  E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  P
Sign, flashing                                E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  P
Sign, marquee                                 E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  P
Sign, neon                                    E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  P
Sign, off-premises                            E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  E
Sign, on-premises                             E  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P
Sign, portable                                E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  E
Sign, projecting                              E  E   E   E   E   P   E   E  E
Sign, pylon                                   E  E   E   E   E   C   P   P  P
Sign, scrolling                               E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  P
Sign, shimmering                              E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  P
Slaughter of animals                          E  E   E   E   E   E   E   C  C
Storage pods                                  E  E   E   E   E   C   P   P  P
Swimming pool, public                         E  C   E   E   E   C   C   C  E
Swimming pool, private (4)                    E  E   P   P   P   E   E   E  E
Taproom (6)                                   E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  C
Tattoo parlor/body piercing                   E  E   E   E   E   A   A   A  E
Telecommunications tower (5)                  E  E   E   E   E   E   E   E  C
Temporary structure                           E  A   A   A   A   A   A   A  A
Tow yard                                      E  E   E   E   E   C   E   E  C
Transition subdivision                        E  E   C   C   E   E   E   E  E
Utility substation                            C  C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C
Water oriented accessory structure or         E  PAC PAC PAC PAC E   E   E  E
facility
Warehousing                                   E  E   E   E   E   E   P   P  P
Warehousing, commercial                       E  E   E   E   E   E   P   P  P
Winemaking on-premises store (6)              E  E   E   E   E   P   P   P  E
Winery, farm (6)                              E  E   P   C   E   E   E   E  E
Winery (6)                                    E  E   E   E   E   C   C   C  C
NOTES TO TABLE:
(1) Screening standards as provided for in § 152.093 of this chapter.
(2) For storage standards, see § 152.092 of this chapter.
(3) For grading standards, see § 152.098 of this chapter.
(4) For pool permit requirements, see § 152.100 of this chapter.
(5) For tower standards, see §§ 152.140 through 152.155. Also, see § 152.059 of
this chapter.
(6) For liquor ordinance standards, see Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances.
(7) For specific cannabis business standards, see Ch. 114 of this code of
ordinances.
 
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 369, passed 10-20-2014; Ord. 372, passed 12-
15-2014; Ord. 393, passed 6-3-2019; Ord. 403, passed 12-6-2021; Ord. 404,
passed 12-6-2021; Ord. 405, passed 4-4-2022; Ord. 406, passed 4-4-2022; Ord.
407, passed 4-4-2022; Ord. 413, passed 12-2-2024; Ord. 418, passed 10-20-2025)
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 152.055 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To establish and maintain districts that overlay
existing zoning district in order to better manage significant areas with
specific needs that cross zoning district boundaries, such as encouraging
growth in areas with existing public facilities or preserving areas with valued
resources and amenities. All sites within an overlay district shall continue to
bear their original zoning, but shall also comply with the provisions of the
overlay district appended.
   (B)   Boundaries. The boundaries are established based on district-specific
criteria and may not be aligned with roads, lot lines or other human-made
boundaries. The boundaries shall be designated on official overlay maps.
Overlay maps are considered part of the Official Zoning Map and are, therefore,
approved and amended following the procedures in §§
152.010 through
152.014 of this chapter.
   (C)   Permits. No subdivision, rezoning, reconstruction, alteration or
addition shall be made to any existing structure, nor shall any additional
structure be constructed upon a site in any overlay district, except in
accordance with the provisions of the applicable overlay district.
   (D)   Districts. The following overlay districts are hereby established:
      (1)   Floodplain Overlay Districts:
         (a)   Floodway District (FW);
         (b)   Flood Fringe District (FF); and
         (c)   General Floodplain District (GF).
      (2)   Mississippi Headwaters Overlay District (MH);
      (3)   Shoreland Overlay District (SH); and
      (4)   Airport Zoning Overlay District (AP).
   (E)   Supremacy. If a provision of an overlay district conflicts with a
provision or provisions of the underlying zoning district, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.056 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Statutory authorization.
      (1)   Responsibility. The legislature of the state has, in M.S. Ch. 103F
and 462, as they may be amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility
to local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses. Therefore, the City Council does ordain as follows.
      (2)   Findings of fact and purpose.
         (a)   This section regulates development in the flood hazard areas of
the city. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which
may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. It is the purpose
of this section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by
minimizing these losses and disruptions.
         (b)   This section is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations
of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. parts 59 through
78, as amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program.
         (c)   This section is also intended to preserve the natural
characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   Maps. This section adopts the floodplain maps applicable to the
city and includes three floodplain districts: Floodway, Flood Fringe and
General Floodplain.
         (a)   Where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are delineated on the
floodplain maps, the standards in divisions (D) or (E) below will apply,
depending on the location of a property.
         (b)   Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are not
delineated on the floodplain maps are considered to fall within the General
Floodplain District. Within the General Floodplain District, the Floodway
District standards in division (D) below apply unless the floodway boundary is
determined, according to the process outlined in division (F) below. Once the
floodway boundary is determined, the Flood Fringe District standards in
division (E) below may apply outside the floodway.
      (2)   Lands to which section applies. This section applies to all lands
within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the
attachments to the map as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway,
Flood Fringe or General Floodplain Districts. The Floodway, Flood Fringe and
General Floodplain Districts are overlay districts that are superimposed on all
existing zoning districts. The standards imposed in the overlay districts are
in addition to any other requirements in this chapter. In case of a conflict,
the more restrictive standards will apply.
      (3)   Incorporation of maps by reference. The following maps together
with all attached material are hereby adopted declared to be a part of the
Official Zoning Map and this chapter. These materials and studies have all been
incorporated into the Floodplain and Shoreland Overlay Zone exhibit prepared by
Bolton & Menk, Inc. and dated November 2015 and shall serve as the exhibit for
the Zoning Administrator to administer the Floodplain and Shoreland Ordinance.
This exhibit is based on FEMA floodplain regulations referenced above and
available online (https://msc.fema.gov/portal).
         (a)   Flood insurance studies:
            1.   City of Aitkin, Minnesota (dated 9-15-1981); and
            2.   Aitkin County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas (dated 2-2-
1996).
         (b)   The currently effective Flood Insurance Rate Map panels
enumerated below:
            1.   City of Aitkin Panel 2700010001B, effective 3-15-1982;
            2.   Aitkin County Panel 2706280240C, effective 2-2-1996;
            3.   Aitkin County Panel 2706280245B, effective 3-15-1982; and
            4.   Aitkin County Panel 2706280325C, effective 2-2-1996.
         (c)   The currently effective Flood Boundary and Floodway Map panels
enumerated below:
            1.   City of Aitkin Panel 2700010001, effective 3-15-1982; and
            2.   Aitkin County Panel 2706280245, effective 3-15-1982.
      (4)   Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood
protection elevation (RFPE) is an elevation no lower than one foot above the
elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused
by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
      (5)   Interpretation.
         (a)   The boundaries of the zoning districts are determined by scaling
distances on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
         (b)   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits
illustrated on the Official Zoning Map and actual field conditions, the flood
elevations shall be the governing factor. The Zoning Administrator must
interpret the boundary location based on the ground elevations that existed on
the site on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing
the area within the regulatory floodplain, and other available technical data.
Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Planning Commission/Board
of Adjustment and to submit technical evidence.
      (6)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this
section to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
other private agreements. However, where this section imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this section prevail. All other ordinances
inconsistent with this section are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
      (7)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. This section does not imply
that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within the
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section does not
create liability on the part of the city or its officers or employees for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
      (8)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
section is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the
remainder of this section shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.
      (9)   Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by
reference into division (B)(3) above may include floodplain areas that lie
outside of the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this
section. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city after
the date of adoption of this section, the newly annexed floodplain lands will
be subject to the provisions of this section immediately upon the date of
annexation.
      (10)   Detachments. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by
reference into division (B)(3) above will include floodplain areas that lie
inside the corporate boundaries of municipalities at the time of adoption of
this section. If any of these floodplain land areas are detached from a
municipality and come under the jurisdiction of the city after the date of
adoption of this section, the newly detached floodplain lands will be subject
to the provisions of this section immediately upon the date of detachment.
   (C)   Establishment of Floodplain Overlay Districts.
      (1)   Districts.
         (a)   Floodway District. The Floodway District includes those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in division (B)
(3) above.
         (b)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District includes those
areas designated as floodway fringe on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in
division (B)(3) above and as illustrated on the Floodplain Exhibit.
         (c)   General Floodplain District. The General Floodplain District
includes those areas designated as Zone A or Zone AE without a floodway on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in division (B)(3) above, and as illustrated
on the Floodplain Exhibit, but not subject to the criteria in divisions (C)(1)
(a) and (C)(1)(b) above.
      (2)   Compliance. Within the floodplain districts established in this
section, the use of any land, the use, size, type and location of structures on
lots, the installation and maintenance of transportation, utility, water supply
and waste treatment facilities, and the subdivision of land must comply with
the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. All uses not listed
as permitted uses or conditional uses in divisions (D), (E) and (F) below,
respectively, are prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
         (a)   New and replacement manufactured homes and certain recreational
vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this section and,
specifically, division (G) below;
         (b)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal
maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing non-conforming
structures and non-conforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the
general provisions of this section and, specifically, division (G) below;
         (c)   All structures must be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
         (d)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood-proofed structures
must be certified by ground surveys and flood-proofing techniques must be
designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as
specified in the general provisions of this section and specifically as stated
in division (G) below; and
         (e)   Critical facilities, as defined in §
152.003(B) of this chapter, are prohibited in all floodplain districts.
   (D)   Floodway District (FW).
      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses, subject to the standards set
forth in division (D)(2) below, are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in the
underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay district:
         (a)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting;
         (b)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas and airport
landing strips;
         (c)   Open space uses, including, but not limited to, private and
public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic
grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and fishing
areas and single or multiple purpose recreational trails;
         (d)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas; and
         (e)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines; provided that, the Department of Natural Resources’ area hydrologist
is notified at least ten days prior to issuance of any permit, and that the
standards in division (D)(4) below are met.
      (2)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.
         (a)   The use must have a low flood damage potential.
         (b)   With the exception of the uses listed in division (D)(1)(e)
above, the use must not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and
must not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
         (c)   Any facility that will be used by employees or the general
public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time
for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the
depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a
product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
      (3)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed as conditional
uses following the standards and procedures set forth in division (G)(4) below
and further subject to the standards set forth in division (D)(4) below if
otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay
district:
         (a)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in division (D)(4)(a)
below and the uses listed in divisions (D)(3)(b) through (D)(3)(g) below;
         (b)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel and other materials;
         (c)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water control
structures;
         (d)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials;
         (e)   Placement of fill or construction of fences that obstruct flood
flows. Farm fences, as defined in §
152.003(B) of this chapter, are permitted uses;
         (f)   Travel-ready recreational vehicles meeting the exception
standards in division (G)(2) below; and
         (g)   Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a
frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency flood event.
      (4)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.
         (a)   All uses. A conditional use must not cause any increase in the
stage of the 1% chance or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages
in the reach or reaches affected.
         (b)   All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures
and standards contained in §§
152.265 through
152.278 of this chapter.
         (c)   The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying
zoning district if one exists.
         (d)   1.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
            2.   Fill, dredge spoil and other similar materials deposited or
stored in the floodplain must be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and gravel
operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site development
plan.
            3.   Temporary placement of fill, other materials or equipment
which would cause an increase to the stage of the 1% chance or regional flood
may only be allowed if the governing body has approved a plan that assures
removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time
available.
         (e)   1.   Accessory structures must not be designed for human
habitation.
            2.   Accessory structures, if permitted, must be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of flood waters:
               a.   Whenever possible, structures must be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
               b.   So far as practicable, structures must be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
            3.   Accessory structures must be elevated on fill or structurally
dry flood-proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing
classifications in the state’s Building Code. All flood-proofed accessory
structures must meet the following additional standards:
               a.   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls; and
               b.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the structure must
be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
flood-proofed.
            4.   As an alternative, an accessory structure may be internally/
wet flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood-proofing classifications in the
state’s Building Code; provided, the accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment and does not exceed 576 square feet in size. A detached garage may
only be used for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All structures must
meet the following standards.
               a.   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure,
there must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure, with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and, so far as practicable,
structures must be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those
of adjoining structures.
               b.   There must be openings on at least two sides of the
structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above
the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a
garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic
openings.
            5.   Structural works for flood control that will change the
course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters are
subject to the provisions of M.S. § 103G.245, as it may be amended from time to
time.
            6.   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway must
not cause an increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The technical
analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a
stream.
            7.   Floodway developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system.
   (E)   Flood Fringe District (FF).
      (1)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures
allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in
division (E)(2) below. If no pre-existing, underlying zoning districts exist,
then any residential or non-residential structure or use of a structure or land
is a permitted use; provided, it does not constitute a public nuisance.
      (2)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.
         (a)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated
on fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures must be
no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
fill must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside
limits of the structure.
            1.   All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or
water-tight to prevent infiltration of flood waters.
            2.   As an alternative to elevation on fill, an accessory structure
that constitutes a minimal investment and that does not exceed 576 square feet
in size may be internally flood-proofed in accordance with division (D)(4)(e)
above.
         (b)   The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a parcel
must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is specifically intended to
elevate a structure in accordance with division (E)(2)(a) above, or if allowed
as a conditional use under division (E)(3)(c) below.
         (c)   The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated on
fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
         (d)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         (e)   Fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
         (f)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or
above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation, or must have a flood warning/emergency evacuation plan acceptable to
the city.
         (g)   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks and parking lots
may be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation.
However, any facilities used by employees or the general public must be
designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet)
multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four
upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
         (h)   Interference with normal manufacturing/industrial plant
operations must be minimized, especially along streams having protracted flood
durations. In considering permit applications, due consideration must be given
to the needs of industries with operations that require a floodplain location.
         (i)   Flood fringe developments must not adversely affect the
hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system.
         (j)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the
standards of division (G) below.
      (3)   Conditional uses. The following uses and activities may be allowed
as conditional uses, if allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) or any
applicable overlay district, following the procedures in division (G)(4) below.
Conditional uses must meet the standards in divisions (E)(2)(d) through (E)(2)
(j) above and division (E)(4) below.
         (a)   Any non-residential structure that is not elevated on fill or
flood-proofed in accordance with division (E)(2)(a) above.
         (b)   Storage of any material or equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
         (c)   The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill
when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with
division (E)(2)(a) above.
      (4)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.
         (a)   The standards listed in divisions (E)(2)(d) through (E)(2)(j)
above apply to all conditional uses.
         (b)   Basements, as defined by §
152.003(B) of this chapter, are subject to the following.
            1.   Residential basement construction is not allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
            2.   Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation; provided, the basement is structurally dry flood-
proofed in accordance with division (E)(4)(d) below.
         (c)   All areas of non-residential structures, including basements, to
be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation must be flood-proofed
in accordance with the structurally dry flood-proofing classifications in the
state’s Building Code. Structurally dry flood-proofing must meet the FP-1 or
FP-2 flood-proofing classification in the state’s Building Code, which requires
making the structure water-tight with the walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures wet
flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification are not permitted.
         (d)   The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other
similar material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of elevating a
structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must comply with an
approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.
            1.   The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize
the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional (1% chance)
flood event.
            2.   The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the city.
            3.   The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of
the material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
         (e)   Storage of materials and equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation must comply with an approved emergency plan providing for
removal of the materials within the time available after a flood warning.
         (f)   1.   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill
may be utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of
stilts, pilings, parallel walls and the like, or above-grade, enclosed areas
such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed
area shall be considered above-grade and not a structures basement or lowest
floor if:
               a.   The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of
the structure;
               b.   It is designed to internally flood and is constructed with
flood resistant materials; and
               c.   It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards.
                  i.   Design and certification. The structure’s design and as-
built condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as being in compliance with the general design standards of the
state’s Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be
designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within these
components during times of flooding.
                  ii.   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed areas.
Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages
must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
                     (A)   The minimum area of openings in the walls where
internal flooding is to be used as a flood-proofing technique. There shall be a
minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The automatic
openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered
professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would
suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves
or other coverings or devices; provided that, they permit the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters without any form of human intervention; and
                     (B)   The enclosed area will be designed of flood
resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the
state’s Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of
vehicles or storage.
   (F)   General Floodplain District (GF).
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   The uses listed in division (D)(1) above are permitted uses.
         (b)   All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe
evaluation criteria specified in division (F)(2) below. Division (D) above
applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Floodway District.
Division (E) above applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Flood
Fringe.
      (2)   Procedures for floodway and flood fringe determinations.
         (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval
within the General Floodplain District, the Zoning Administrator must obtain,
review and reasonably utilize any regional flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source.
         (b)   If regional flood elevation and floodway data are not readily
available, the applicant must furnish additional information, as needed, to
determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed
use would fall within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District. Information must
be consistent with accepted hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards
and the standards in division (F)(2)(c) below.
         (c)   The determination of floodway and flood fringe must include the
following components, as applicable:
            1.   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional (1% chance) flood;
            2.   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood
based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas; and
            3.   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage
increase than one-half foot is required if, as a result of the stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both
sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing floodway
boundaries.
         (d)   The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information
and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood
Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of
previous floodway encroachments. The Zoning Administrator may seek technical
assistance from a designated engineer or other expert person or agency,
including the Department of Natural Resources. Based on this assessment, the
Zoning Administrator may approve or deny the application.
         (e)   Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been
determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the permit application
consistent with the applicable provisions of divisions (D) and (E) above.
   (G)   Land development standards.
      (1)   In general. Recognizing that flood-prone areas may exist outside of
the designated floodplain districts, the requirements of this section apply to
all land within the city.
      (2)   Subdivisions. No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for
reasons of flooding or inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are considered subdivisions under this chapter.
         (a)   All lots within the floodplain districts must be able to contain
a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision
and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the
regulatory flood protection elevation, unless a flood warning emergency plan
for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional (1%
chance) flood has been approved by the governing body. The plan must be
prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, and must
demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation.
         (c)   For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
required elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
         (d)   In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the
information required in division (F)(2) above to determine the regional flood
elevation, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory
flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.
         (e)   If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is
in a flood-prone area, any such proposal must be reviewed to assure that:
            1.   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage within the flood-prone area;
            2.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
            3.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood
hazard.
      (3)   Building sites. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone
area, all new construction and substantial improvements (including the
placement of manufactured homes) must be:
         (a)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage;
         (c)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
and
         (d)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      (4)   Utilities, railroads, roads and bridges public utilities. All
public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer and water supply
systems to be located in the floodplain must be flood-proofed in accordance
with the state’s Building Code or elevated to the regulatory flood protection
elevation.
      (5)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads and
bridges to be located within the floodplain must comply with divisions (D) and
(E) above. These transportation facilities must be elevated to the regulatory
flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of these facilities
would result in danger to the public health or safety or where the facilities
are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads
or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or
safety.
      (6)   On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems. Where public
utilities are not provided:
         (a)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
         (b)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they must not be subject
to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment
system designed in accordance with the state’s current statewide standards for
on-site sewage treatment systems is considered to be in compliance with this
section.
      (7)   Manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and recreational
vehicles.
         (a)   Manufactured homes. New manufactured home parks and expansions
to existing manufactured home parks are prohibited in any floodplain district.
For existing manufactured home parks or lots of record, the following
requirements apply.
            1.   Placement or replacement of manufactured home units is
prohibited in the Floodway District.
            2.   If allowed in the Flood Fringe District, placement or
replacement of manufactured home units is subject to the requirements of
division (E) above and the following standards.
               a.   New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in
compliance with division (E) above and must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
               b.   New or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for
subdivisions in division (G)(2) above.
         (b)   Recreational vehicles. New recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are prohibited in any floodplain district. Placement of
recreational vehicles in existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds in
the floodplain must meet the exemption criteria below or be treated as new
structures meeting the requirements of this section.
            1.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this
section if they are placed in any of the following areas and meet the criteria
listed in division (G)(7)(b)2. below:
               a.   Individual lots or parcels of record;
               b.   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds; and
               c.   Existing condominium-type associations.
            2.   Criteria for exempt recreational vehicles:
               a.   The vehicle must have a current license required for
highway use;
               b.   The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks;
               c.   No permanent structural type additions may be attached to
the vehicle;
               d.   The vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any
pre-existing, underlying zoning district;
               e.   Accessory structures are not permitted within the Floodway
District. Any accessory structure in the Flood Fringe District must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials and be securely anchored, meeting the
requirements applicable to manufactured homes in division (G)(7)2.b.; and
               f.   An accessory structure must constitute a minimal investment
            3.   Recreational vehicles that are exempt in division (G)(7)2.b.
above lose this exemption when development occurs on the site that exceeds a
minimal investment for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage
building. The recreational vehicle and all accessory structures will then be
treated as new structures subject to the elevation and flood-proofing
requirements of division (E) above. No development or improvement on the parcel
or attachment to the recreational vehicle is allowed that would hinder the
removal of the vehicle should flooding occur.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.057 MISSISSIPPI HEADWATERS OVERLAY (MH) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   This section is intended to control development along the
Mississippi River in areas which, prior to their annexation, were subject to
the county’s Mississippi Headwaters Ordinance.
      (2)   This section is intended to regulate the lot area, length of lot,
lot width at the waterline, setback of structures, sewage treatment systems,
structure height and to protect the quality of the Mississippi River and
shorelines, its vegetation, soils, water quality, floodplain areas and geology;
and to regulate alterations of the shoreland vegetation and topography;
maintain property values and prevent uncontrolled or poorly planned
development; protect and conserve the historic, recreational, archaeological,
cultural, fish and wildlife resources of the Mississippi River and adjacent
lands.
      (3)   This section is also intended to comply with M.S. § 103F.221,
Municipal Shoreland Management, as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and intended to comply with M.S. §§
103F.361 to 103F.377, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   The segment of the Mississippi River flowing through the city is
classified by the Mississippi Headwaters Board as “scenic”. The scenic
classification has a corridor width of 500 feet from both sides of the
Mississippi River.
      (2)   This overlay shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of
city shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments thereto as being
located within the boundaries of the Mississippi Headwaters Overlay District
(MH). The district boundaries are generally defined as including the land area
starting from the ordinary high-water mark (OHW) of the Mississippi River and
proceeding landward 500 feet.
      (3)   All lands falling within the designated Mississippi Headwaters
Corridor that are annexed into the city after the effective date of this
chapter shall thereafter be governed by the standards and provisions of this
overlay district.
      (4)   No structure or land shall be used within the MHB Overlay, except
those uses and accessory uses permitted within the MHB Overlay.
   (C)   Building standards for the Mississippi Headwaters Corridor for lots of
record in the office of the County Recorder as of 1-1-1981.
      (1)   Minimum setbacks and lot widths for lots of record in the office of
the County Recorder as of 1-1-1981, within any zoning classification in the
Mississippi Headwaters Corridor:
 
Lot width at OHW and building line        150 feet
Maximum impervious coverage               25%
Maximum structure height, except churches 25 feet
Structure setback from OHW                100 feet
Structure setback from top of bluff       30 feet
 
      (2)   Annexed property shall be serviced by city sewer and water systems
immediately upon annexation.
      (3)   Where there is a conflict between setback requirements within this
section, the most restrictive setback requirements shall apply.
      (4)   Conditional use permits for substandard lots of record as of 1-1-
1981 in any zoning district in the Mississippi Headwaters Corridor.
         (a)   Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder as of 1-1-
1981, which do not meet the requirements of this section, may be allowed as
building sites if the use if allowed within the underlying zoning district; the
lot has been in single and separate ownership for abutting lands at all times
since 1-1-1981; was created compliant with official controls in effect at the
time; and sewage treatment and setback requirements of shoreland control were
met.
         (b)   If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same
ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of this section,
the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of
development. The lot must be combined with the one or more contiguous lots so
they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the requirements of this
section.
         (c)   Additions to structures on substandard lots of record in the
office of the County Recorder as of 1-1-1981 may be permitted under a
conditional use permit.
         (d)   Substandard lots may be used as a building site under a
conditional use permit; however conditional use permits for substandard lots
are not permitted if they increase the non-conformity of the lot. Conditional
use permits shall not be granted for any land that is designated as wetlands.
         (e)   In granting a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission
shall give consideration to the following:
            1.   Mitigation of impacts to water quality and the environment;
            2.   Storm water management including direction and flow of
drainage and storm water retention areas;
            3.   Connection to city sewer and water systems is required;
            4.   Preparation of a natural landscape protection plan which
shows, among other things, shoreline restoration, side yard plantings,
reduction in tree removal; and
            5.   Shoreline maintenance plan which is approved by the state’s
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) or which is composed exclusively of
plantings approved by the state’s DNR.
   (D)   Minimum standards for new plats or subdivisions of existing lots of
record in the office of the County Recorder as of 1-1-1981. Minimum standards
for new plats or subdivisions of existing lots of record in the office of the
County Recorder as of 1-1-1981 shall be one acre, excluding wetlands. City
sewer and water systems must be utilized where available.
      (1)   The minimum lot requirements for a new plat or subdivision of an
existing lot of record in the office of the County Recorder as of 1-1-1981, in
addition to a 50-foot vegetative buffer zone extending landward from the OHW:
 
Lot size, buildable area, acres, minimum  1
Lot width at OHW and building line        125 feet
Maximum impervious coverage               25%
Maximum structure height, except churches 25 feet
Structure setback from OHW                100 feet
Structure setback from top of bluff       30 feet
 
      (2)   A natural landscape protection plan and storm water management plan
must be prepared and approved in connection with any new development. A natural
landscape protection plan must be designed with native vegetation to ensure
bank stability, provide natural migration corridors for wildlife, birds and
insects, as well as shading for fish habitat.
      (3)   New subdivisions governed by this section will be encouraged to
include a system of trails and open space of at least 10% that will enhance the
ability of the public to view and enjoy the Mississippi River and will provide
connections to other open spaces and trails in the area and will be
incorporated into the storm water management plan. Use of wetlands to enhance
trails and open spaces will also be encouraged. Retention ponds are required
for storm water runoff to the Mississippi River.
   (E)   Minimum standards for all Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Zoning
Districts.
      (1)   Natural Landscape Protection Plan (NLPP). Before issuing a permit
for expansion of a structure or new construction, a natural landscape
protection plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city in compliance
with this section. Criteria for the NLPP includes considerations for soil
types, vegetation removal/restoration, erosion control before, during and after
construction, the construction and maintenance of the 50-foot vegetative
buffer.
      (2)   Significant cultural sites.
         (a)   Unplatted cemetery. No structure shall be placed nearer than 50
feet from the boundary of an unplatted cemetery or of a significant cultural
site protected under M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (b)   Significant cultural sites. No structure shall be placed on a
significant cultural site in a manner that affects the value of the site unless
adequate information about the site has been recovered and documented in a
public repository as determined by the city and the state’s Historical Society.
         (c)   Review for presence of significant cultural sites. All zoning
actions within the MHB Overlay District will be reviewed for the presence of
significant historical or cultural sites. Thirty days’ notice will be made to
the state’s Historical Society of pending development on or near significant
cultural sites.
      (3)   Bluff impact zone. Structures and accessory structures or
facilities, except stairways, lifts and landings, shall not be placed within
bluff impact zones or shore impact zones.
      (4)   Steep slopes. Before issuing a permit for the construction of
roads, driveways, structures or other improvements on steep slopes, the slope
must be evaluated for possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility
from public waters. The city will impose conditions to prevent erosion,
preserve existing vegetative screening of structures, assuming summer leaf-on
vegetation, as cost effective preventative measures to maintain the river
amenity and decrease the cited contamination in this stretch for turbidity,
threat to aquatic life, swimming and other potentially harmful results of poor
management practices. No excavation shall be made between the building line and
the water.
      (5)   Stairways, lifts and landings.
         (a)   Stairway and lift width. Stairways and lifts shall not exceed
four feet in width on residential zoned lots. Wider stairways may be used for
resort properties, public open space and recreational properties.
         (b)   Landing area. Landings for stairways and lifts on residential
zoned lots shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
         (c)   Construction requirements. Stairways, lifts and landings may be
either placed into the ground or constructed above the ground on posts or
pilings; provided that, they are designed and built in a manner that ensures
control of soil erosion.
         (d)   Visibility minimized. Stairways, lifts and landings shall be
located to minimize their visibility from public waters, assuming summer, leaf-
on conditions.
         (e)   Canopies or roofs. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on
stairways, lifts or landings.
         (f)   Handicap access. Facilities that provide access to shore areas
for physically disabled persons are allowed; provided that, the dimensional and
performance standards of this section are met.
      (6)   Decks. Decks not meeting the minimum structure setback requirement
existing on 1-1-1981, may be added to; provided, the following criteria are
met:
         (a)   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water mark does
not exceed 15% of the existing shoreline setback from the ordinary high water
mark or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive;
and
         (b)   The deck is constructed primarily of untreated wood and is not
roofed or screened.
      (7)   Commercial and industrial uses.
         (a)   No new commercial, business or industrial uses shall be
permitted within any Mississippi Headwaters Zoning District, except for home
occupations permitted by conditional use permit, and congregate living or
foster care homes permitted by law. Home occupations must be of a nature that
does not threaten water quality (i.e., salvage yards, automotive repair or
other uses where potential for hazardous spills may permeate sandy soils and
migrate to river waters). No waste oil pits or below ground storage, or above
ground storage of potentially harmful measures are allowed, nor home
occupations where these substances may be used or stored, nor any other uses
which may not further the goals of the Mississippi River Headwaters Plan.
         (b)   Non-conforming commercial, business or industrial uses in
existence prior to their incorporation into any Mississippi Headwaters Zoning
District may be continued. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or
altered in a way which increases its non-conformity. The City Council shall
consider whether any detrimental impacts to water quality and the environment
can be mitigated. In considering mitigation, the Council shall consider such
factors as the direction of gutters to storm sewers, limitation of direct
drainage into the Mississippi River, side yard plantings, reduction of tree
removal, correction of a failing individual sewage treatment system, decrease
in impervious area on site, shoreline maintenance pursuant to a plan approved
by the Department of Natural Resources or plantings approved by the Department
of Natural Resources to approve fish or wildlife habitat.
      (8)   Municipal services city ordinance provisions. All lands within any
Mississippi Headwaters Zoning District shall be subject to the city ordinance
provisions relating to the public water service and public sewerage service
shall be serviced by city sewer and water systems.
      (9)   Docks. Docks may be built in compliance with the state’s Department
of Natural Resources regulations.
      (10)   Maintenance. A maintenance regime for structures and roads in
subdivisions, with financial assurances as needed, is required.
   (F)   Natural landscape protection plan.
      (1)   Requirement:
         (a)   To protect water quality and prevent shoreline erosion, a
natural landscape protection plan shall be completed and reviewed, consistent
with the provisions of this section; and
         (b)   All existing structures are required to construct or maintain a
minimum of a ten-foot natural vegetative buffer.
      (2)   The purpose of a natural landscape protection plan is to:
         (a)   Retain or recreate original hydrologic conditions by minimizing
use of pavements and impervious surfaces and retaining original runoff volume
and velocities;
         (b)   Confine development and construction activities to the least
critical areas by avoiding critical areas such as long, steep slopes, erodible
soils and fragile vegetation;
         (c)   Fit development to terrain;
         (d)   Preserve and utilize the natural drainage system;
         (e)   Maintain a minimum of 50-foot chemically untreated vegetative
buffer zone at the water's edge, as required in this section;
         (f)   Alteration of vegetation and topography should be limited to
prevention of erosion into public waters, fixation of nutrients, stabilization
of shorelines, preservation of historic, archeological or cultural values,
prevention of bank slumping, protection of fish and wildlife habitat and
conservation of natural resources; and
         (g)   The landscape plan should be planned and conducted in a manner
that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion
potential and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be
stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to
retain sediment on site.
   (G)   Storm water management plans in Mississippi Headwaters Corridor.
      (1)   Consideration. Proper storm water management must be considered in
all reviews, approvals and permits related to this section. A storm water
management plan shall be submitted with any application.
      (2)   Review provisions. The following provisions shall be considered in
reviewing proper storm water management.
         (a)   Natural features to be used. Existing natural drainage ways,
wetlands and vegetated soils must be used to convey, store, filter and retain
storm water runoff before discharge to public waters.
         (b)   Constructed facilities may be used. When development density,
topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to
adequately handle storm water runoff using natural features and vegetation,
various types of constructed facilities such a diversions, settling basins,
skimming devices, dikes, waterways and ponds may be used. Preference must be
given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation and infiltration rather
than buried pipes and human-made material and facilities. Holding structures
must be designed and approved by a licensed engineer.
         (c)   Minimize disturbance. Development must be planned and conducted
in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff
velocities, erosion potential and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed
areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or
methods used to retain sediment on site.
         (d)   New development or expanded development. New development must
meet the following standards.
            1.   Impervious surface coverage of the lot must not exceed 15% of
total area.
            2.   Facilities constructed for storm water management must be
consistent with the Department of Natural Resources field office technical
guide, which is located at the county’s Soil and Water Conservation Service
District Office.
            3.   Storm water outfalls to the Mississippi River must provide for
filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before
discharge.
            4.   A natural landscape protection site plan must be prepared to
guide construction and lot development in accordance with this section.
   (H)   Issues addressed by the natural landscape protection plan and the
storm water management plan. In achieving their purpose, the natural landscape
protection plan and the storm water management plan shall address the following
issues:
      (1)   Topography. A topographic map showing the existing contour
elevations at intervals of ten feet is the basis of the natural landscape
protection plan. It is important to note slope steepness and slope length on
this map. The longer and the steeper the slope, the greater the erosion
potential;
      (2)   Drainage patterns. Locate and clearly mark all existing drainage
swales and patterns on the topographic map. Consider where water will
concentrate on the property. Natural drainage areas are overland flows,
depressions, swales and natural watercourses. The natural drainage should be
used to convey runoff on and off the site, but increased runoff should be
limited so erosion does not occur;
      (3)   Soils. Determine and show major soil types on the topographic map.
Plot directly on the map at the same scale for ease of interpretation. Soil
types should be evaluated for potential for flood hazard, natural drainage,
depth to seasonal water table, permeability, shrink-swell potential, texture
and erodibility;
      (4)   Ground cover. Show the existing vegetation on the topographic map.
Features such as tree clusters, grassy areas and unique vegetation should be
shown on the map. Any denuded or exposed soil areas should also be shown on the
topographic map. If at all possible, existing vegetation should be maintained
to minimize erosion. If existing vegetation cannot be maintained, then
construction should be staged, (one site completed before the second is begun),
to minimize erosion. Alternatives are temporary seeding, mulching or temporary
structure controls, such as settling basins, silt fences or bale dams. A
vegetative buffer of natural grasses, shrubs and trees should be maintained for
at least 25 feet at the waters edge. This buffer zone helps protect water
quality, provide habitat for wildlife and maintains the natural aesthetics of
the shoreline; and
      (5)   Adjacent areas. Delineate areas adjacent to the site on the
topographic map. Such features as streams, roads, houses or other buildings and
wooded areas should be shown. Streams which will receive runoff from the site
should be noted. Consider the potential for increased runoff during the
construction and where the runoff will go.
   (I)   Accessory uses within Mississippi Headwaters Corridor. All accessory
uses must meet or exceed structure setback standards. The term “accessory
uses”, as used herein, does not include stairways, lifts and docks. The
following standards must also be met.
      (1)   The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails. The structure or facility cannot occupy an area
greater than 250 square feet, or, if used solely for watercraft storage,
including storage of related boating and water-oriented sporting equipment, may
occupy an area up to 400 square feet; provided, the maximum width of the
structure is 20 feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the
shoreline. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above grade at any point.
      (2)   The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high
water mark shall not be less than the setback from the principal structure.
      (3)   The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as
viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks, color or other means.
      (4)   The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be
enclosed or used as a storage area.
      (5)   The accessory use must not be designed or used for human habitation
and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
   (J)   Shoreland alteration within the Mississippi Headwaters Corridor.
      (1)   Purpose. Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated
to prevent erosion to public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland
aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, preserve a
corridor for movement of wildlife, protect fish and wildlife habitat, conserve
cultural resources and to preserve the scenic and aesthetic character of the
shoreland within the Mississippi Headwaters Corridor.
      (2)   Vegetative management provisions.
         (a)   Intensive vegetation clearing. Intensive vegetation clearing
within the OHW setback and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not
allowed.
         (b)   Alteration. Shoreland alteration should avoid negative impacts,
such as use of steep slopes; increased soil erosion; development visibility;
preservation of existing vegetative screening from the Mississippi River,
assuming summer leaf-on conditions; avoidance of wetlands; avoidance of
excavation between the building line and the Mississippi River; avoidance of
intensive vegetative clearing within the OHW setback; shading of water surfaces
should be maintained or enhanced; limitation of impermeable material to no more
than 15% of the building site; management of long-lived species along the river
front shall be directed toward promotion of large sized trees by using
rotations based on biological age rather than economic age; cuttings shall be
conducted in compliance with a natural landscape protection plan and best
management practices.
         (c)   Limited clearing. In setback areas and bluff impact zones and on
steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning and
trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal
dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways, landings and
access paths; provided that:
            1.   The screening of structures, vehicles or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer leaf-on conditions, is maintained;
            2.   Shading of water surfaces is maintained; and
            3.   The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
trees, limbs or branches that are dead, diseased or pose safety hazards.
   (K)   Grading, filling, alterations in the bed of public waters within the
Mississippi Headwaters Corridor.
      (1)   Permit required. Any grading or filling work done within the
Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Districts, controlled by this section, shall
require a permit and shall comply with the following.
         (a)   Grading and filling of the natural topography which is not
accessory to a permitted or conditional use may be permitted if consistent with
the natural landscape protection plan.
         (b)   Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory
to a permitted or conditional use shall not be conducted without a grading and
filling permit. A grading and filling permit may be issued only if the
following conditions of division (K)(2) below are met. Grading and filling
shall be performed in a manner which minimizes earth moving, erosion, storm
water runoff, tree clearing and the destruction of natural amenities.
Excavation on lots abutting the Mississippi River shall not be permitted
between the building line and the ordinary high-water mark.
      (2)   Grading and filling standards. Grading and filling of the natural
topography shall also meet the following standards.
         (a)   A one-time permit of ten cubic yards of fill material shall be
allowed. Additional grading and filling work within the Mississippi Headwaters
Corridor shall require a conditional use permit and shall comply with the
following best management practices:
            1.   The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a
period of time as feasible;
            2.   Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used until a
permanent ground cover, such as sod, is planted;
            3.   Methods to prevent erosion and to trap sediment are employed;
            4.   Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards;
            5.   Fill or excavated material is not placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope;
            6.   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes is
reviewed by a licensed engineer for continued slope stability and in no case
may create finished slopes of 30% or greater;
            7.   Fill or excavated materials are not placed within bluff impact
zones; and
            8.   Disturbed areas are restored in the same building season.
         (b)   Applications for an activity within the Mississippi Headwaters
Corridor will be considered if there are no outstanding violations on the
property or by the applicant.
      (3)   Altering current or cross-section of public waters. Excavation of
materials from, filling in construction of any permanent structures or
navigational obstructions, or any work that will change or diminish the course,
current or cross-section of the Mississippi River is prohibited unless
authorized by a permit from the Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources or the Army Corps of Engineers.
      (4)   Drainage, filling or banking of wetlands.
         (a)   Drainage or filling in of wetlands is not allowed within the
Mississippi Headwaters Corridor under this section. The county is the local
government unit for wetland activities that occur in the county. Any draining
or filling of wetlands must be approved by the Wetland Technical Evaluation
Panel (TEP) and the county. The county will further consult with the Department
of Natural Resources and the Army Corps of Engineers.
         (b)   Wetland banking that is allowed by variance due to a hardship
should be conducted in the Upper Mississippi River Corridor in order to benefit
the river.
   (L)   Cooperative efforts.
      (1)   The city cooperates with the county’s Soil and Water Conservation
District in working with the River Watch Program to monitor river water
quality.
      (2)   The city participates in the River Defense Network in order to
actively prevent contamination of the river by spills.
      (3)   Periodic water quality monitoring will occur to determine the
success of the program or to identify improvements needed.
   (M)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a violation against a major potable water supply and protected waters
of the state and is subject to the penalties provided within §§
152.009 and
152.999  of this chapter.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 394, passed 8-5-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.058 SHORELAND OVERLAY (SH) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. The Shoreland Overlay District (SH) is
adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in M.S. Ch. 103F,
as it may be amended from time to time, Minn. Rules parts 6120.2500 through
6120.3900 and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Ch. 462, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the city affects the
public health, safety and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution
of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in
the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare to provide for the
wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public waters. The
legislature of the state has delegated responsibility to local governments of
the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of the shorelands of
public waters and, thus, preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters,
conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands and
provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources. This
responsibility is hereby recognized by the city.
   (C)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of this overlay district shall apply to
the shorelands which includes all lands within 300 feet from the ordinary high
water mark of any river or stream and 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water
mark of a lake, pond or flowage, or the landward extend of floodplain
designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The outer
boundary shall generally following property lines and road centerlines, and as
shown on the Shoreland Overlay District Map contained in this chapter.
   (D)   Shoreland classification system. The public waters of the city include
the following:
      (1)   Ripple River.
         (a)   Forested from confluence with Mississippi River to the southern
boundary of the NE quarter of the SW quarter of S24-T47N-R27W.
         (b)   Urban from southern boundary of NE quarter of the SW quarter of
S24-T47N-R27W to western boundary of the NE quarter of the NE quarter of S26-
T47N-R27W.
         (c)   Forested from the western boundary of the NE quarter of the NE
quarter of S26-47N-27W to the western boundary of the NE quarter of the SE
quarter of S26-T47N-R27W.
         (d)   Urban from the western boundary of the NE quarter of the SE
quarter of S26-T47N-R27W to the southern boundary of the SW quarter of the SW
quarter of S25-T47N-R27W, 2018 city side only (county side is forested).
         (e)   Forested from southern boundary of the SW quarter of the SW
quarter of S25-T47N-27W to southern boundary of S36-T47N-R27W forested.
      (2)   Unnamed stream. Tributary from S36-T47N-R27W to S1-T46N-27W; and
      (3)   The Mississippi River is also a public water, but the shorelands of
this river shall follow the guidelines provided in the Mississippi Headwaters
Overlay District (MH) contained in §
152.057 of this chapter.
Land uses Forested Urban Tributary Scenic
Land uses                                                        Forested Urban Tributary Scenic
Single residential                                               P        P     P         P
Duplex, triplex, quad residential                                P        P     P         P
Residential PUD                                                  C        C     C         C
Water-dependent commercial - as accessory to a residential       C        C     C         C
planned unit development
Commercial                                                       C        P     P         P
Commercial PUD - limited expansion of a commercial PUDs
involving up to six additional dwelling units or sites may be    C        C     C         C
allowed as a permitted use provided the provisions of § 152.071
are satisfied
Guest quarters                                                   N        N     N         N
Controlled access lots                                           N        N     N         N
Parks and historic sites                                         C        C     C         C
Public, semipublic                                               C        P     P         C
Industrial                                                       C        C     C         C
Agricultural: crop land and pasture                              P        P     P         P
Agricultural feedlots - new                                      N        N     N         N
Agricultural feedlots - expansion or resumption of existing      C        C     C         C
Forest management                                                C        C     C         P
Forest land conversion                                           C        C     C         C
Extractive use                                                   N        N     N         N
Mining of metallic minerals and peat                             N        N     N         N
 
   (E)   Lot area and lot width standards. The lot area (in square feet) and
the lot width standards (in feet) for single, duplex, triplex and quad
residential lots are as follows.
      (1)   Lot area. The required minimum lot area of the underlying zoning
district shall apply.
      (2)   Lot width. Lots shall meet the lot width standards contained herein
both at the OHW and at the building line. The following lot width standards
shall apply:
 
                      Forested Urban and tributary
                               No sewer Sewer
Single                200      100      75
Duplex                300      150      115
Triplex               400      200      150
Quad                  500      250      190
Commercial/Industrial 100      100      100
 
   (F)   Setbacks. Placement of structures and sewage treatment systems on
lots. When more than one setback applies to a site, structures and facilities
must be located to meet all setbacks, and comply with the following OHWL
setback provisions:
 
                                Structures Structures Sewage Treatment System
                                No Sewer   Sewer
Forested                        150        150        100
Urban                           100        50         75
Right-of-way-of local streets   20         20         20
Right-of-way of state or county 50         50         50
highway
Top of bluff                    30         30         30
Unplatted cemetery              50         50         50
 
   (G)   Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory structures or facilities,
except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within bluff impact zones.
   (H)   Design criteria for development within the SH Overlay District.
      (1)   High water elevations. Properties elevations shall comply with
floodplain ordinance minimum elevations located in §
152.056(B)(3) of this chapter. In the absence of floodplain data, structures
shall be placed with the lowest floor of the structure at least three feet
above the flood of record, if data are available. If data are not available,
structures must be placed with the lowest floor at least three feet above the
OHW or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine effects of the
proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flows and to establish a
flood protection elevation. All such technical evaluations, regardless of
approach, shall be performed by a qualified licensed engineer or hydrologist
consistent with Minn. Rules parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200 governing the
management of floodplain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest
protection elevation determined must be used for placing structures and other
facilities.
      (2)   Stairways, lifts and landings. Stairways and lifts are the
preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up
and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet
the following design requirements.
         (a)   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public
open-space recreational properties and planned unit developments.
         (b)   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not
exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used
for commercial properties, public open-space recreational properties and
planned unit developments.
         (c)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or
landings.
         (d)   Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed above
the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground; provided, they are
designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.
         (e)   Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.
         (f)   Facilities such as ramps, lifts or mobility paths for physically
handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas;
provided that, the dimensional and performance standards of divisions (H)(2)(a)
to (H)(2)(e) above are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minn.
Rules Ch. 1341.
      (3)   Significant historical sites. No structure may be placed on a
significant historical site in a manner that affects the values of the site
unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a
public repository.
      (4)   Steep slopes. The City Engineer shall evaluate possible soil
erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters prior to the
issuance of a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads,
driveways, structures or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined
necessary, conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and
to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles and other
facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-
on vegetation.
      (5)   Height of structures. All structures in residential districts,
except churches and non-residential agricultural structures, must not exceed 25
feet in height.
   (I)   Shoreland alterations. Alterations of vegetation and topography shall
be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve
shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping and
protect fish and wildlife habitat.
      (1)   Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures
and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas
regulated by division (K) below are exempt from the vegetation alteration
standards that follow.
      (2)   Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural uses
as regulated in division (N) below is allowed subject to the following
standards.
         (a)   Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact
zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for
forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is allowable as a
conditional use if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and
approved by the soil and water conservation district in which the property is
located.
         (b)   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning and trimming of trees is
allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to
accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access
paths, livestock watering areas, beach and watercraft access areas and
permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities; provided that:
            1.   The screening of structures, vehicles or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not
substantially reduced;
            2.   Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved;
and
            3.   The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
trees, limbs or branches that are dead, diseased or pose safety hazards.
   (J)   Topographic alterations/grading and filling.
      (1)   Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction
of structures, sewage treatment systems and driveways under validly issued
construction permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of a
separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and filling standards
in this section must be incorporated into the issuance of permits for
construction of structures, sewage treatment systems and driveways.
      (2)   Public roads and parking areas are regulated by division (K) below.
      (3)   Notwithstanding divisions (J)(1) and (J)(2) above, a grading and
filling permit will be required for:
         (a)   The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on steep
slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and
         (b)   The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of
steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.
      (4)   The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to
during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits,
conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals.
         (a)   The grading, filling or alteration of a wetland shall be
prohibited unless approved by the state or federal authorities in cases where
no other alternatives exist for development.
         (b)   Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that
ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest
time possible.
         (c)   Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for
temporary bare soil coverage and a permanent vegetation cover must be
established as soon as possible.
         (d)   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before
they reach any surface water feature must be used.
         (e)   Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil
and water conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation
Service.
         (f)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope.
         (g)   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must
be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and must
not create finished slopes of 30% or greater.
         (h)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact
zones.
         (i)   Any alterations below the ordinary high water mark of public
waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources under M.S. Ch. 103G, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (j)   Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent
or nearby properties.
         (k)   Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading
of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if no other
alternatives exist. The permitted riprap placement shall have a finished slope
that does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward
extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water mark and the
height of the riprap above the ordinary high water mark shall not exceed three
feet.
      (5)   Connections to public waters. Excavations where the intended
purpose is connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons
and harbors, must be controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for
excavations may be given only after the Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources has approved the proposed connection to public waters.
   (K)   Placement and design of roads, driveways and parking areas.
      (1)   Public and private roads and parking areas must be designed to take
advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening
from view from public waters. Documentation must be provided by a qualified
individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to
minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office
technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other
applicable technical materials.
      (2)   Roads, driveways and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and
must not be placed within bluff and Shore Impact Zones, when other reasonable
and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may
be placed within these areas, and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.
      (3)   Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads and
access-related parking areas may be placed within Shore Impact Zones; provided,
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this division (K)
are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of division
(J) above must be met.
   (L)   Storm water management. The following standards shall apply to all
properties within the Shoreland Overlay District (SH).
      (1)   When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter and retain storm
water runoff before discharge to public waters.
      (2)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential
and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and
protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment
on the site.
      (3)   When development density, topographic features and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle storm water
runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed
facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation and infiltration rather than buried pipes and
human-made materials and facilities.
      (4)   Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25% of the lot
area.
      (5)   When constructed facilities are used for storm water management,
documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed
and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local
soil and water conservation districts.
      (6)   New constructed storm water outfalls to public waters must provide
for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris
before discharge.
   (M)   Standards for commercial, industrial, public and semi-public uses.
      (1)   Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public or
semi-public uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters
may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses
with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards.
         (a)   In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks and
other zoning standards in this chapter, the uses must be designed to
incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and
structures.
         (b)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must
centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation
and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need.
         (c)   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs
and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the
provisions of §§
152.120 through
152.125 of this chapter and the following general standards.
            1.   No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be
placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages
may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit
issued by the County Sheriff.
            2.   Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the Shore Impact
Zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey
needed information. Signs must only convey the location and name of the
establishment and the general types of goods or services available. Signs shall
not be permitted for any other purpose, shall not be located higher than ten
feet above the ground, and shall not exceed 32 square feet in size. If
illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be shielded or directed to
prevent illumination out across public waters.
            3.   Other outside lighting may be located within the Shore Impact
Zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential
safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct
illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of
navigational lights.
      (2)   Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or
parcels without public waters frontage or, if located on lots or parcels with
public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high
water mark setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by
vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
   (N)   Agriculture use standards.
      (1)   General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, sod farming and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep
slopes and Shore and Bluff Impact Zones are maintained in permanent vegetation
or operated under an approved conservation plan (resource management systems)
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation districts or the United States Soil Conservation Service, as
provided by a qualified individual or agency. The Shore Impact Zone for parcels
with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50
feet from the ordinary high water mark.
      (2)   Animal feedlots must meet the following standards.
         (a)   New feedlots must not be located in the shoreland of
watercourses or in bluff impact zones and must meet a minimum setback of 300
feet from the ordinary high water mark of all public waters basins.
         (b)   Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are
located within 300 feet of the ordinary high water mark or within a bluff
impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into the existing
ordinary high water mark setback or encroach on bluff impact zones.
   (O)   Extractive uses. Extractive uses, excavation, extractive material
processing and extractive accessory uses shall be prohibited within the
Shoreland Overlay District.
   (P)   Mandatory EAW. An environmental assessment worksheet consistent with
Minn. Rules Chpter 4410 must be prepared for projects meeting the thresholds of
Minn. Rules, part 4410.4300, subparts 19a, 20a, 25, 27, 28, 29, and 36a.
   (Q)   Water-oriented accessory structures or facilities. Each residential
lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure or facility if it complies
with the following provisions:
      (1)   The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square
feet. The structure or facility may include detached decks not exceeding eight
feet above grade at any point or at-grade patios;
      (2)   The structure or facility is not in the bluff impact zone;
      (3)   The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high
water level must be at least ten feet;
      (4)   The structure is not a boathouse or boat storage structure as
defined under M.S. § 103G.245;
      (5)   The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as
viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;
      (6)   The roof may be used as an open-air deck with safety rails, but
must not be enclosed with a roof or sidewalls or used as a storage area;
      (7)   The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human
habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 394, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 152.059 AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT (AP) DISTRICT.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Purpose and authority. The city’s Airport Joint Airport Zoning
Board, created and established by joint action of the City Council and the
Board of Commissioners of the county and the Town Board of Spencer Township,
pursuant to the provisions and authority of M.S. § 360.063, as it may be
amended from time to time, hereby finds and declares that:
         (a)   An airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of
the Aitkin Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; and also
if of the obstructive type, in effect reduces the size of the area available
for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy
or impair the utility of the airport and the public investment therein;
         (b)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and an injury to the region served by the Aitkin Airport;
         (c)   For the protection of the public health, safety, order,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare, and for the promotion of the most
appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or
establishment of airport hazards;
         (d)   The prevention of these airport hazards should be accomplished,
to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without
compensation;
         (e)   The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport
hazards, and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation or marking and
lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political
subdivisions may raise and expend public funds;
         (f)   The Aitkin Airport is an essential public facility that serves
an important public transportation role and provides a public good;
         (g)   This section establishes the Airport Zoning Overlay District to
“better manage significant areas with specific needs that cross Zoning District
Boundaries. All sites within an overlay district shall continue to bear their
original zoning, but shall also comply with the provisions of the overlay
district appended”. (Section 6.1.A). City ordinance recognizes that Overlay
(Airport Zoning) Maps are considered part of the official Zoning Map and all
land uses must comply with the provisions of the applicable overlay district;
         (h)   Section 21 of the Aitkin County Zoning Ordinance recognizes the
Airport Zoning Ordinance to “promote public health, safety, and general welfare
and to protect the lives and property of users of the Aitkin County Airports
and of the owners and occupants of land in their vicinities”. (Section 21.01);
         (i)   The county’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan recognizes the
importance of aviation industry to the community and recommends that the
county:
            1.   Support continued development and maintenance of the airport
system serving the county’s Airport Zoning Ordinance;
            2.   Work with each city or airport manager to assure plans are
developed to reserve space for future airport expansion; and
            3.   Assure that zoning districts surrounding existing airports are
compatible with airport use and expansion and have adequate space for
associated business development.
         (j)   This subchapter amends and replaces the city’s Airport Zoning
Ordinance adopted May, 1972.
      (2)   Short title. This subchapter shall be known as the “Aitkin Airport
Zoning Ordinance”. Those sections of land affected by this subchapter are
indicated in Appendix B at the end of this chapter.
      (3)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         AIRPORT. The Aitkin Airport located in Sections 18 and 19, Township 47
North, Range 26 West.
         AIRPORT ELEVATION. The established elevation of the highest point on
the usable landing area which elevation is established to be 1,206 feet above
mean sea level.
         AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the
air space required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at the airport; and any use of land which is hazardous to
persons or property because of its proximity to the airport.
         AITKIN AIRPORT COMMISSION. A five-member commission with the authority
to make decisions on the Aitkin Airport which is funded two-thirds by the
county and one-third by the city.
         COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the state’s Department of
Transportation.
         CONFORMING USE. Any structure, tree or object of natural growth, or
use of land that complies with all the applicable provisions of this subchapter
or any amendment to this subchapter.
         DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a
residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.
         ESTABLISHED RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD IN A BUILT UP URBAN AREA (ERN -
BUUA). An area which, if it existed on or before 1-1-1978 shall be considered a
conforming use that shall not be prohibited.
         HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this subchapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be
mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
         LANDING AREA. The area of the airport used for the landing, taking off
or taxiing of aircraft.
         LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL LOT. A single lot located in an area which is
zoned for single-family or two-family residences and in which the predominant
land use is the type of residences.
         LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. A single-family or two-family home.
         NON-CONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure, tree, natural growth
or land use which is inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter or an
amendment hereto.
         NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing or
planned straight-in instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
facilities with only horizontal guidance, and for which no precision approach
facilities are planned or indicated on an approved planning document.
         OTHER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by jet aircraft or aircraft of more than 12,500 pounds
maximum gross weight; or is 4,900 feet or more in length.
         PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic, and includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative.
         PLANNED. Those proposed future airport developments that are so
indicated on a planning document having the approval of the Federal Aviation
Administration, state’s Department of Transportation Office of Aeronautics and
the Aitkin Airport Commission.
         PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS), a microwave
landing system (MLS) or a precision approach radar (PAR), a transponder landing
system (TLS) or a satellite-based system capable of operating to the same level
of precision guidance provided by the other included systems. Also, a runway
for which a precision instrument approach system is planned and is so indicated
on an approved planning document.
         RUNWAY. Any existing or planned paved surface or turf covered area of
the airport which is specifically designated and used or planned to be used for
the landing and/or taking off of aircraft.
         SLOPE. An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio
of horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1085.jpg]
 
         STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by humans, including,
but without limitations, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formations and
overhead transmission lines.
         TRAVERSE WAYS. For the purpose of determining height limits as set
forth in this subchapter, shall be increased in height by 17 feet for
interstate highways; 15 feet for all other public roadways; ten feet or the
height of the highest mobile object that would normally traverse the road,
whichever is greater, for private roads; 23 feet for railroads; and for
waterways and all other traverse ways not previously mentioned, an amount equal
to the height of the highest mobile object that would normally traverse it.
         TREE. Any object of natural growth.
         UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for, and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and
less; and is less than 4,900 feet in length.
         VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument approach
procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an approved planning
document.
         WATER SURFACES. The same meaning as land for the establishment of
protected zones.
      (4)   Conflicts. Where there exists a conflict between any of the
regulations or limitations prescribed in this subchapter and any other
regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect
to the height of structures or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the
more stringent limitation or regulation shall govern and prevail.
   (B)   Rules and regulations.
      (1)   Air space obstruction zoning.
         (a)   Air space zones. In order to carry out the purpose of this
subchapter, as set forth above, the following air space zones are hereby
established: Primary Zone, Horizontal Zone, Conical Zone, Approach Zone,
Precision Instrument Approach Zone and Transitional Zone, and whose locations
and dimensions are as follows.
            1.   Primary Zone.
               a.   All that land which lies directly under an imaginary
primary surface longitudinally centered on a runway and:
                  i.   Runway 16-34: extends 200 feet beyond each end; and
                  ii.   Runway 8-26:
                     A.   Coincides with the 3,145-foot visual turf runway; and
                     B.   Three thousand seven hundred foot non-precision
bituminous runway: extends 200 feet beyond each end. The elevation of any point
on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway centerline.
               b.   The width of the primary surface is:
                  i.   One thousand feet for Runway 16-34; and
                  ii.   Five hundred fifty-six feet to accommodate the combined
surfaces of both the 3,145 foot visual turf runway and the 3,700 foot non-
precision bituminous runway.
            2.   Horizontal Zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary horizontal surface 150 feet above the established airport elevation,
or a height of 1,356 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of which is
constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of
the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines
tangent to those arcs. The radius of the horizontal surface arc is 10,000 feet
for Runway 16-34 which encompasses the arc of the crosswind runway.
            3.   Conical Zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary conical surface extending upward and outward from the periphery of
the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000
feet as measured outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface.
            4.   Approach Zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary approach surface longitudinally centered on the extended centerline
at each end of a runway. The inner edge of the subchapter’s approach surface is
at the same width and elevation as, and coincides with, the end of the primary
surface. The approach surface inclines upward and outward at a slope of:
               a.   Twenty to one for the 3,145-foot visual turf runway: the
approach surface expands uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a distance of
5,000 feet, then continues at the same rate of divergence to the periphery of
the conical surface; and
               b.   Twenty to one for the 3,700 foot non-precision bituminous
runway: the approach surface expands uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a
distance of 5,000 feet, then continues at the same rate of divergence to the
periphery of the conical surface.
            5.   Precision Instrument Approach Zone. All that land which lies
directly under an imaginary precision instrument approach surface
longitudinally centered on the extended centerline at each end of Runway 16-34,
a precision instrument runway. The inner edge of the precision instrument
approach surface is at the same width and elevation as, and coincides with, the
end of the primary surface. The precision instrument approach surface inclines
upward and outward at a slope of 50:1 for a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet
expanding uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet, then continues upward and outward
for an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet at a slope of 40:1,
expanding uniformly to an ultimate width of 16,000 feet.
            6.   Transitional Zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary surface extending upward and outward at right angles to the runway
centerline and centerline extended at a slope of 7:1 from the sides of the
primary surfaces and from the sides of the approach surfaces until they
intersect the horizontal surface or the conical surface. Transitional surfaces
for those portions of the precision instrument approach surface which project
through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of
5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the precision instrument
approach surface and at right angles to the extended precision instrument
runway centerline.
         (b)   Height restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this
subchapter, and except as necessary and incidental to airport operations, no
structure or tree shall be constructed, altered, maintained or allowed to grow
in any air space zone created in division (A) above so as to project above any
of the imaginary air space surfaces described in the division (A) above. Where
an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive
limitation shall prevail.
         (c)   Boundary limitations. The air space obstruction height zoning
restrictions set forth in this section shall apply for a distance not to exceed
one and one-half miles beyond the perimeter of the airport boundary and in that
portion of an airport hazard area under the approach zone for a distance not
exceeding two miles from the airport boundary.
      (2)   Land use safety zoning.
         (a)   Safety zone boundaries. In order to carry out the purpose of
this subchapter, as set forth above, to restrict those uses which may be
hazardous to the operational safety of aircraft operating to and from the
Aitkin Airport and, furthermore, to limit population and building density in
the runway approach areas, thereby creating sufficient open space to protect
life and property in case of an accident, there are hereby created and
established the following land use safety zones.
            1.   Safety Zone A. All land in that portion of the approach zones
of a runway, as defined in § 153.15(A) of this subchapter, which extends
outward from the end of the primary surface a distance equal to two-thirds of
the planned length of the runway, which distance shall be:
               a.   Three thousand three hundred thirty-four feet for Runway
16-34;
               b.   Two thousand ninety-seven feet for the 3,145-foot visual
turf runway; and
               c.   Two thousand four hundred sixty-seven feet for the 3,700-
foot non-precision bituminous runway.
            2.   Safety Zone B. All land in that portion of the approach zones
of a runway, as defined in § 153.15(A) of this subchapter, which extends
outward from Safety Zone A a distance equal to one-third of the planned length
of the runway, which distance shall be:
               a.   One thousand six hundred sixty-six feet for Runway 16-34;
               b.   One thousand forty-eight feet for the 3,145-foot visual
turf runway; and
               c.   One thousand two hundred thirty-three feet for the 3,700-
foot non-precision bituminous runway.
            3.   Safety Zone C. All land which is enclosed within the perimeter
of the horizontal zone, as defined in § 153.15(A) of this subchapter, and which
is not included in Safety Zone A or Safety Zone B.
            4.   Exceptions established residential neighborhoods. There are no
areas designated as established residential neighborhoods in built up urban
areas based upon the status of development existing on 1-1-1978.
         (b)   Restrictions.
            1.   General. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in division (B)(1)(b), above, no use shall be made of any land in any of
the safety zones defined in division (B)(2)(a) above, which creates or causes
interference with the operations of radio or electronic facilities on the
airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport,
impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the
landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft.
            2.   Zone A. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in division (B)(1)(b) above and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(2)(b)1. above, areas designated as Zone A shall contain no
buildings, temporary structures, exposed transmission lines or other similar
above-ground land use structural hazards, and shall be restricted to those uses
which will not create, attract or bring together an assembly of persons
thereon. Permitted uses may include, but are not limited to, such uses as
agriculture (seasonal crops), horticulture, animal husbandry, raising of
livestock, light outdoor recreation (non-spectator), cemeteries and automobile
parking without lighting or other above ground structures.
            3.   Zone B. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in division (B)(1)(b) above, and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(2)(b)1. above, areas designated as Zone B shall be restricted in
use as follows.
               a.   Each use shall be on a site whose area shall not be less
than three acres.
               b.   Each use shall not create, attract or bring together a site
population that would exceed 15 times that of the site acreage.
               c.   Each site shall have no more than one building plot upon
which any number of structures may be erected.
               d.   A building plot shall be a single, uniform and non-
contrived area, whose shape is uncomplicated and whose area shall not exceed
the following minimum ratios with respect to the total site area:
 
Site Area                       Ratio of
                                Building Site    Maximum Site   Population (15
At Least (acres) But Less Than  Area to Building Plot Area (sq. persons/acre)
                 (acres)        Plot Area        ft.)

3                               4                12:1           10,900
4                               6                10:1           17,400
6                               10               8:1            32,600
10                              20               6:1            72,500
20                              and up           4:1            218,000
 
               e.   The following uses are specifically prohibited in Zone B:
churches; hospitals; schools; theaters; stadiums; hotels; motels; trailer
courts; campgrounds; and other places of frequent public or semi-public
assembly.
            4.   Zone C. Zone C is subject only to height restrictions set
forth in division (B)(1)(b) above and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(2)(b)1. above.
            5.   Exemptions; established residential neighborhoods. There are
no areas designated as established residential neighborhoods in built up urban
areas based upon the status of development existing on 1-1-1978.
         (c)   Boundary limitations. The land use zoning restrictions set forth
in this section shall apply for a distance not to exceed one mile beyond the
perimeter of the airport boundary and in that portion of an airport hazard area
under the approach zone for a distance not exceeding two miles from the airport
boundary.
         (d)   Boundary assurances. A certified survey prepared by a licensed
land surveyor shall be required to be submitted with a building/zoning permit
application for properties that are entirely or partially contained within Land
Use Safety Zones A and B, unless the Zoning Administrator determines the
proposed building site is clearly outside the safety zones. For any location
within the air space jurisdiction of this subchapter, the Zoning Administrator
may require a survey that shows the elevation of a proposed structure will
conform to the air space requirements of this subchapter.
      (3)   Airport map. The several zones herein established are shown in
Appendix B to this chapter, the exhibits are attached hereto and made a part
hereof, which, together with such amendments thereto as may from time to time
be made, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone boundaries and
other information thereon, shall be and the same is hereby adopted as part of
this subchapter. Refer to the local land use authority for underlying land use
and zoning designations, as well as division (A)(4) above for guidance on
conflicts between regulations.
      (4)   Performance standards. To avoid the creation of a use that may have
adverse impacts on overhead flight or to persons or property on the ground, no
land use within the airport’s proximity, regardless whether permitted under the
applicable airport zoning regulations, can operate or perform in a way that
exceeds the following performance standard limits:
         (a)   Is tall enough to be hazardous to the navigation of aircraft,
including tall buildings, smokestacks, construction cranes, trees, cell towers
and wind energy conversion systems;
         (b)   May interfere with electronic navigation aids such as radar
facilities and instrument landing systems that provide for the safe movement of
aircraft. These aides may be located on-airport or off. Non-aviation electronic
sources placed near electronic navigation aids may cause interference.
Similarly, new structures may block the navigation aid signals. Both these
types of situations must be reviewed prior to the placement of the uses and
structures;
         (c)   May cause a visual distraction to pilots approaching the
airport. Distractions can occur from outdoor lights near an airport (e.g., high
mast lighting or stadium lighting), from highly reflective exterior building
materials or from water surfaces. Smoke or steam generated by nearby
businesses, industry or field burning can also create severe visual
difficulties for pilots. Activities that generate a lot of dust can cause
similar problems; and
         (d)   Is deemed to have the potential to create a wildlife hazard to
airport operations as determined by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services (USFWS)
and Mn/DOT Aeronautics.
      (5)   Non-conforming uses. Regulations are not retroactive. The
regulations prescribed by this subchapter shall not be construed to require the
removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not
conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this subchapter, or
otherwise interfere with the continuance of any non-conforming use. Nothing
herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration or
intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was
begun prior to the effective date of this subchapter, and is diligently
prosecuted and completed within two years thereof.
      (6)   Hazard marking and lighting.
         (a)   Non-conforming uses. The owner of any non-conforming structure
or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon of the markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by
the Zoning Administrator, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the
vicinity of the airport the presence of the airport hazards. The markers and
lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the Aitkin
Airport Commission.
         (b)   Permits and variances. Any permit or variance deemed advisable
to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter and be reasonable in the
circumstances, and granted by the Zoning Administrator or Board, shall require
the owner of the structure or tree in question, at his or her own expense, to
install, operate and maintain thereon the markers and lights as may be
necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.
   (C)   Administration and enforcement.
      (1)   Permits.
         (a)   Future uses. Except as specifically provided in divisions (C)(1)
(a)1. and (C)(1)(a)2. below, no material change shall be made in the use of
land and no structure shall be erected, altered or otherwise established in any
zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and
granted by the Zoning Administrator, hereinafter, provided for. Each
application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If the determination is in the affirmative, the
permit shall be granted.
               1.   However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than 75
feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the
horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a
horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, except when the
tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features,
would extend the height or land use limit prescribed for the respective zone.
               2.   Nothing contained in this foregoing exception shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or
growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limitations
established by this subchapter as set forth in division (B)(1)(b) above and the
land use limitations set forth in division (B)(2) above.
         (b)   Existing uses. Before any existing use or structure may be
replaced, substantially altered or repaired or rebuilt within any zone
established herein, a permit must be secured authorizing the replacement,
change or repair. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment
or creation of an airport hazard or permit a non-conforming use, structure or
tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective
date of this subchapter or any amendments thereto, or than it is when the
application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for
such a permit shall be granted.
         (c)   Non-conforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Administrator determines that a non-conforming structure or tree has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall
be granted that would allow the structure or tree to exceed the applicable
height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. Whether
application is made for a permit under this division (C)(1)(c) or not, the
Zoning Administrator may order the owner of the abandoned or partially
destroyed non-conforming structure, at his or her own expense, to lower,
remove, reconstruct or equip the same in the manner necessary to conform to the
provisions of this subchapter. In the event the owner of the non-conforming
structure shall neglect or refuse to comply with the order for ten days after
receipt of written notice of the order, the Zoning Administrator may, by
appropriate legal action, proceed to have the abandoned or partially destroyed
non-conforming structure lowered, removed, reconstructed or equipped and assess
the cost and expense thereof against the land on which the structure is or was
located. Unless such an assessment is paid within 90 days from the service of
notice thereof on the owner of the land, the sum shall bear interest at the
rate of 8% per annum from the date the cost and expense is incurred until paid,
and shall be collected in the same manner as are general taxes.
      (2)   Variances.
         (a)   Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, permit the growth of any tree or use his or her property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this subchapter may apply to the
Board of Adjustment, hereinafter provided for, for a variance from the
regulations. If the Board of Adjustment fails to grant or deny the variance
within the time frame established within M.S. §
         (b)   The respective Zoning Administrator shall forward the request to
the state’s Department of Transportation Office of Aeronautics and the other
jurisdiction’s Zoning Administrator for review and comment prior to
consideration of the request by the Board of Adjustment.
      (3)   Airport Zoning Administrator. It shall be the duty of the City and
County Zoning Administrators to administer and enforce the regulations
prescribed herein, based on the area in which they have land use authority.
Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the appropriate
jurisdiction’s Zoning Administrator upon a form furnished by them. Permit
applications shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by them in
accordance with the regulations prescribed herein or as provided for within
M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time. Variance applications
shall be forthwith transmitted by the appropriate jurisdiction’s Zoning
Administrator to the Board of Adjustment for action as hereinafter provided
for.
      (4)   Board of Adjustment. 
         (a)   Establishment. The Board of Adjustment for this subchapter shall
exclude elected officials and be defined as follows:
            1.   City Planning Commission for requests in the corporate city
limits or within the boundary of an orderly annexation agreement area; and
            2.   County Board of Adjustment for other requests in the
unincorporated area. If elected officials serve on a Board of Adjustment, they
shall abstain from voting.
         (b)   Powers. The Board of Adjustment shall have and exercise the
following powers:
            1.   Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the Administrator in the enforcement of this
subchapter;
            2.   Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this
subchapter upon which the Board of Adjustment under such regulations may be
required to pass; and
            3.   Hear and decide specific variances.
         (c)   Procedures.
            1.   A request for a variance or an appeal to the Zoning
Administrator’s ruling shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The
respective Zoning Administrator shall forward the request to the state’s
Department of Transportation Office of Aeronautics and the other jurisdiction’s
Zoning Administrator for review and comment prior to consideration of the
request by the Board of Adjustment.
            2.   Rules governing the Board of Adjustment shall be consistent
with those established by the body serving as the Board of Adjustment and the
provisions of this subchapter. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be
held at the call of the Zoning Administrator or Chairperson and at such other
times as the Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson, or in his or
her absence the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall be
public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing
the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the offices of
both Zoning Administrators and the County Recorder’s Office and shall be a
public record.
            3.   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of facts
and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any order,
requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this subchapter.
            4.   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board
of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
subchapter, or to effect any variation in this subchapter.
      (5)   Appeals.
         (a)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision
of the Zoning Administrator made in his or her administration of this
subchapter may appeal to the Board of Adjustment. The appeals may also be made
by any governing body of a municipality, county or airport zoning board, which
is of the opinion that a decision of the Zoning Administrator is an improper
application of this subchapter as it concerns the governing body or board.
         (b)   All appeals hereunder must be commenced within 30 days of the
Zoning Administrator’s decision, by filing with the Zoning Administrator a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall
forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken. In addition, any person
aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decisions of the Zoning
Administrator made in his or her administration of this subchapter who desires
to appeal the decision shall submit an application for a variance, by certified
mail, to the Zoning Administrator in the manner set forth in M.S. § 360.068,
subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (c)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of
the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed, except by order of the Board of Adjustment on notice to the Zoning
Administrator and on due cause shown.
         (d)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
         (e)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions
of this subchapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such
order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the
circumstances and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the Zoning
Administrator.
      (6)   Judicial review. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by
any decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any governing body of a
municipality, county or airport zoning board, which is of the opinion that a
decision of the Board of Adjustment is illegal may present to the District
Court of the county a verified petition setting forth that the decision or
action is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the
illegality. The petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after
receipt of notice of the decision. The petitioner must exhaust the remedies
provided in this subchapter before availing himself or herself of the right to
petition a court as provided by this section.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. passed 3-15-2011)
URBAN RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
§ 152.070 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to maximize the use of developable land
with the provision of urban services, to protect and preserve the natural
environment and to take full advantage of the existing urban infrastructure by
promoting infill development. The city encourages and promotes the efficient
use of land, flexibility in design and new development concepts. The design of
these developments should provide a quality of life equal to or greater than
that provided in developments built under the standard zoning codes, be
aesthetically pleasing, provide for more efficient land use and reduce the
impact of development on the natural environment and surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.071 GENERAL.
   (A)   Urban planned unit development (U-PUD). An urban planned unit
development requires the assistance of professional planning and usually
involves the approval of multiple agencies or other governmental bodies. Where
circumstances are favorable, U-PUDs provide more latitude in land use than
normal development in order to allow for planning, clustering facilities and
consolidating green spaces and internal recreation amenities. While greater
flexibility is allowed in these types of development than what is required in
the underlying zoning district, they must be justified by the significant
improvements and design features beneficial to the residents, neighbors and the
general public. These benefits may include open space protection, provision of
affordable or lifecycle housing, and re-development of blighted areas.
   (B)   Mixed use PUDs. Mixed uses may be allowed where appropriate; provided
that, the use not normally allowed in the underlying zoning district does not
exceed 15% of the building floor area.
   (C)   Zoning provision. Provisions of each zoning district shall govern
within that district, except where addressed by this section.
   (D)   Density. A plan may provide for a greater number of dwelling units
than would otherwise be permitted by the regulations otherwise applicable to
the site; however, the applicant has the burden to show that the excess will
not have an adverse effect on existing public facilities and on the reasonable
enjoyment of neighboring property. Further the Planning Commission and City
Council, in determining the reasonableness of the increase in the authorized
dwelling units density, shall recognize that increased density may be
compensated for additional measures that serve the public interest, which may
be achieved by the inclusion of: the location, amount and proposed use of
common open space; the location, design and type of dwelling units (energy
efficiency, life-cycle housing, affordability); and the physical
characteristics of the site.
   (E)   All PUDs in shoreland must comply with Minn. Rules, part 6120.3800.
The DNR must review and approve all PUDs according to referenced rule.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 394, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 152.072 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   All U-PUDs shall abide by the following design criteria.
   (A)   Minimum size. A U-PUD shall contain a minimum of three units or sites.
   (B)   Minimum development size. The development shall be placed on property
consisting of one or more parcels that together meet the minimum lot size for
the underlying zoning district, as a minimum.
   (C)   Urban services. All U-PUDs shall have access to, and shall be required
to connect to, available urban service utilities for the provision of sewer and
water. All proposed developments must be adjacent to existing infrastructure
for urban services, or be within an area identified for urban service extension
in the city’s Capital Improvement Plan within the next two years.
   (D)   Setbacks. Setbacks from the exterior boundary of the site shall be the
same as those required in the underlying district. Side setback requirements
shall be waived to allow flexibility in design, but the following shall apply.
      (1)   Individual buildings shall be separated by a minimum of ten feet.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may establish setbacks, as necessary, to
buffer agriculture, forestry and water-use activities from residential uses.
   (E)   Parking. One and one-half spaces per unit are required as a minimum,
unless modified by the conditional use permit, with evidence to support the
modification.
   (F)   Storm water management.
      (1)   All PUDs must develop and maintain a storm water management plan
indefinitely.
      (2)   Capacities of existing drainage ways shall be maintained and shall
not be adversely impacted by the development.
      (3)   Unless specifically allowed by the city, inlets and outlets to
adjacent parcels shall be maintained. Flows from outlets shall be maintained
unless allowed by the city.
      (4)   All PUDs shall contain the ten-year, 24-hour storm event within the
development.
      (5)   Runoff from the parcel shall not be concentrated unless part of a
city storm water management plan.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.073 DENSITY CALCULATIONS.
   The overall density of the development shall not exceed the density limits
established herein.
   (A)   (1)   The density shall be computed by dividing the total number of
dwelling units by the acreage of the project, including land dedicated to the
public. Fractional portions of the final answer, after bonus point
calculations, shall not apply towards the total density.
      (2)   Base density shall be determined by the density of the zoning
district the proposed development is located within.
   (B)   All developments with a density of five units or greater shall be
required to provide a minimum of 5% of the total lot area in open space that is
not subject to bonus point calculations. Open space shall be optional for all
developments of less than five units.
   (C)   The permitted base density may be increased by the percentage gained
through bonus points.
   (D)   Density bonuses may be awarded based on, but not limited to,
percentage of open space, amount of park dedication, building materials,
sidewalks and trails, landscaping, screening, assisted living facilities,
amenities, housing affordability, and other considerations that may be
determined by the city.
   (E)   The specific density bonus shall be determined by the use of the
city’s bonus calculator, adopted herein by reference, dated August 1, 2019, and
any subsequent updates.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 395, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 152.074 PUD COMMON FACILITIES; OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   In the event that certain land areas or structures are provided within
the PUD for private recreational use or as service facilities, the owner of the
land and buildings shall enter into an agreement with the city to assure the
continued operation and maintenance to predetermined reasonable standards.
   (B)   Common areas may be placed under the ownership of one of the
following:
      (1)   Dedicated to the public where a community-wide use would be
anticipated;
      (2)   Landlord control; or
      (3)   Homeowner’s association; provided, all of the following conditions
are met.
         (a)   The homeowner’s association must be established prior to any
sale.
         (b)   Membership must be mandatory for each owner and any successive
buyer.
         (c)   The open space restrictions must be permanent, not for a given
period of years.
         (d)   The association must be responsible for liability insurance,
local taxes and the maintenance of residential and other facilities.
         (e)   Landowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost and the
assessment levied by the association that can become a lien on the property in
accordance with state statutes.
         (f)   The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet
changed needs.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.075 COVENANTS, EASEMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   The final plan shall contain such proposed covenants, easements and other
provisions relating to the bulk, location and density of such residential
units, non-residential uses and public facilities as are necessary for the
welfare of the PUD and are consistent with the best interests of the entire
city. All or any covenants, easements and other provisions which are part of
the final plan, may be modified, enforced, removed or released as deemed
necessary by the City Council for the preservation of the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare of all city residents.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 152.090 WATER QUALITY PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Erosion and drainage.
      (1)   No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that
results in water runoff causing flooding, erosion or deposit of sediment on
adjacent properties or bodies of water.
      (2)   All storm sewer inlets and drainage ways that are functioning
during construction shall be protected so that sediment laden water does not
enter the conveyance system without first being filtered or otherwise treated
to remove sediment.
      (3)   All on-site storm water conveyance systems must be designed and
constructed to withstand the design volume of storm water with appropriate
stabilization to prevent scour and erosion. Erosion controls must be provided
at the outlets of all storm sewer pipes or drainage ways.
      (4)   All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices
shall be maintained and repaired to assure the continued performance of their
intended function.
      (5)   All disturbed ground left inactive for seven or more days shall be
stabilized by seeding or sodding or by mulching or covering or other equivalent
control measure.
      (6)   All temporary erosion control devices, including silt fence,
gravel, hay bales or other measures shall be removed from the construction site
and properly disposed of or recycled. This removal and disposal must occur
within 60 days of the establishment of permanent vegetative cover on the
disturbed area.
   (B)   Fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides. No person shall place, spread
or store fertilizers, herbicides and/or pesticides in any manner other than
that recommended by the manufacturer or in any manner which allows any escape
of nutrients or toxins into the air, ground water or surface water of the city.
   (C)   Tree removal and soil erosion prevention.
      (1)   Intensive vegetation clearing within the shoreland setbacks and on
steep slopes is not allowed.
         (a)   Along rivers, existing shading of water shall be preserved.
         (b)   No tree larger than four inches in diameter shall be removed,
except to accommodate a stairway or landing.
      (2)   All vegetation removal must be done according to Best Management
Practices in Minnesota. Soil erosion must be prevented and area storm water
drainage patterns shall not be altered.
      (3)   Any area disturbed during any clearing operation shall have the
native topsoil augmented and the area shall be replanted with native
vegetation.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.091 FENCES.
   (A)   General. Performance standards relating to fences are listed for each
district in §§
152.030 through
152.040 of this chapter.
   (B)   Safety hazards. Fences shall not be erected where they create a visual
safety hazard in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Location and orientation. Fences shall sit on the property of the
property owner installing the fence; fences may abut, but not sit directly on
side lot lines of adjacent parcels. The “good side” of the fence shall face
abutting properties, meaning that the posts shall face in toward the property
on which the fence sits and the finished face of the fence shall face abutting
properties. If the fence is within two feet of a property line, the adjoining
property owner abutting the fence is allowed to finish the side of the fence
facing his or her property.
   (D)   Maintenance. Fences shall be maintained to retain their aesthetic
quality, screening abilities and function. Missing boards, rusting wire and
posts and peeling paint shall be taken care of at the owner’s expense as they
occur.
   (E)   District standards: city fence standards. Zoning table follows on the
next page.
    District Performance Standards
Use Maximum Height Setback from ROW Allowable Prohibited Height at Corner/
                                    Material  Features   Traffic Visibility
            District Performance Standards
                                                                 Height at
Use         Maximum     Setback from  Allowable    Prohibited    Corner/
            Height      ROW           Material     Features      Traffic
                                                                 Visibility
                                                   Barbed or
                        10 feet       Metal, wood, electrified   Max height of
                        Unless        concrete,    (except where 2.5 feet
Downtown    72 inches   permission is brick, vinyl specific      within 20
Mixed Use               received from or smooth    approval has  feet of the
                        the Planning  wire         been given by corner
                        Commission                 the Planning
                                                   Commission)
                                                   Barbed or
                                      Metal, wood, electrified   Max height of
                                      concrete,    (except where 2.5 feet
Highway     84 inches   10 feet       brick, vinyl specific      within 20
Commercial                            or smooth    approval has  feet of the
                                      wire         been given by corner
                                                   the Planning
                                                   Commission)
                                                   Barbed or
                                      Metal, wood, electrified   Max height of
                                      concrete,    (except where 2.5 feet
Industrial  84 inches   10 feet       brick, vinyl specific      within 20
                                      or smooth    approval has  feet of the
                                      wire         been given by corner
                                                   the Planning
                                                   Commission)
                                                   Barbed or
                        10 feet       Metal, wood, electrified   Max height of
Light                   Unless        concrete,    (except where 2.5 feet
Industrial/ 72 inches   permission is brick, vinyl specific      within 20
Commercial              received from or smooth    approval has  feet of the
Transition              the Planning  wire         been given by corner
                        Commission                 the Planning
                                                   Commission)
            6 feet                                 Barbed or
            Unless                    Metal, wood, electrified   Max height of
            permission                concrete,    (where        2.5 feet
Open Space  is received 10 feet       brick, vinyl frequent      within 20
            from the                  or smooth    human contact feet of the
            Planning                  wire         is            corner
            Commission                             anticipated)
                                                                 Max height of
Parks and                                                        2.5 feet
Recreation                                                       within 20
                                                                 feet of the
                                                                 corner
            6 feet                                 Barbed or
            Unless                    Metal, wood, electrified   Max height of
Rural       permission                concrete,    (where        2.5 feet
Residential is received 10 feet       brick, vinyl frequent      within 20
            from the                  or smooth    human contact feet of the
            planning                  wire         is            corner
            commission                             anticipated)
            6 feet                                 Barbed or
            Unless                    Metal, wood, electrified   Max height of
Urban       permission                concrete,    (where        2.5 feet
Residential is received 10 feet       brick, vinyl frequent      within 20
            from the                  or smooth    human contact feet of the
            Planning                  wire         is            corner
            Commission                             anticipated)
            6 feet                                 Barbed or
            Unless                    Metal, wood, electrified   Max height of
Urban Rural permission                concrete,    (where        2.5 feet
Transition  is received 10 feet       brick, vinyl frequent      within 20
Residential from the                  or smooth    human contact feet of the
            Planning                  wire         is            corner
            Commission                             anticipated)
 
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 418, passed 10-20-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.092 STORAGE.
   (A)   Exterior storage.
      (1)   There shall be no exterior storage allowed on lots that do not
contain a principal or accessory structure, except where the property owner
also owns adjoining property that contains a principal or accessory structure.
Provisions of divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) below are still applicable.
      (2)   Where there is a principal or accessory structure, all materials
and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to
be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following: laundry drying;
recreational equipment; construction landscaping materials and equipment
currently being used for construction of the premises; woodpiles; other
equipment currently (within a period of 30 days) being used on the premises;
agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on
the premises; off-street parking, except as otherwise regulated herein.
Additional standards apply based on the zoning classification of the parcel.
      (3)   Abandoned motor vehicle(s) shall be stored within a structure or
completely screened from view.
   (B)   Bulk storage. All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil,
gasoline, liquid propane, liquid fertilizer, chemicals and similar liquids
shall comply with the requirements of the state’s Fire Marshal, the state’s
Pollution Control Agency and the state’s Department of Agriculture Office. When
in excess of normal domestic requirements, the uses shall have documents from
those offices stating that the use is in compliance. No storage facility shall
be constructed or placed where spillage from the facility would drain to a
drainageway or public waters without providing complete containment.
   (C)   Temporary storage.
      (1)   Use of a temporary storage container may be allowed for a period of
up to 14 days, unless extended by the Planning Commission. All temporary
storage containers shall be placed entirely upon the property in which the
container is intended to serve.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of both the property owner and person
having control of the property to ensure compliance with this requirement.
   (D)   Storage pods. Use of a storage pod may be allowed in the Commercial
Highway Zoning District. The structures shall not interfere with the normal
operation of the permanent use on the property and shall not be detrimental to
property or improvements in the surrounding areas. There shall also be no risk
of injury to persons as a result of the storage. The containers shall be
located to the rear or side of the principal building and set back a minimum of
five feet from side and rear property lines. Parcels abutting residential
properties shall have double setbacks.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.093 VISUAL STANDARDS; SCREENING.
   (A)   General. No use shall create, maintain or continue any activity or
structure which has a strong negative visual impact or offends the morals or
violates the standards of the city.
   (B)   Adjacent residential properties. Where any business or industry is
adjacent to property zoned residential or any use cannot meet the visual
standards of the city, screening shall be provided by the business or offending
use.
   (C)   Landscaping. Screening required shall be in addition to normal
landscaping and planting, and consist of a visual obstruction completely
containing the activity on the commercial or offending use property assuming
off-leaf conditions.
   (D)   Materials. Screening may consist of dense evergreen planting eight
feet or more in height, wood walls with 100% obstruction, a building wall
consisting of aesthetically pleasing materials that blends with the
surroundings or other similar structures that screen the property. All
structural elements shall meet required setbacks.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.094 SANITATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Solid waste. All solid waste shall be disposed of weekly in accordance
with the standards of city ordinance.
   (B)   Domestic sewage.
      (1)   All plumbing shall discharge into a city sewer system if available.
      (2)   All dwellings or structures with plumbing served by an individual
or common sewage disposal system shall meet the requirements of Minn. Rules Ch.
7080 or 7081, the requirements of which are administered by the county.
      (3)   All non-conforming systems shall be brought into conformance.
      (4)   Sewage tanks being abandoned shall be thoroughly pumped and filled
with soil.
   (C)   Water supply.
      (1)   All potable water systems shall be connected to a city water
system, if made available.
      (2)   All domestic and agricultural wells shall conform to the state’s
Department of Health standards for wells.
      (3)   All water systems shall meet the requirements of the state’s
Department of Health standards for water systems.
      (4)   All wells being abandoned shall be sealed according to the state’s
Department of Health standards and report to the state’s Department of Health
and the city.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.095 ANIMAL HUSBANDRY.
   (A)   Pets. Pets shall be properly cared for, shall not be allowed to create
problems for neighbors or the city, or become a nuisance, and shall have
sanitary standards maintained consistent with §
152.094(C) of this chapter.
   (B)   Farm animals or livestock.
      (1)   No feedlots, as defined by this chapter, are allowed anywhere
within the city.
      (2)   Farm animals or livestock may be raised as provided in zoning
districts with proper permits; provided that, the standards of the district are
not compromised.
      (3)   Farm animals or livestock shall be properly cared for, shall not
create problems for neighbors or the city and shall have sanitary standards
maintained consistent with §
152.094(C) of this chapter.
   (C)   Wild animals.
      (1)   The keeping of wild animals as pets, including, but not limited to,
primates and large carnivores, is not allowed.
      (2)   Wildlife rehabilitation uses shall require a conditional use permit
and must meet the minimum standards established by the state’s Department of
Natural Resources Rules Ch. 6244.
   (D)   Hen chickens.
      (1)   No more than five hen chickens are allowed on any parcel of land in
the Rural Residential (RR) District, Urban/Rural Transition Residential (TR)
District, Urban Residential (UR) District, and Industrial (I) District within
the city.
      (2)   Every person who owns, controls, keeps, maintains or harbors hen
chickens must keep them confined on the premises at all times in a chicken coop
or chicken run. Hen chickens are not allowed in any part of a house or garage.
      (3)   Any chicken coop or chicken run must comply with all applicable
building and zoning codes and regulations.
      (4)   No chicken coop or run shall be constructed on any parcel of land
before construction of the principal building.
      (5)   A chicken coop or run cannot be located in the front or side yard.
      (6)   A chicken coop or run must be set back at least 50 feet from any
residential structure on any adjacent lot and at least ten feet from the
property line.
      (7)   A chicken coop or run must be screened from view with a solid fence
or landscaped buffer with a minimum height of four feet.
      (8)   A chicken coop can be no larger than ten square feet per chicken
and cannot exceed six feet in height. A chicken run cannot exceed 20 square
feet per chicken and the fencing cannot exceed six feet in height. A chicken
run may be enclosed with wood or woven wire materials and may allow chickens to
contact the ground. A chicken run must have a protective overhead netting to
keep the chickens separated from other animals.
      (9)   A chicken coop must be elevated a minimum of 12 inches and a
maximum of 24 inches above grade to ensure circulation beneath the coop.
      (10)   Chicken grains and feed must be stored in rodent-proof containers.
      (11)   No chicken may be kept or raised in a manner as to cause injury or
annoyance to persons on other property in the vicinity by reason of noise, odor
or filth.
      (12)   Any chicken running at large may be impounded by the city and,
after being impounded for three days or more without being reclaimed by the
owner, may be destroyed or sold. A person reclaiming any impounded chicken must
pay the cost of impounding and keeping the same.
   (E)   Slaughtering of animals within city limits.
      (1)   Slaughter of live animals or birds is prohibited within city
limits, unless completely enclosed inside of a building.
      (2)   Any slaughtering operations shall be properly screened as defined
in §
152.093.
   (F)   Processing of animals within city limits.
      (1)   Evisceration, the removal of the internal organs from a carcass, of
livestock within city limits is prohibited, unless completely enclosed inside
of a building.
      (2)   Animal excrements, including but not limited to blood, shall be
prohibited from entering the city’s waste water collection system. Use of
sewage and septic systems for animal processing shall be consistent with §
53.03(A).
      (3)   Animal processing shall meet all requirements of §
152.094(C).
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 404, passed 12-6-2021; Ord. 406, passed 4-4-
2022)
§ 152.096 PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   General. On-site parking or garage space shall be provided in all
districts, except as specifically exempted. There shall be adequate drive
access to prevent the need to back onto collector streets or county highways.
On-site parking spaces shall not be used for storage.
   (B)   Dimensions. Parking sites shall be a minimum of 20 feet long and ten
feet wide.
   (C)   Parking ratios. On-site parking shall be provided at the following
ratios at a minimum, except where exempted within §§
152.030 through
152.040 of this chapter or unless modified by conditional use permit:
      (1)   Two stalls per dwelling unit;
      (2)   One additional stall per employee in home occupation;
      (3)   One and one-half stalls per dwelling unit, for multi-family over 20
units per complex, motel/hotel units;
      (4)   One stall per six seats for churches, restaurants and other
assembly places;
      (5)   One stall per 300 square feet of office space;
      (6)   One stall per 300 square feet of retail space; and
      (7)   One stall per 2,000 square feet or two employees at maximum shift
for industrial uses, whichever Planning Commission deems suitable.
   (D)   On-site parking. On-site parking shall not be closer than ten feet
from a lot line, except in the Downtown Mixed Use (DMU) District.
   (E)   Handicapped parking. Handicapped parking shall be required in
accordance with state law.
   (F)   Parking surfaces. All parking areas shall be adequately drained to a
pervious surface designed to allow entrapment of silts prior to discharge to a
public water.
   (G)   Landscaping. More than five parking stalls contiguously located and
any commercial parking adjacent to residential property shall be landscaped
according to a plan approved by the Zoning Administrator with review by the
Planning Commission.
   (H)   Loading, general. All required loading berths shall be off street and
shall be located on the same lot as the principal use served. Loading shall not
occupy front yard space. Berths shall not be used for storage.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 369, passed 10-20-2014) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.097 DRAINAGE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter and retain storm
water runoff before discharge to public waters.
      (2)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential
and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and
protected as soon as possible and facilities and methods used to retain
sediment on the site.
      (3)   When development density, topographic features and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle storm water
runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed
facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways and ponds must be used. Preference must be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation and infiltration rather than buried pipes and
human-made materials and facilities.
   (B)   Drainage plan(s). All development shall contain provisions for
adequate surface or subsurface runoff of storm water and snow melt directed to
natural drainageways. A storm frequency of a five-year, 24-hour storm period
shall be provided for with no structural flooding or ponding.
   (C)   Natural drainage. All development shall provide for the continuance of
natural drainageways, and structures shall be so constructed as to be one foot
above the water level in the drainageway created by a storm of a 100-year
return period or a 1% chance of occurrence.
   (D)   Drainage structures. All drainage structures provided shall be
sufficient in size to pass a five-year, 24-hour storm to a natural drainageway
and to pass a 100-year, 24-hour storm along a drainage way.
   (E)   Drainage storage areas. The use of natural or human-made storm water
storage areas is encouraged. These areas should be vegetated and designed to
naturally lower after a storm.
   (F)   Filling. No filling of areas inundated by the 100-year, 24-hour storm
along drainageways shall be allowed, except by conditional use permit.
   (G)   Impervious areas. All parking areas, heavy use areas, storage areas
and impervious areas shall be designed to allow entrapment of silts and
nutrients prior to discharge to a natural drainage way or public water.
   (H)   Public waters. Newly constructed storm water outfalls to public waters
must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming or
surface debris before discharge.
   (I)   Erosion. Erosion control measures shall be provided in all areas
disturbed during any grading or construction. All areas disturbed shall be
covered with topsoils and seeded. Areas subject to concentrated runoff or
steeper than three to one shall be sodded, planted with appropriate deep-rooted
vegetation or protected with an appropriate mulch cover as directed by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.098 GRADING.
   (A)   General. The following activities must be authorized by permit, except
for excavation for permitted structure, drives, sewer systems and parking
areas:
      (1)   Grading and filling disturbing an area greater than one acre;
      (2)   Grading and filling in the Shore Impact Zone; and
      (3)   Any alterations of the natural topography when the slope of the
land is toward a public water or watercourse involving the movement of more
than ten cubic yards of material in a bluff or Shore Impact Zone or more than
50 cubic yards of material anywhere else within a shoreland area.
   (B)   Conditions. The following conditions shall apply.
      (1)   The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time
as feasible.
      (2)   Four inches of topsoil is placed, temporary ground cover such as
mulch is used and permanent ground cover such as sod is planted.
      (3)   Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed.
      (4)   Fill is stabilized to acceptable engineering standards and must not
create an unstable slope.
      (5)   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be
reviewed by a qualified professional for continued slope stability and must not
create finished slopes of 30% or greater.
      (6)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact
zones.
      (7)   Fill placed in a public water below the ordinary high water mark
requires a DNR waters permit and a Corps of Engineers permit.
      (8)   Excavation in the bed of public waters requires a DNR waters permit
and a Corps of Engineers permit.
      (9)   Only clean fill consisting of sand, gravel or rock will be allowed
where contact with water is anticipated. Mineral soil may be allowed elsewhere.
      (10)   Alterations to topography must only be allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent
or nearby properties.
      (11)   When applicable, the above conditions shall be consistent with
those provided within this division (B), in addition to those required by
Mississippi Headwaters Board, the state’s DNR and the Army Corps of Engineers.
   (C)   Wetlands. Grading or filling in any protected wetland is prohibited
unless authorized by federal, state, county and local permitting agencies.
   (D)   Public waters. Connections to public waters of boat slips, canals,
lagoons, harbors and similar inland excavations are prohibited.
   (E)   Riprap. The city encourages the use of riprap only as a last resort to
control shoreline erosion. Other methods should be used, including the planting
of native, deep rooted vegetation. If riprap has been found to be the only tool
available, riprap installation shall have the following standards.
      (1)   Gradation. A well-graded mixture of rock sizes should be used
instead of one uniform size.
      (2)   Quality of stone. Riprap must be durable so that freeze/thaw cycles
do not decompose it in a shore time; most igneous stones such as granite have
suitable durability.
      (3)   Riprap depth. The thickness of riprap layers should be at least two
times the maximum stone diameter.
      (4)   Vegetation.
         (a)   Existing vegetation on the shoreline and in the water should be
maintained without disturbance.
         (b)   All bare soil on the slope above the riprap should be stabilized
with seed and mulch, or sod.
         (c)   Wooded, deep rooted vegetation should be planted among the
riprap to help stabilize and create wildlife habitat.
      (5)   Filter material. Filter material is usually required between riprap
and the underlying soil surface to prevent soil from moving through the riprap;
a filter cloth material or a layer of gravel is usually used for the filter.
         (a)   Leaching protection. Leaching can be controlled by installing a
riprap gradation small enough to act as a filter against the channel base
material, or a protective filter can be installed between the riprap and the
base material.
         (b)   Riprap limits. The riprap should extend for a maximum flow
depth, or to a point where vegetation will be satisfactory to control erosion.
         (c)   Curves. Riprap should extend to five times the bottom width
upstream and downstream of the beginning and ending of the curve as well as the
entire curved section.
         (d)   Riprap size. The size of riprap to be installed depends on site-
specific conditions.
         (e)   Riprap prohibitions. Slopes on which riprap is used to stabilize
shorelines shall be no steeper than two to one.
      (6)   Maintenance. Inspections should be made of all sites immediately
after the first rainfall following installation of riprap. This is particularly
important in areas where riprap that is displaced during the storm would impact
culverts. Thereafter, riprapped sites should be checked following large storms,
especially those which are near or exceed the storm frequency used in the
design. Displaced riprap should be removed from its downstream location and new
riprap placed according to the specifications above.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.099 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its
lowest point to the sky, unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of
window wells above the bottom of the yard or court and except for the
projections of sill belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features not to
exceed four feet six inches.
   (B)   Allowed appurtenances. Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fire-
proof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers may extend into
a required front or rear yard a distance not to exceed four feet six inches.
   (C)   Yard usage. A yard, court or other open space provided about any
building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall
not again be used as a yard, court or other open space for another building.
   (D)   Safety setback. A total setback requirement of 300 feet shall be
mandatory for all land uses handling highly explosive or inflammable materials
in quantity such as gas service stations, bulk fuel or oil dealers and similar
operations, from all schools, churches, hospitals or any public meeting place
having a seating capacity of 50 or more persons.
   (E)   Permitted obstructions in required yards. The following shall not be
considered to be obstructions when located in the required yard specified.
      (1)   In front yards.
         (a)   One story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the
yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting two and one-half feet or
less into the yard.
         (b)   A landing place or uncovered porch may extend into the required
front yard to a distance not exceeding six feet, if the landing place or porch
has its floor no higher than the entrance floor of the building. An open
railing no higher than three feet six inches may be placed around the place.
         (c)   The required front yard of a corner lot shall not contain any
wall, fence or other structure, tree, shrub or other growth which may cause
danger to traffic on a street or public road by obscuring the view or
obstructing or interfering with the passage of vehicles or pedestrians. No
fence or accessory structure or planting shall rise two and one-half feet in
height above the level of the adjoining ground within 14 feet of any corner. No
fence or wall or shrub planting of more than two and one-half feet in height
above the level of the adjoining ground shall be erected on any lot within ten
feet of the property line.
         (d)   On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets; provided, however, that, the buildable lot width
shall not be reduced to less than 30 feet.
      (2)   In side yards. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the
yard for a distance of two inches per foot of required side yard.
      (3)   In rear yards. Enclosed, attached or detached off-street parking
spaces; open off-street parking spaces; accessory structures, tool rooms and
similar buildings or structures for domestic storage; balconies; breezeways and
open porches; one story bay windows projecting two and one-half feet or less
into the yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting two and one-half
feet or less into the yard.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.100 POOLS.
   (A)   Permit required. A building permit shall be required for any swimming
pool with a capacity of over 1,500 gallons or greater than three feet water
depth. Non-permanent pools which are designed to be entirely removed from their
location and stored, including inflatable pools or non-permanent pools
supported by removable frame, shall not require a building permit; however, the
pools shall conform to the provisions herein.
   (B)   General. All pools shall conform to the lot requirements for the
zoning district in which the property is located. The swimming pool filter
unit, pump, heating unit and any other noise-making mechanical equipment shall
be located not less than 50 feet from any adjacent or nearby residential
structure and not closer than ten feet from any lot line.
   (C)   Fences and gates. All pools with a capacity of 1,500 gallons or
greater than three feet water depth shall be enclosed with fencing, at least
four feet in height and not exceeding eight feet in height, to prevent
uncontrolled access of all persons. The fence shall have self-closing, self-
latching gates with provisions for locking and shall be installed prior to the
filling of the pool. No part of the pool, including an edge of the pool itself,
shall constitute a portion of a fence.
   (D)   Pool water. Water within a swimming pool shall be maintained in a
suitable manner as to not present a health hazard of any type. The water shall
be subject to inspection by the city. Filling swimming pools from fire hydrants
or other public facilities shall require the approval of designated public
officials. To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool drainage
shall be directed onto the owners property or into approved public
drainageways. Water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby private land.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.101 CAMPGROUNDS AND CAMPSITES.
   (A)   General. Campgrounds/RV parks shall be considered a form of planned
unit development and administered thereunder as conditional uses in the
district where the use is allowed, except no density increases will be
considered.
   (B)   Minimum parcel size. No campground or recreational vehicle park shall
be allowed on a parcel less than two acres and with a minimum of ten sites. Up
to ten additional sites may be allowed for each additional acre.
   (C)   Dwelling site requirements. The dwelling sites must conform to the
state’s Department of Health standards and the following.
      (1)   Campsites or recreational vehicle sites shall have a minimum of
3,000 square feet designated for each family unit, with a minimum of 40 feet of
width, as measured center to center.
      (2)   A strip of land with a minimum width of 40 feet shall be reserved
for a service road providing access to each of the designated sites.
      (3)   Parking shall be off the road.
      (4)   Recreational facilities shall be provided as determined by PUD
process.
      (5)   A water system capable of providing 100 gallons per site, per day,
at a pressure of 20 psi at the most remote fixture for RV sites, or within 400
feet of each campsite for non-RV sites.
      (6)   Conforming on-site sewage collection and disposal system sized for
100 gallons per campsite per day.
      (7)   Solid waste facilities consisting of one 30-gallon can for each
four campsites or one dumpster for each 20 sites, constructed to prevent
overturning or cover removal by animals, and screened.
      (8)   Campsites for recreational vehicles shall have sewer connection,
water connection and electric connection or recreational vehicles shall be
self-contained and a wastewater disposal station shall be provided on site.
      (9)   Drinking water and restroom facilities with showers shall be
provided, all within 400 feet of every site not served with full facilities.
      (10)   Grass or other complete ground cover shall be maintained, except
in parking areas and roads.
      (11)   Evidence shall be provided, prior to final approval, that the
licenses and approval process of the state’s Department of Health has been
adhered to.
      (12)   All sites shall be well-drained, preventing any pooling of water
and avoiding wetlands.
      (13)   Sufficient storm shelter shall be provided to accommodate all
occupants of the campground.
   (D)   Seasonal use. Sites can be leased out for seasonal use for up to six
continuous months to one person.
   (E)   Submission requirements. The submission requirements for a campground
shall be the same as PUDs, except as determined not applicable by the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.102 MANUFACTURED AND PRE-BUILT HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   General. Manufactured housing development shall be considered a form
of PUD and administered as a conditional use in the zoning district where the
use is allowed. Development of this type creates a heavy demand and reliance on
municipal type facilities including roads, sewer, water and fire protection. In
addition these developments are often the most dense in a community requiring
heavier streets, more public recreation facilities and nearby shopping.
   (B)   Minimum standards.
      (1)   A state’s Department of Health permit shall be required.
      (2)   Parcel size shall be a minimum of 20 acres.
      (3)   At least two acres shall be set aside for parks and recreation.
      (4)   Minimum individual lot dimensions shall be 60 feet by 140 feet.
      (5)   At least 20% of the land shall be in common ownership not used for
individual lots.
      (6)   The common roadway area, where private, shall be a minimum of 40
feet wide with a 24-foot wide bituminous surfaced road.
      (7)   There shall be a minimum of two and a maximum of three parking
spaces for each unit.
      (8)   Each unit shall be a minimum of 640 square feet.
      (9)   All units must be skirted, unless placed on an enclosed foundation.
      (10)   Landscaping shall be required as per the direction of the Planning
Commission.
      (11)   When served by public utilities, there shall be individualized
sewer, water and electrical connection for each site.
      (12)   Solid waste storage and removal shall be centralized within the
development and shall be the responsibility of the owner of the development.
      (13)   Each unit must meet the requirements of the state’s Building Code,
HUD standards and M.S. §§ 327.23 through 327.35, as they may be amended from
time to time; and shall be no older than five years at time of installation and
have the required state seal attached.
      (14)   Sufficient storm shelter shall be provided to accommodate all
residents of the development.
   (C)   Manufactured home development; floodplain. The placement of new or
replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks or on
individual lots of record that are located within floodplain districts will be
treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in compliance
with §
152.056(E) of this chapter. If vehicular road access for preexisting
manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance with §
152.056(E)(4)(a) of this chapter, then replacement manufactured homes will not
be allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan
acceptable to the Planning Commission and the plan is approved by the City
Council.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.103 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   General. Each home occupation in the city shall require a permit. Home
occupation permits are not transferable to a new owner/renter/occupant, thus
the permit will not run with the property, nor be transferable to a different
property.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   All business activities, including storage, shall be inside
buildings or completely screened from adjacent properties.
      (2)   All activities shall be clearly incidental to the use of the
property for residential purposes. Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of
the residence or 50% of the gross floor area of a garage or storage building
shall be used for commercial purposes.
      (3)   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the occupation is contained entirely within the
principal building, does not constitute a nuisance to surrounding properties
and will not require any on-street parking facilities.
      (4)   Not more than two non-residents may be employed on the premises by
the home occupation.
      (5)   On the premises, retail sales will be allowed only of products
manufactured on those premises, unless specifically authorized by conditional
use permit.
      (6)   No articles for sale shall be displayed so as to be visible from
the street.
      (7)   All activities will be controlled to prevent nuisance problems of
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, fumes or litter.
      (8)   The home occupation shall not generate more than two customer
vehicles at one time. Off-street parking shall be provided, but no more than
two spaces shall be allowed for customer use.
      (9)   No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be used if the
operation of the equipment interferes unreasonably with the desired quiet
residential environment of the neighborhood or if the health and safety of the
residents is endangered. No equipment shall be used in the home occupation
which will create electrical interference to surrounding properties.
      (10)   A person having a home occupation shall provide proof of meeting
the above requirements upon request by the city.
   (C)   Yard sales/garage sales. Yard sales and garage sales do not require a
home occupation permit, so long as they do not exceed seven cumulative days in
one calendar year.
   (D)   Private automobile sales. One automobile displayed for sale on a
property shall not require a home occupation permit so long as not more than
two automobiles are sold over 30 cumulative days per calendar year.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.104 SALVAGE YARDS.
   (A)   Salvage yards are to be allowed only as a service to the community. No
more than two yards will be allowed within the city limits.
   (B)   The facilities are subject to the following, in addition to
conditional use permit criteria and conditions.
      (1)   On-site sales are allowed along with parts salvage.
      (2)   Fencing/screening sufficient to prevent the facility and all
salvaged materials from being seen from a public roadway or adjacent property
shall be provided.
      (3)   A defined perimeter containing the operation must be approved and
maintained.
      (4)   The facility shall not be located within a drainageway or wetland.
      (5)   Landscaping, in addition to the required screening, may be required
by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.105 UTILITY SUBSTATION.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is:
      (1)   To allow a process to permit a utility substation in a location
that is necessary for public convenience and service, and cannot be supplied
with equal public convenience if located elsewhere.
      (2)   To provide standards so that the use shall not seriously impair the
use of neighboring property.
      (3)   To ensure the architectural scale, design, and landscaping
treatment of the use shall be compatible with other development in the area and
shall be fully or partially enclosed as may be necessary to provide
compatibility.
      (4)   To ensure findings are made as part of the permitting process
regarding adverse effects of the project on the character of the surrounding
area including impacts from sound, light, visual appearance, impervious
surfaces, traffic impacts, and on forest and wildlife impacts.
      (5)   To establish predictable and balanced regulations to protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the city.
      (6)   To facilitate the provision of telecommunications services and
facilities in the city.
      (7)   To minimize adverse visual effects of utility substations through
careful design standards.
      (8)   To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from utility
substations failure and weather related occurrences through structural
standards, careful siting, and setback requirements.
   (B)   Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct in place, place, or re-erect any utility
substation, without first making application to the city and securing a permit.
A change in construction, dimension, lighting design, or design type shall also
require a permit. The placement of towers or antennae on previously approved
utility substations must apply for a new building permit.
   (C)   Utility substation design requirements. Utility Substations and all
accessory structures or buildings shall conform to the following minimum
requirements:
      (1)   Utility substations, shall to the greatest degree possible, be
located so as to minimize impacts on surrounding properties and public
infrastructure and at a minimum meet all zoning district setbacks.
      (2)   Screening shall be provided as determined by the Conditional Use
process to minimize visual impacts to surrounding properties.
      (3)   Whenever practicable, utility buildings shall have the exterior
appearance of other structures in the area.
      (4)   Lighting shall not project from the Utility Substation on to other
properties, or public right-of-ways.
   (D)   Utility substation performance standards. Utility Substations and all
accessory structures or buildings shall conform to the following minimum
requirements:
      (1)   Utility substations, shall to the greatest degree possible, be
located so as to minimize impacts on surrounding properties and public
infrastructure and at a minimum meet all zoning district setbacks.
      (2)   Screening shall be provided as determined by the conditional use
process to minimize visual impacts to surrounding properties.
      (3)   Whenever practicable, utility buildings shall have the exterior
appearance of other structures in the area.
      (4)   Lighting shall not project from the Utility Substation on to other
properties, or public rights-of-way.
§ 152.106 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY.
   No walls, fences, structures, trees, shrubs, vegetation, or other
obstructions shall be permitted in any yard when it poses a danger to traffic
by obscuring the view from any street, roadway, or alley, except as provided
below:
   (A)   Visibility from any street or roadway shall be unobstructed above the
height of two and one-half feet and below five feet within the triangle
described as beginning from a point at the intersection of the extension of the
existing curb lines of the two streets and extending a distance of 20 feet
along the edge of each street. This defines two sides of the triangle. The
third side is a line connecting the end points of the two sides described
above.
   (B)   Visibility from the intersection of any street or roadway and an alley
or driveway shall be unobstructed above the height of two and one-half feet and
below five feet within the triangle described as beginning from a point at the
intersection of the extension of the existing curblines or pavement edges or if
unpaved, the edge of the traveled surface, of the street and alley, and
extending a distance of 15 feet along the edge of each street. This defines two
sides of the triangle. The third side is a line connecting the end points of
the sides described above.
   (C)   Visibility from the intersection of any two alleys shall be
unobstructed above the height of two and one-half feet and below five feet
within the triangle described as beginning from a point at the intersection of
the extension of the existing curblines or pavement edges of the two alleys and
extending a distance of ten feet along the edge of each alley. This defines two
sides of the triangle. The third side is a line connecting the end points of
the two sides described above.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1375.jpg]
   (D)   The traffic visibility ordinance shall apply to properties in all
residential zoning districts as well as properties in other zoning use
districts with a defined residential land use including but not limited to a
single-family dwelling or multi-family dwelling.
(Ord. 418, passed 10-20-2025)
SIGNS
§ 152.120 FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Findings. The city hereby finds as follows:
      (1)   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and
quality of the environment;
      (2)   Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may
convey a variety of messages; and
      (3)   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and detriments
to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. It is not the purpose or intent of these sign
standards to regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose
or intent of this chapter to regulate any building design or any display not
defined as a sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from the outside of a
building. The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other
physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to protect and
promote the public health, safety and welfare;
      (2)   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the city
by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the
community;
      (3)   Improve the visual appearance of the city while providing for
effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and
the city’s goals of public safety and aesthetics; and
      (4)   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations
set forth herein under the zoning authority of the city.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.121 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Size. No sign shall exceed 128 square feet in area. See division (I)
below for measurement of area.
   (B)   Regulations. Except as otherwise permitted in this section, no signs
shall be erected or maintained at any angle to a building or structure so that
the sign extends or projects over the street or highway. No sign which is
erected or maintained flat against any building or structure shall extend or
project more than 12 inches from the building.
   (C)   Electrical signs. Electrical signs must be installed in accordance
with the current Electrical Code and a separate electrical permit from the
state must be obtained prior to placement.
   (D)   Flashing signs. All flashing, revolving and intermittently lighted
signs and all portable signs are prohibited, except as specifically allowed in
this section.
   (E)   Temporary signs.
      (1)   Temporary signs pertaining only to the construction, sale or rental
of the premises are allowable provided they do not exceed nine square feet in
any district and are removed within 30 days of the completion of construction,
sale or rental.
      (2)   One temporary signs is allowed for special events such as grand
openings and promotions subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Time frame of use.
            1.   No temporary sign shall be erected for more than 14 days
unless otherwise authorized by a temporary sign permit.
            2.   The use of temporary signs shall be limited to six independent
time periods which do not exceed 90 days gross in any calendar year.
         (b)   Number. Only one temporary sign shall be allowed, but the sign
may be supplemented by streamers, balloons and other similar peripherals.
         (c)   Size and height. No temporary sign for special events shall
exceed 64 square feet in size, nor exceed the height standards for signs in the
base zoning district.
   (F)   Sandwichboard signs. Sandwichboard signs are permitted in the DMU
district and may be used as temporary signage subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   Four feet of clear space must be maintained in the center of all
sidewalks for the passage of pedestrians.
      (2)   The sign shall conform to the following height and area maximums:
         (a)   Height: five feet; and
         (b)   Area: six square feet.
      (3)   All sandwichboard signs shall be placed 20 feet back from the
Highway 210/Highway 169 Intersection.
   (G)   Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited signs:
      (1)   Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles any official traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or emergency vehicle signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with effectiveness
of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal;
      (2)   All off-premises advertising; and
      (3)   Signs painted, attached or in any other manner affixed to trees,
rocks or similar natural surfaces, or attached to public utility poles,
bridges, towers or similar public structures.
   (H)   Setbacks. Permanent signs can be allowed up to the right-of-way as
long as there are no safety or maintenance concerns as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (I)   Area. The area within the frame shall be used to calculate the square
footage. If the letters or graphics are mounted directly on a wall of fascia or
in such way as to be without a frame, the dimensions for calculating the square
footage shall be the area within the periphery around the letters or graphics
in a plane figure bounded by straight lines connecting the outermost points
thereof. Each surface utilized to display a message or to attract attention
shall be measured as a separate sign and shall be calculated in the overall
square footage. Symbols, flags, pictures, wording, figures or other forms of
graphics painted on or attached to walls, awnings, free-standing structures,
suspended by balloons or kites are considered a sign and are included in
calculating the overall square footage.
   (J)   Canopies, marquees and fixed awnings. Canopies, marquees and fixed
awnings are an integral part of the structure to which they are attached. Where
allowed, they shall meet the following requirements and the applicable square
footage requirements.
      (1)   An awning, canopy or marquee may not extend out from the building
more than 30 inches.
      (2)   Awnings, canopies or marquees may have no part of the structure
other than supports nearer to the ground surface than eight feet.
      (3)   No sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated, may project below a
marquee.
   (K)   Illumination. External illumination for signs shall be so constructed
and maintained so that the source of light is not visible from the public
right-of-way or neighboring residential properties.
   (L)   Height. The top of a sign, including its superstructure, if any, shall
be no higher than 50% of the roof elevation of the building to which the sign
may be attached or 30 feet above ground level, whichever height is less. Free-
standing signs shall not exceed an overall height of 30 feet from ground level.
   (M)   Non-commercial speech. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, all signs of any size containing non-commercial speech may be posted
in any number from August 1 in a (state) general election year until ten days
following the (state) general election and 13 weeks prior to any special
election until ten days following the special election.
   (N)   Projecting signs. Projecting signs are subject to the building sign
requirements in this chapter. Where there is a conflict between the
requirements governing projecting signs and building signs, the requirements
for projecting signs shall control for projecting signs only.
      (1)   A building tenant shall have no more than one projecting sign
attached outside the tenant's space within building. The projecting sign may be
in addition to other signage permitted by this chapter.
      (2)   Projecting signs attached directly to the building facade shall be
supported in a stationary position by a cantilevered structure without the use
of any guy wires, cables, angle irons, or turnbuckles. Projecting signs
attached to the underside of an overhang covering the pedestrian walkway shall
be securely attached by metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws and hang by a
metal pole or chain of sufficient gauge to hold the weight of the sign. The
only permissible attachment angle shall be 90 degrees from the building facade
and positioned perpendicular to a pedestrian walkway so to be viewable in both
directions of the walkway. The projecting sign shall be attached to the
building within ten feet of the tenant's entrance for the public from the
exterior as measured along the building facade. The projecting sign shall not
extend more than four feet from the building measured from the face of the wall
to which the sign is mounted to the farthest edge of the sign structure
including any mounting equipment. The sign shall not extend over a parking
area, or a loading area. A projecting sign hanging over a pedestrian walkway
shall not conflict with the use of the walkway and in no case shall the bottom
edge of the sign structure, including mounting devices, be less than eight feet
above grade of the walkway. The top edge of the sign shall not be taller than
the roof line of a single-story building, nor a windowsill of the second story
of a multi-story building. If multiple projecting signs are attached to the
same building, they shall be attached at the same height so to present a
uniform appearance.
      (3)   Sign size. A projecting sign structure (not copy area on sign),
excluding the mounting equipment, shall not exceed eight square feet. The
thickness of the sign shall be no more than one foot.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 354, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 418, passed 10-
20-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.122 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS BY ZONING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Residential districts.
      (1)   Within residential zoning districts one sign per primary structure
is allowed, with a permit, with a maximum sign area of eight square feet.
      (2)   The following types of signs are not permitted in residential
zoning districts:
         (a)   Awning signs;
         (b)   Balloon signs;
         (c)   Digital display signs;
         (d)   Flashing signs;
         (e)   Marquee signs;
         (f)   Pole signs;
         (g)   Projecting signs;
         (h)   Pylon signs;
         (i)   Neon signs;
         (j)   Scrolling signs; and
         (k)   Shimmering signs.
   (B)   Business districts.
      (1)   Highway Commercial District. Within the Highway Commercial District
(C), signs are permitted as follows.
         (a)   The following types of signs are permitted in Highway Commercial
zoning districts:
            1.   Pole signs;
            2.   Pylon signs;
            3.   Awning signs;
            4.   Balloon signs;
            5.   Digital display signs;
            6.   Flashing signs;
            7.   Marquee signs;
            8.   Neon signs;
            9.   Scrolling signs; and
            10.   Shimmering signs.
      (2)   Downtown Mixed Use District. Within the Downtown Mixed Use District
(DMU), signs are permitted as follows.
         (a)   The following types of signs are conditional in the DMU
district:
            1.   Pole signs; and
            2.   Pylon signs.
         (b)   The following types of signs are permitted in Downtown Mixed Use
zoning districts:
            1.   Awning signs;
            2.   Balloon signs;
            3.   Digital display signs;
            4.   Flashing signs;
            5.   Marquee signs;
            6.   Projecting signs;
            7.   Neon signs;
            8.   Scrolling signs; and
            9.   Shimmering signs.
   (C)   Industrial districts. Within the Industrial District (I), signs are
permitted as follows.
      (1)   The following types of signs are permitted in industrial zoning
districts:
         (a)   Awning signs;
         (b)   Balloon signs;
         (c)   Digital display signs;
         (d)   Flashing signs;
         (e)   Marquee signs;
         (f)   Pole signs;
         (g)   Pylon signs;
         (h)   Neon signs;
         (i)   Scrolling signs; and
         (j)   Shimmering signs.
      (2)   Each property is allowed one free-standing sign so long as the
sign’s placement does not create a safety hazard by obstructing lines of sight
or pedestrian corridors.
      (3)   For corner lots, one free-standing sign conforming to these
standards is allowed on each roadway.
      (4)   Maximum sign area of a single sign is 128 square feet.
      (5)   Up to 10% of any principal structure facade area which directly
abuts and lies generally parallel with a road right-of-way or publicly traveled
roadway may be dedicated to signage.
      (6)   The permitted sign area may be split up into several signs or used
for one sign.
      (7)   Signs placed on a building shall not exceed 10% of the facade area
encompassed by the building side on which the sign is placed.
      (8)   The maximum sign area for the side of the principal structure not
abutting the road right-of-way or publicly traveled road is 24 square feet.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 354, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 418, passed 10-
20-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.123 REQUIRED PERMITS.
   No sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed or moved in the city
without first securing a permit from the city. The content of the sign shall
not be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign
permit.
   (A)   Permanent signs. To apply for a permanent sign permit, a complete
application shall be submitted to the city containing the following:
      (1)   Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of the sign and lot;
      (2)   The address at which the sign(s) are to be erected and the street
on which they are to front;
      (3)   A complete set of scaled plans showing the sign dimensions, area,
height, ground elevations, applicable setbacks and other details to fully and
clearly represent the safe construction and placement of the proposed sign(s);
      (4)   Type of sign(s) being requested (i.e., wall sign, pylon sign and
the like);
      (5)   The permit fee; and
      (6)   A permit from either MnDOT or the county if the proposed sign is
along a state highway or county road (only if applicable).
   (B)   Temporary signs. To apply for a permit to allow a temporary sign, a
complete application shall be submitted to the city containing the following:
      (1)   Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of the sign and lot;
      (2)   The address at which the sign(s) is to be erected;
      (3)   A generalized plan set showing the sign dimensions and height and a
notation of the materials to be used;
      (4)   A generalized site plan which clearly represents the placement of
the proposed sign(s) on the applicable property;
      (5)    The proposed time frame(s) over which the sign(s) will be posted;
and
      (6)   A permit from either MnDOT or the county if the proposed sign is
along a state highway or county road (only if applicable).
   (C)   Temporary sign renewal. A previously approved temporary sign permit
issued by the city may be renewed provided the sign design, size, location or
other previously approved details are not proposed to significantly change. A
temporary sign permit renewal application shall include the following:
      (1)   Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of the sign and lot;
      (2)   The address at which the sign(s) is to be erected;
      (3)   The date of issuance of the original permit which is being renewed;
and
      (4)   The proposed time frame(s) over which the sign(s) will be posted.
   (D)   Review.
      (1)   The city shall approve or deny complete sign permit applications
upon receipt of a complete application.
      (2)   If the permit is denied, the city will send a written notice of
denial to the applicant.
      (3)   The written notice will indicate the reason(s) for denial and a
description of the applicant’s appeal rights.
   (E)   Exemptions. The following signs shall not require a permit. However,
these exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from
the responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating signs:
      (1)   The changing of the display surface on a previously approved sign;
      (2)   Signs six square feet or less in size, per surface if double sided;
      (3)   Window signage; and
      (4)   Governmental signs.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 354, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 418, passed 10-
20-2025)
§ 152.124 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   It is recognized that signs exist within the zoning districts
which were lawful before this chapter was enacted, which may be prohibited,
regulated or restricted under the terms of this subchapter or future
amendments.
      (2)   It is the intent of this subchapter that non-conforming signs shall
not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding
other signs or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this subchapter to permit legally
established non-conforming signs existing on the effective date of this
chapter, or amendments thereto, to continue as legally established non-
conforming signs provided the signs are safe, are maintained so as not to be
unsightly, and have not been abandoned or removed subject to the following
provisions.
      (1)   No sign shall be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
non-conformity.
      (2)   Should the sign or sign structure be destroyed by any means to an
extent greater than 50% of its replacement cost and no sign permit has been
applied for within 180 days of when the property was damaged, it shall not be
reconstructed, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Should the sign or sign structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
zoning district in which it is located after it is moved.
      (4)   No existing sign devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in
the zoning district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended or
moved, except in changing the sign to a sign permitted in the zoning district
in which it is located.
      (5)   When a structure loses its status as a legal non-conforming
structure, all signs on the property shall be brought into conformance with
this chapter within 60 days.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.125 SUBSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this chapter may
substitute non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or non-
commercial copy.
   (B)   This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval
or permitting.
   (C)   The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring
of commercial speech over non-commercial speech or favoring of any particular
non-commercial message over any other non-commercial message.
   (D)   This provision prevails over any more specific provisions to the
contrary.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS
§ 152.140 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is:
   (A)   To establish predictable and balanced regulations to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare of the city;
   (B)   To facilitate the provision of telecommunications services and
facilities including commercial wireless telecommunication services in the
city;
   (C)   To minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design
standards;
   (D)   To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna
failure and weather related occurrences through structural standards, careful
siting and setback requirements; and
   (E)   To encourage the use of existing towers and buildings to accommodate
commercial wireless telecommunication service antennas in order to minimize the
number of towers needed to serve the city.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.141 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct
in place, place or re-erect any tower, unless it shall replace a like tower,
without first making application to the city and securing a permit. A change in
construction, dimension, lighting design or design type shall also require a
permit. The placement of antennas on previously approved towers may be
administratively approved by the city.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.142 TOWER AND ANTENNA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   Proposed or modified towers and antennas shall meet the following design
requirements.
   (A)   Towers and antennas shall blend into the surrounding environment
through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in
instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities.
   (B)   No tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any
way, any platform, catwalk, crow’s nest or similar structure, except during
periods of construction or repair.
   (C)   Towers and their antennas shall be certified by a qualified and
licensed engineer to conform to applicable state structural building standards.
   (D)   Towers and their antennas shall be designed to conform to accepted
electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions
of the National Electrical Code.
   (E)   Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive
resistant material.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.143 TOWER SETBACKS.
   Towers and all accessory structures or buildings shall conform to the
following minimum setback requirements.
   (A)   Towers shall be set back from all property lines and existing
structures an amount equal to the height of the structure.
   (B)   Guy wires for towers shall be located no closer than 25 feet to any
property line and shall meet the setback of the underlying land use district
with respect to the public road right-of-way.
   (C)   Suitable protective anti-climbing fencing, with a minimum height of
six feet shall be provided around any tower and guy wires.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.144 TOWER LOCATION.
   Towers less than 150 feet in height shall be located a minimum of 10,200
feet from the end of an airport runway as measured from the center point of the
base of a free-standing tower. Towers that are 150 feet or more in height shall
be located a distance of at least three miles from any public or private
airport.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.145 CO-LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All commercial wireless telecommunication towers erected, constructed or
located within the city shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Documentation of the area to be served including maps demonstrating
the size of communication cells and a search ring for the antenna location. A
narrative describing a search ring for the request, with not less than one-mile
radius clearly explaining why the site was selected, what existing structures
were available and why they are not suitable as locations or co-locations.
   (B)   Documentation that the communications equipment planned for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
building within the search ring of the service area due to one or more of the
following reasons:
      (1)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced,
modified or replaced to accommodate planned equipment at a reasonable cost;
      (2)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building
as documented by a qualified and licensed engineer or qualified radio frequency
engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
      (3)   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius
that are 60 feet or over in height that cannot accommodate the planned
equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a
qualified and licensed engineer; and
      (4)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
   (C)   Any proposed tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically and,
in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable
antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is over 99 feet in
height, or for at least one additional user if the tower is between 35 and 99
feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of
antennas upon the tower and to accept mounting at varying heights.
   (D)   An agreement stating that the site will be designed for not less than
three users with applicant and property owner commitment to co-location,
whereby, any prohibition of additional users on a tower will be considered a
violation of the permit and city policy. The agreement shall also include a
statement that any unused or abandoned tower shall be removed by the property
owner and/or applicant. The agreement shall be signed by the applicant and the
property owner and shall be attached to and become a part of the permit.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.146 ANTENNAS MOUNTED ON EXISTING BUILDINGS OR TOWERS.
   The placement of telecommunication antennas, including wireless
telecommunication antennas on existing buildings, towers or structures, shall
meet the requirements of the underlying land use district and this section. A
site plan and building plan must be submitted to the city as part of the land
use permitting process. Where a tower is non-conforming due to the requirements
of this section additional telecommunication antennas may be permitted to be
placed on the tower after being reviewed by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.147 ACCESSORY UTILITY BUILDINGS.
   All buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall:
   (A)   Be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding
environment and shall meet the height and setback limitations as established
for each land use district; and
   (B)   Have ground-mounted equipment screened from view by suitable
vegetation, except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects
and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.148 TOWER LIGHTING.
   A tower shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not have
affixed or attached to it in any way, except during time of repair or
installation, any lights, reflectors, flashers or other illuminating device,
except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal
Communications Commission or state agency. When incorporated into the approved
design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking
lots or similar areas may be attached to the tower.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.149 ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS.
   Abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed within
12 months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the Zoning Administrator. In the event that a tower is not removed
within the 12 months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and
associated facilities may be removed by the city and the costs of removal
assessed against the property.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.150 PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS INTERFERENCE.
   Commercial wireless telecommunications services shall not interfere with
public safety telecommunications. All applications shall include adequate
information that will be reviewed by the Planning Commission before a permit
may be issued. Before the introduction of new service or changes in existing
service, telecommunication providers shall notify the city at least ten
calendar days in advance of any changes and allow the city to monitor
interference levels during the testing process.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.151 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.
   The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment
information signs is prohibited.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.152 NON-CONFORMING TOWERS.
   (A)   To avoid requiring new towers and to minimize the number of towers
needed to serve the city, the following provisions shall apply to non-
conforming towers. Telecommunication towers in existence at the time of this
chapter may be permitted to increase tower height after being issued a
conditional use permit.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall consider the following criteria as part
of the conditional use permit process:
      (1)   Tower safety concerns including tower collapse, falling ice and
airplane traffic;
      (2)   Land use character and history of tower(s);
      (3)   Comparative visual impact to the surrounding lands of the proposed
tower height increase;
      (4)   Disturbance or conflict with agricultural uses on the property; and
      (5)   Other factors which tend to reduce conflicts or are incompatible
with the character and need of the area.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.153 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   A screening and landscaping plan designed to screen the base of the
tower, accessory utility buildings, utility structures and security fencing
shall be submitted. The plan shall show the location, size, quantity and type
of landscaping materials. Landscape materials shall be capable of screening all
year and must be six feet in height by the end of the second growing season.
Gravel or other durable surface or other weed prevention measures shall be
applied within the fenced area to prevent the growth of weeds.
   (B)   A maintenance plan for landscaped materials shall also be submitted.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.154 ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the information required elsewhere, applications shall
include the following information:
   (A)   A report from a licensed engineer that describes the commercial
wireless telecommunication service towers capacity, including the number and
type of antennas that it can accommodate;
   (B)   A letter of intent from the commercial wireless telecommunication
service tower owner committing the tower owner and successors to allow the
shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use;
   (C)   The location of all public and private airports within a three-mile
radius of the tower site;
   (D)   Applicant must obtain FAA approval and/or provide documentation that
FAA approval is not needed;
   (E)   Applicant must obtain FCC licensure and approval as required for
various communications applications. No interference with local television and
radio reception will be allowed;
   (F)   An intermodulation study which provides a technical evaluation of
existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference
problems, only if that is the basis for not co-locating;
   (G)   The applicant must submit proof of liability and worker’s compensation
insurance;
   (H)   For towers over 500 feet, an environmental assessment worksheet (EAW)
is required and the applicant shall be responsible to provide the city with all
information required to complete the EAW prior to the issuance of a permit from
the city; and
   (I)   The owner of the tower shall provide the city with an acceptable
financial guarantee in an amount equal to one and one-half times the cost to
remove the tower and related infrastructure, including footings and other
underground improvements to a depth of 36 inches below existing grade, and to
restore the site. Failure to remove the structure shall be cause for the city
to remove the tower and associated equipment at the expense of the property
owners.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.155 TOWERS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   Permits are not required for the following:
   (A)   A satellite earth station antenna four feet in diameter or less,
located in an industrial or commercial district, meeting required setbacks;
   (B)   A satellite earth station antenna three feet or less in diameter,
meeting the required setbacks; and
   (C)   A tower less than 50 feet as measured from the ground.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
ADULT USES
§ 152.170 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate adult-oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to:
      (1)   Prevent additional criminal activity within the city;
      (2)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent adverse
effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood;
      (3)   To locate adult-oriented businesses away from residential areas,
schools, churches, parks and playgrounds; and
      (4)   Prevent concentration of adult-oriented businesses within certain
areas of the city.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter have neither the purpose, nor
effect, of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative material, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is
not the intent, nor the effect, of this chapter to restrict or deny access by
adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their
intended market.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.171 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Except as specifically provided for in this subchapter, no structure
shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no
structure or land shall be used, for any purpose, nor in any manner that is not
in conformity with this subchapter.
   (B)   No adult-oriented business shall engage in any activity, conduct or
permit any other person to engage in or to conduct any activity in or about the
establishment which is prohibited by this subchapter, the laws of the state or
the United States of America. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as
authorizing or permitting conduct which is prohibited or regulated by other
statutes or ordinances, including, but not limited to, statutes or ordinances
prohibiting the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material generally
or the exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials to minors.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.172 LOCATION.
   During the term of this subchapter, no adult-oriented businesses shall be
located in any zoning district other than (I) Industrial, as defined and
described in this chapter, nor less than 1,000 feet from any church site,
school site, day care facility, park or boundary of a residential district, as
defined and described in this chapter. In addition, no adult-oriented business
may be located within 500 feet of another adult-oriented business. For purposes
of this subchapter, this distance shall be a horizontal measurement from the
nearest existing residential district boundary or site used for residential
purposes, church site, school site, day care site, park site or another adult-
oriented business site to the nearest boundary of the proposed adult-oriented
business site.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.173 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No adult-oriented business site shall be open to the public from the hours
of 11:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.174 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY-EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
IN VIEWING ROOMS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented
business (other than an adult motel) which exhibits on the premises, in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements.
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually-oriented use license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not
exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place
at which the permit, if granted, will be conspicuously posted. A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of a licensed engineer’s or architect’s
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications, if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station may be made without the prior approval of the city.
      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at
least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station
at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in
this division (A)(5) must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s
station.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area
specified in division (A)(5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all
times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in
the application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) above.
      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as measured at the
floor level.
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect
the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes
exist.
      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to
be non-porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, non-porous,
easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous
material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.
   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(14) above
commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.175 ESCORT AGENCIES.
   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort, or agrees
to act as an escort, for any person under the age of 18 years.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.176 PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and
intentionally, in an adult-oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or
engages in specified sexual activities.
   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally,
in an adult-oriented business, appears in a semi-nude condition unless the
person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least six feet from any
patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor.
   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in an
adult-oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any
patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity
directly to any employee, while that employee is semi-nude in an adult-oriented
business.
   (D)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to
knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.177 MINORS IN ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under
the age of 18 years on the premises of a adult-oriented business.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.178 OPERATION.
   (A)   Off-site viewing. An establishment operating as an adult-oriented
business shall prevent off-site viewing of its merchandise, which if viewed by
a minor, would be in violation of M.S. Ch. 617, as it may be amended from time
to time, or other applicable federal or state statutes or local ordinances.
   (B)   Entrances. All entrances to the business, with the exception of
emergency fire exits which shall not be usable by patrons to enter the
business, shall be visible from a public right-of-way.
   (C)   Layout. The layout of the display areas shall be designed so that the
management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside the
business can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise
offered for sale of viewing including, but not limited to, books, magazines,
photographs, video tapes or any other material.
   (D)   Illumination. Illumination of the premises’ exterior shall be adequate
to observe the location and activities of all persons on the premises’
exterior.
   (E)   Signs. Signs for adult-oriented businesses shall comply with the sign
restrictions addressed in §§
152.120 through
152.125 of this chapter, and in addition, signs for adult-oriented businesses
shall not contain representational depiction of an adult nature or graphic
descriptions of the adult theme of the operation.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.179 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; CONSUMPTION OR SALE.
   Adult-oriented businesses shall not be located on the same parcel as or on a
parcel adjacent to or within 500 feet of an establishment that serves alcoholic
beverages. Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on a parcel containing
an adult use is prohibited.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.180 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Licenses required. All establishments, including any business
operating at the time this subchapter becomes effective, operating or intending
to operate an adult-oriented business, shall apply for and obtain a license
from the city. A person is in violation of the city ordinance if he or she
operates an adult-oriented business without a valid license issued by the city.
      (2)   Applications. An application for a license must be made on a form
provided by the city.
         (a)   The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram
showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total
floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
         (b)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this subchapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with the appropriate state, county and local law and codes by the
Health Official, Fire Marshal and Building Official.
         (c)   All employees of an adult-oriented business must be licensed as
an adult-oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter.
         (d)   Application for license shall contain the following and shall be
supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
enforcement officer within ten working days of a change of circumstances which
would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete:
            1.   Name, business location, business mailing address, phone
number and legal description of the property to be used;
            2.   The full true names and any other names used in the preceding
five years, addresses, phone numbers, birthdates of the owners, lessees (if
any), the operator or manager and all employees;
            3.   Either a set of fingerprints suitable for conducting necessary
background checks pursuant to this subchapter, or the applicant’s Social
Security number, to be used for the same purpose;
            4.   The names, addresses and phone numbers of two persons, who
shall be residents of the state, and who may be called upon to attest to the
applicant’s, manager’s or operator’s character;
            5.   Whether the applicant, manager or operator has ever been
convicted of a crime or offense other than a traffic offense and, if so,
complete and accurate information detailing the disposition thereof;
            6.   The names and addresses of all creditors of the applicant,
owner, lessee or manager regarding credit which has been extended for the
purposes of constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, furnishing or
acquiring the premises, personal effects, equipment or anything incidental to
the establishment, maintenance and operation of the business; and
            7.   Written proof of age, in the form of either:
               a.   A copy of a birth certificate with a current photo;
               b.   A current driver’s license with picture; or
               c.   Other picture identification document issued by a
government agency.
         (e)   If the application is made on behalf of the corporation, joint
business venture, partnership or any legally constituted business association,
it shall submit along with its application accurate and complete business
records showing the names, address and birth dates of all individuals having an
interest in the business, including partners, officers, owners and creditors
furnishing credit for the establishment, acquisition, maintenance and
furnishings of the business. In the case of a corporation, the names, addresses
and birth dates of all officers, general managers, members of the board of
directors, as well as any creditors who have extended credit for the
acquisition, maintenance, operation or furnishing or the establishment,
including the purchase or acquisition of any items of personal property for use
in the operation.
         (f)   All applicants shall furnish to the city, along with their
applications, complete and accurate documentation establishing the interest of
the applicant and any other person having an interest in the premises upon
which the building is proposed to be located or the furnishings thereof,
personal property thereof or the operation or maintenance thereof.
Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed, contract for deed,
mortgage deed, mortgage credit arrangement, loan agreements, security
agreements and any other documents establishing the interest of the applicant
or any other person in the operation, acquisition or maintenance of the
enterprise.
      (3)   Application/applicant disqualification. Any one of the following
items shall invalidate the application or disqualify the applicant from
submitting an application:
         (a)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; and
         (b)   An applicant has been convicted of a crime involving any one of
the following offenses:
            1.   Any sex crimes, as defined by M.S. §§ 609.293 through 609.352,
inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, or as defined by any
ordinance or statute in conformity therewith;
            2.   Any obscenity crime, as defined by M.S. §§ 617.293 et seq., as
it may be amended from time to time, or as defined by any ordinance or statute
in conformity therewith, for which:
               a.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
               b.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
               c.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is two or more
misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-hour period.
            3.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed from shall have
no effect on disqualification of the applicant or applicant’s spouse.
      (4)   Requalification. An applicant who has been convicted of an offense
listed in division (A)(3) above may qualify for an adult-oriented license only
when the time period required by division (A)(3)(b)2. above has elapsed.
      (5)   Posting. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name
of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the
address of the adult-oriented business. The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous location near the entrance to the adult-oriented business so that
it may be easily read at any time.
      (6)   Council action. The City Council shall act to approve or disapprove
the license application within 120 days from the date the application was
submitted; provided that, the application contains all of the information
required by this subchapter. If the application is deficient, the Council shall
act on the application within 120 days from the date that the deficiency has
been corrected. The City Administrator shall notify the applicant of the
deficiencies in the application.
      (7)   Appeals. Within 90 days after the decision by the Council, the
applicant may appeal to the District Court by serving a notice upon the Mayor
or City Administrator.
   (B)   Investigation and issuance. The City Council shall direct the Police
Department or County Sheriff to investigate all facts set forth in the
application. An advance fee as set forth in §
33.01 shall be submitted with the application to defray the city’s costs and
expenses associated with the background investigation. After the background
investigation has been completed and all information required by the
application has been submitted to the city, the City Council shall determine
whether to grant or to deny the license application.
   (C)   License fees. Fees shall be established by City Council resolution on
the fee structure.
   (D)   Inspection.
      (1)   Access. An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, Zoning Administrator and Building
Inspection Division, County Sheriff’s office and Fire Department to inspect the
premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the law and city ordinance at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
      (2)   Refusal to permit inspections. A person who operates an adult-
oriented business or his or her agent or employee commits an offense if he or
she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, County Sheriff’s Department, Fire
Department, Zoning Administrator or Building Inspection Division at any time it
is occupied or open for business. Refusal to permit inspections may result in
the suspension of the license as provided for in division (F) below.
      (3)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of
an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for uses as a
permanent or temporary habitation.
   (E)   Expiration and renewal.
      (1)   Expiration. Each license shall expire at the end of the calendar
year and may be renewed only by making application as provided for in §
152.171 of this chapter. Application for renewal must be made at least 60 days
before the expiration date, and when made less than 60 days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license will be unaffected.
      (2)   Denial of renewal. When the city denies renewal of a license, the
applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the
renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapse since the denial date became final.
   (F)   Suspension.
      (1)   Causes of suspension. The city may suspend a license for a period
not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:
         (a)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
chapter;
         (b)   Engaged in the use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult-
oriented business premises. Refused to allow an inspection of the adult-
oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. Knowingly permitted
gambling by any person on the adult-oriented business premises; and/or
         (c)   Demonstrated the inability to operate or manage an adult-
oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.
      (2)   Notice. A suspension by the city shall be preceded by written
notice to the licensee and before a hearing. The notice shall give at least
ten-days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the
nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the
licensee personally, or by leaving the same at the licensee’s business premises
with the person in charge thereof.
   (G)   Revocation.
      (1)   Suspended licenses. The city may revoke a license if a cause of
suspension in division (F) above occurs and the license has been suspended
within the preceding 12 months.
      (2)   Causes of revocation. The city shall revoke a license if it
determines that:
         (a)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the city during the application process;
         (b)   A licensee or an employee knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
         (c)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on
the premises;
         (d)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult-oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
         (e)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in division
(A)(3) above, for which the time period required in division (A)(3)(b)2. above,
has not elapsed;
         (f)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or
persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a
crime listed in division (A)(3) above for which a conviction has been obtained,
and the person or persons were employees of the adult-oriented business at the
time the offenses were committed;
         (g)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or on
the licensed premises; and
         (h)   A licensee has allowed the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic
beverages at the adult-oriented business for which a license has been issued
herein.
      (3)   Appeals. The fact that conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.
      (4)   Granting a license after revocation. When the city revokes a
license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not
be issued an adult-oriented business license for one year from the date that
the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds
that the basis for revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may
be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under division (G)(2)
(e) above, an applicant may not be granted another license until the
appropriate number of years required under division (A)(3) above have elapsed.
      (5)   Notice. A revocation by the city shall be preceded by written
notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least
ten-days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the
nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the
licensee personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed premises with the
person in charge thereof.
   (H)   Transfer of license. A licensee shall not transfer this license to
another, nor shall a licensee operate an adult-oriented business under the
authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the
application.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.181 EXEMPTIONS.
   It is a defense to prosecution under §
152.180(A) of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so
in a modeling class operated:
   (A)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   (B)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
   (C)   In a structure:
      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
       (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
PAWNSHOPS
§ 152.195 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to prevent pawn businesses from
being used as facilities for the commission of crimes, and to assure that the
businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards, thereby protecting
the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (B)   It is also the purpose of this subchapter to establish uniform and
reasonable regulations to:
      (1)   Prevent additional criminal activity within the city;
      (2)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent adverse
effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood; and
      (3)   Locate pawnshops away from adult-oriented businesses and off-sale
liquor businesses.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.196 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to or include the following:
   (A)   The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following conditions are
present:
      (1)   The sale is held on property occupied as a dwelling by the seller,
or owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political organization;
      (2)   The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
      (3)   The sale does not exceed a period of 72 consecutive hours;
      (4)   Not more than two sales are held either by the same person or on
the same property, as defined in division (A)(1) above, in any 12-month period;
and
      (5)   None of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale
or received on consignment for purposes of resale.
   (B)   Sales by a person licensed as a motor vehicle dealer;
   (C)   The sale of secondhand books, magazines, sound or video recordings or
films;
   (D)   The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer;
   (E)   The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods taken as
part of full payment for new goods, and where the business is incidental to and
not the primary business of a person;
   (F)   A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler
having an established place of business or of goods sold at open sale from
bankrupt stock;
   (G)   Goods sold at a public market;
   (H)   Goods sold at an exhibition; and
   (I)   The sale of secondhand goods by a secondhand goods dealer on property
where no pawnbroker license is required.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.197 LOCATION.
   No license shall be issued to a location that is less than 1,000 feet from
any adult business as regulated by §§
152.170 through
152.181 of this chapter, nor shall any license be issued to a location that is
less than 350 feet from any off-sale liquor business and at least 100 feet from
any residential use.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.198 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Licenses required.
         (a)   All establishments, including any business operating at the time
this chapter becomes effective, operating or intending to operate a pawnshop,
shall apply for and obtain a license from the city.
         (b)   A person is in violation of the city ordinance if he or she
operates a pawnshop without a valid license issued by the city.
      (2)   Applications. An application for a license under this subchapter
shall be made on a form provided by the city and be filed with the City
Administrator. The application shall include the following information:
         (a)   If the applicant is a natural person:
            1.   The name, birthplace, date of birth, resident street address
and phone number of applicant;
            2.   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien;
            3.   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a
name other than the applicant’s given name and, if so, the name or names used
previously and information concerning dates and places where used;
            4.   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name or style other than the name of the applicant and a certified
copy of the certification required by M.S. § 333.01, as it may be amended from
time to time;
            5.   The street addresses at which the applicant has lived during
the preceding five years;
            6.   The type, name and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five years and the
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s previous employer(s) and partner(s),
if any, for the preceding five years;
            7.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
crime or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the
applicant must furnish information as to the time, place and offense of all
such convictions;
            8.   The physical description of the applicant;
            9.   The applicant’s current personal financial statement; and
            10.   If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of
the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information
concerning each of them required in divisions (A)(2)(a)1. through (A)(2)(a)8.
above.
         (b)   If the applicant is a partnership:
            1.   The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited
partners and all information concerning each general partner required in
division (A)(2)(a) above;
            2.   The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of
each partner in the licensed business;
            3.   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted
with the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as
to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, as it may be amended from time to
time, a certified copy of the certificate must be attached to the application;
and
            4.   If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information
concerning each of them as required in divisions (A)(2)(a)1. through (A)(2)
(a)8. above.
         (c)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
            1.   The name of the corporation or business form and, if
incorporated, the state of incorporation;
            2.   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement, and bylaws shall be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority as required in M.S. § 303.06, as it may be amended from time to time,
shall be attached;
            3.   The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business and all information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent as
required in divisions (A)(2)(a)1. through (A)(2)(a)8. above; and
            4.   A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess
of 5% in the organization or business form or who are officers of the
corporation or business form and all information concerning the persons as
required in divisions (A)(2)(a)1. through (A)(2)(a)8. above.
         (d)   For all applicants, the following information shall be supplied:
            1.   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker license from
any other governmental unit;
            2.   Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had
revoked, or had suspended a pawnbroker license from any other governmental
unit;
            3.   The names, resident street addresses and business addresses of
three character references, who are of good moral character and who are not
related to the applicant or not holding any ownership in the premises or
businesses;
            4.   The location of the business premises;
            5.   The legal description of the premises to be licensed, together
with a sketch plan of the area for which the license is sought showing
dimensions, location of buildings and street access parking facilities; and
            6.   Such other information as the Planning Commission may deem
necessary.
      (3)   Application execution. All applications for a license under this
subchapter must be signed and sworn to under oath of affirmation by the
applicant. If the application is that of a natural person, it must be signed
and sworn to by the person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if
that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an
unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application, license and bond shall be made and
issued in the name of all partners. Any false statement on an application shall
result in denial of the application.
      (4)   Application investigation. At the time of making an initial or
renewal application, the applicant shall, in writing, authorize the Police
Department or the County Sheriff to investigate all facts set out in the
application and to perform a personal background and criminal record check on
the applicant. The applicant shall further authorize the Police Department or
the County Sheriff to release information received from the investigation to
the city. The applicant shall have an opportunity to review the information
before it is released to the city.
      (5)   New manager. When a licensee places a manager in charge of a
business, or if the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes,
the licensee must complete and submit the appropriate application on forms
provided by the city within 14 days. The application must include all
appropriate information as required in division (A)(2) above.
   (B)   Transfer of license.
      (1)   Each license under this subchapter shall be issued to the applicant
only and the license shall not be transferable, except as allowed in the
following statements regarding corporations, partnerships or associations.
         (a)   Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as
there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation
unless the change is approved by the city, in which event the license shall
continue in force until the end of the then current license year.
         (b)   Licenses issued to partnerships or associations shall be valid
only so long as there is no change in the partnership or association agreement
or in the ownership of the partnership or association unless the change is
approved by the city, in which event the license shall continue in force until
the end of the then current license year.
         (c)   Corporation, partnerships or associations shall submit written
notice to the Administrator of any such changes described herein on or before
60 days prior to the effective date of any the change and pay a fee required
for an amendment to the license. In the case of a corporation, the licensee
shall submit written notice to the Administrator when a person not listed in
the initial application will be acquiring an interest and shall give all
information about the person as is required of a person pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Each license shall be issued only for the premises described in the
application and shall not be transferable to a different location. No licensee
shall loan, sell, give or assign a license to another person.
   (C)   Expiration and renewal.
      (1)   Expiration. All licenses shall expire at the end of the calendar
year.
      (2)   Renewal. Applications may only be renewed by making an application
as provided for in division (A)(2) above. Application renewals shall be made at
least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the license and shall be made on
forms provided by the city. The city will mail application renewal forms to
existing licensees approximately 120 days prior to the expiration of the
licenses.
   (D)   License disqualification. No license shall be issued if the applicant,
any general partner or managing partner of a partnership, or a manager,
proprietor or agent in charge of a corporation or other organization meets any
of the following:
      (1)   Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      (2)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation
licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 2, as it may be amended from
time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by M.S.
§ 364.03, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
      (4)   Holds an intoxicating liquor license; and
      (5)   In the judgment of the city, is not the real party in interest or
beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be operated, under the
license.
   (E)   Fees. The annual license fee and investigation fee shall be
established by the City Council by resolution on the fee structure.
   (F)   Denial, suspension or revocation. Any license issued under this
subchapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   The proposed use does not comply with any applicable zoning
ordinance;
      (2)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance or other provisions of this chapter or state law;
      (3)   The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more
provisions of this subchapter;
      (4)   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or
financial investigation due to the unavailability of information;
      (5)   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery was used or attempted in
securing or renewing a license;
      (6)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements were made in the
application and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant’s
business;
      (7)   The applicant has violated within the preceding five years, any law
relating to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled
substance or illegal operation of a business; and
      (8)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.199 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals,
extensions or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in English
the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in
a computerized record approved by the Police Department:
      (1)   A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name or other identifying mark on such an item;
      (2)   The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon or pledged
therefor;
      (3)   The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including
monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges;
      (4)   Date, time and place the item of property was received by the
licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that
distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee’s records. The
identifiers shall be consecutively numbered and for the purpose of the
reporting requirements shall include any identifiers that may have been voided;
      (5)   Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone
number, birth date and accurate description of the person from whom the item of
property was received, including sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and
color of hair;
      (6)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the
following forms of identification of the seller:
         (a)   Current valid Minnesota driver’s license;
         (b)   Current valid Minnesota identification card; and
         (c)   Current valid photo identification issued by another state or
province of Canada.
      (7)   The signature of the person identified in the transaction;
      (8)   Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the Police
Department of acceptable video standards, the licensee must also take a color
photograph or color video recording of each customer involved in a billable
transaction and every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved or affixed thereto.
         (a)   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches in
length by two inches in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the
photography can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. The photographs must be available to the
Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, upon request.
         (b)   The major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable
facial image of the person who pawned or sold the item. Items photographed must
be accurately depicted. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is
being photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous
place in the premises.
         (c)   If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must focus on
the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an identifiable image
of that person’s face. Items photographed by video must be accurately depicted.
Video photographs must be electronically referenced by time and date so that
they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. The licensee must inform the person that he
or she is being videotaped by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a
conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape
for at least three months.
      (9)   Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the Police
Department, licensees must fulfill the color photograph requirements in
division (A)(8) above by submitting them as digital images, in a format
specified by the issuing authority, electronically cross-referenced to the
reportable transaction with which they are associated. Even though the digital
images may be captured from required video recordings, this provision does not
altar or amend the requirements of division (A)(8) above.
   (B)   For renewals, extensions, redemptions and confiscations, the licensee
shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current
transaction and the type of transaction.
   (C)   The records must, at all reasonable times, be open to inspection by
the Police Department or Department of Licenses and Consumer Services. Data
entries shall be retained for at least three years from the date of
transaction. Entries of required digital images shall be retained for a minimum
of 90 days.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.200 DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.
   Effective no later than 60 days after the Police Department provides
licensees with the current version of the automated pawn system interchange
file specification, licensees must submit every reportable transaction to the
Police Department on a daily basis in the following manner.
   (A)   Licensees must provide to the Police Department all reportable
transaction information by transferring it from their computer to the automated
pawn system via modem using the current version of the automated pawn system
interchange file specification. All required records must be transmitted
completely and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance
with standards and procedures established by the issuing authority. Any
transaction that does not meet the automated pawn system interchange file
specification must be corrected and resubmitted the next business day. The
licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the
premises, which informs patrons that all transactions are reported to the
Police Department daily.
   (B)   Licensees will be charged for each billable transaction reported to
the Police Department.
   (C)   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required reports
by modem, the licensee must provide the Police Department, upon request, with
printed copies of all reportable transactions along with the video tape(s) for
that date, by noon of the next business day.
   (D)   If the problem is determined to be in the licensee’s system and is not
corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the
licensee must continue to provide the required reports as detailed in division
(C) above, and shall be charged as set in the Fee Schedule in §
33.01 of this code of ordinances reporting failure penalty, daily, until the
error is corrected.
   (E)   If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee’s system, the
licensee must continue to provide the required reports as detailed in division
(C) above, and resubmit all such transactions via modem when the error is
corrected.
   (F)   If the licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the
photographs as required in §
152.199 of this chapter, the licensee must immediately take all required
photographs with a still camera, cross-reference the photographs to the correct
transaction, and make the pictures available to the Police Department upon
request.
   (G)   Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that
prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon
correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable
transaction from every business day that the problem had existed.
   (H)   Divisions (C) through (E) above notwithstanding, the Police Department
may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay the implementation
of the daily reporting penalty.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.201 RECEIPT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every
reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three
years.
   (B)   The receipt must include, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business;
      (2)   The date and time that the item was received by the licensee;
      (3)   Whether the item was pawned, sold or the nature of the transaction;
      (4)   An accurate description of each item received including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name or other identifying mark on such an item;
      (5)   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that
conducted the transaction;
      (6)   The amount advanced or paid;
      (7)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and
charges;
      (8)   The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed
by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount
necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date;
      (9)   The full name, current residential address, current residence phone
number and birth date of the pledger or seller;
      (10)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the
following forms of identification of the seller:
         (a)   Current valid Minnesota driver’s license;
         (b)   Current valid Minnesota identification card; and
         (c)   Current valid photo driver’s license or identification card
issued by another state or province of Canada.
      (11)   Description of the pledger or seller including sex, height,
weight, race, eye color and hair color;
      (12)   The signature of the pledger or seller; and
      (13)   All printed statements as required by M.S. § 325J.04, subd. 2, as
it may be amended from time to time, or any other applicable statutes.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.202 REDEMPTION PERIOD.
   Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have a
minimum of 90 days from the date of the transaction to redeem the item before
it may be forfeited and sold. Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item
to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued, or to any
person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the
property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the
pledger at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or
with approval of the Chief of Police or Chief’s designee. Written authorization
for release of property to persons other than the original pledger must be
maintained along with the original transaction record in accordance with §
152.199 of this chapter.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.203 HOLDING PERIOD.
   Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee must not be sold or
otherwise transferred for 30 days from the date of the transaction. An
individual may redeem an item 72 hours after the item was received on deposit,
excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.204 POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
   (A)   Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any
agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing
by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days
from the date of the initial notification, or until the investigative order is
cancelled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to division
(B) below, whichever comes first.
   (B)   Order to hold. Whenever the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee
(s), notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the Chief
or the Chief’s designee. The order to hold shall expire 90 days from the date
that it is placed unless the Chief of Police of the Chief’s designee determines
that the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
   (C)   Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or as being
evidence in a criminal case, the Chief or the Chief’s designee may:
      (1)   Physically confiscate and remove the item from the shop, pursuant
to a written order from the Chief or the Chief’s designee; or
      (2)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided for in
division (B) above, and leave it in the shop.
   (D)   License provided. When an item is confiscated, the person doing so
shall provide identification upon request of the licensee, and shall provide
the licensee with the name and the phone number of the confiscating agency and
investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation.
   (E)   Licensee notification. When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer
necessary, the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee shall so notify the
licensee.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.205 INSPECTION OF ITEMS.
   At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow law
enforcement officials to enter the premises where the licensed business is
located, including all off-site storage facilities, during normal business
hours, except in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting the premises and
inspecting the items, ware, merchandise and records therein to verify
compliance with this subchapter or other applicable laws.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.206 LABEL REQUIRED.
   Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently
recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the
transaction in the shop’s records, the transaction date, the name of the item
and the description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to
the Police Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of
pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be re-used.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.207 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years may pawn, sell, or attempt to pawn
or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive any goods from a
person under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an
intoxicated person.
   (C)   No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents
identification in the form of a valid driver’s license, a valid Minnesota
identification card or current valid photo driver’s license issued by the state
or province of residency of the person from whom the item was received.
   (D)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any
article of property not his or her own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge,
sell, consign, leave or deposit the property of another, whether with
permission or without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave
or deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest;
with any licensee.
   (E)   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any
article of property with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious name;
nor give a false date of birth; nor give a false or out-of-date address of
residence or telephone number; nor present a false or altered identification or
the identification of another; to any licensee.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.208 BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE.
   A license issued under this subchapter authorizes the licensee to carry on
its business at the permanent place of business designated in the license.
However, upon written request, the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee,
may approve an off-site locked and secured storage facility. The licensee shall
permit inspection of the facility in accordance with §
152.205 of this chapter. All provisions of this subchapter regarding record
keeping and reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be
stored in compliance with all provisions of the city ordinances. The licensee
must either own the building in which the business is conducted, and any
approved off-site storage facility, or have a lease on the business premises
that extends for more than six months.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
TRANSITION SUBDIVISIONS
§ 152.220 GENERAL.
   Phased growth conservation subdivisions provide for residential development
in rural areas that are on the fringe of existing development in a way that
maintains or enhances the city’s character; retains large, undivided parcels of
land that provide opportunities for rural uses and future development; protects
environmental resources; facilitates the connection to and expansion of the
public infrastructure system in a cost-effective manner; and minimizes the
impacts of those road and utility systems through the efficient use of land.
Phased growth conservation subdivision shall be completed through the platting
process.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.221 APPLICABILITY.
   The TS style of development is an alternative set of standards for
development with the city for new development of ten acres or more contiguous
to existing development.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.222 FUTURE GROWTH PARCEL.
   (A)   Each TS development shall contain a contiguous future growth parcel
comprising a minimum of 75% of the land area to be subdivided.
   (B)   The future growth parcel may be owned by a corporation, land trust,
individual, partnership or other legal entity.
   (C)   The following uses of the future growth parcel are permitted, subject
to any land use limitations in the underlying zoning district:
      (1)   Residential (ten-acre minimum lot-size);
      (2)   Agriculture;
      (3)   Forestry; and
      (4)   Passive recreation.
   (D)   In order to retain large, undivided parcels of land that provide
opportunities for future development, the future growth parcel shall, to the
greatest extent possible, be a single contiguous parcel and shaped so as to
facilitate the extension of roads and infrastructure for future development.
The future growth parcel shall not include strips of land located between
dwellings or along roadways.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.223 LOT DIMENSION AND SIZE CRITERIA.
   (A)   General. The TS property shall have access to city sewer systems at
the time of subdivision, or shall be located in an area identified in the
city’s capital improvement plan for sanitary sewer extension within the next
two years. Any property located outside of this area shall not qualify for a
subdivision of this type.
   (B)   Maximum dwelling unit density. As indicated in the provisions for the
underlying Urban/Rural Transition Residential Zoning District as applied to the
portion of the property to be developed.
   (C)   Minimum lot size, dimensions and setback standards. The development
shall be subject to the buildable lot size, setback, impervious coverage and
dimension requirements of the Urban Residential District, as contained in §
152.035 of this chapter.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.224 SUBDIVISION DESIGN.
   (A)   General. Proposed roadways shall extend existing roadways to the
greatest extent possible, as well as provide for through access to future
development. All proposed roadways shall meet the city’s adopted road
standards.
   (B)   Ownership and maintenance of public space. Provision shall be made for
the ownership and maintenance of streets, squares, parks, open space and other
public spaces in a TS development by dedication to the city.
   (C)   Open space. Open space uses, as identified below, shall be
incorporated into the TS development as deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission. Large outdoor recreation areas should be located at the periphery
of neighborhoods rather than at central locations.
      (1)   Environmental corridors;
      (2)   Protected natural areas;
      (3)   Community parks;
      (4)   Streams, ponds, wetlands and other water bodies; and
      (5)   Storm water detention/retention facilities.
   (D)   Storm water management. The design and development of a TS subdivision
should minimize off-site storm water runoff, promote on-site infiltration and
minimize the discharge of pollutants to ground and surface water. Natural
topography and existing land cover should be maintained and protected to the
maximum extent practicable. New development and redevelopment shall meet the
following requirements.
      (1)   Untreated, direct storm water discharges to wetlands or surface
waters are prohibited.
      (2)   Post-development peak discharge rates should not exceed pre-
development peak rates.
      (3)   Erosion and sediment controls shall be implemented to remove 80% of
the average annual load of total suspended solids.
      (4)   All treatment systems or BMPs shall have operation and maintenance
plans to ensure that systems function as designed. These plans shall be
included in the application.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.225 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit all materials required for a subdivision,
in addition to any materials that sufficiently show that the requirements
contained herein will be met.
   (B)   The applicant shall also submit an application for a conditional use
permit and show that all required criteria related to conditional uses have
been met.
   (C)   Upon final approval of the development proposal, the developed portion
of the property shall be rezoned to urban residential and thereafter follow the
provisions of that zoning district.
   (D)   The future growth parcel may be retained as an outlot for future
development, as open space, or as large-lot development subject to the
provisions of the underlying Urban/Rural Transition Residential (TR) Zoning
District.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
§ 152.240 GENERAL.
   The purpose of the subdivision standards is to provide procedures and design
requirements for the subdivision of lands within the city. The provisions of
this subchapter are intended to provide the requirements for the administration
of subdivisions provided in §§
152.265 through
152.278 of this chapter.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.241 SKETCH PLAN.
   A sketch plan shall contain the following data.
   (A)   Existing conditions.
      (1)   Approximate exterior boundary drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 100 feet with the scale and northerly direction shown thereon;
      (2)   Indication of floodplains, wetlands, slopes over 12%, bluffs, tree
cover and ordinary high water mark;
      (3)   Use of adjoining properties including street locations, structure
locations and property lines;
      (4)   Significant historical sites;
      (5)   Approximate locations of existing structures;
      (6)   Approximate locations of existing wells and sewage treatment
systems;
      (7)   Location by section, town and range with small scale sketch showing
location within the city; and
      (8)   The existing zoning classification and the zoning classification of
adjacent parcels.
   (B)   Proposed design.
      (1)   Proposed roads and walkways;
      (2)   Proposed lots with building setbacks and bluff impact zones;
      (3)   Proposed green space; and
      (4)   Proposed city sewer and water system connections or sewage
treatment systems and well locations.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.242 PRELIMINARY PLAT, PRELIMINARY CONDOMINIUM PLAT OR MINOR SUBDIVISION
RESULTING IN AT LEAST ONE PARCEL LESS THAN TEN ACRES.
   A preliminary plat, preliminary condominium plat or minor subdivision
resulting in at least one parcel less than ten acres shall contain the
following data (except as waived in advance by the Planning Commission); along
with other reasonable information required by the Commission needed to make a
proper evaluation of the proposal.
   (A)   Existing conditions.
      (1)   Boundary lines with lengths and bearings drawn to exact scale of no
less than one inch equals 100 feet taken from a boundary survey by a licensed
surveyor with the legal description of the property, total acreage, name of the
fee owner, developer and surveyor. North arrow and scale;
      (2)   Topography consisting of two-foot contour intervals, or at the
discretion of the Planning Commission during the sketch plan review, ten-foot
contour intervals taken from the USGS mapping with additional field determined
spot elevations added to define drainageways, 100-year floodplains, wetlands,
slopes and the ordinary high water mark. Near shore aquatic conditions,
including depths, types of bottom, sediments and aquatic vegetation;
      (3)   Tree cover limits, specimen tree locations;
      (4)   Soils as determined by hand borings on a random basis, to determine
depth to ground water at lower elevations and suitability for sewage treatment
systems. At least one boring for each unit unless waived by the Planning
Commission;
      (5)   Location of adjoining streets, wetlands, structures and property
lines within 200 feet of subject parcel, including acreage of any property
owned by the developer not included in the preliminary plat;
      (6)   Significant historical sites;
      (7)   Significant wildlife habitat areas;
      (8)   Endangered, threatened, rare or critical species, both flora and
fauna;
      (9)   Date of boundary survey, topography and proposed plat;
      (10)   Layout of existing streets, walkways, driveways, blocks, lots and
structures drawn to the same scale;
      (11)   Locations of existing wells and sewage treatment systems;
      (12)   Location by section, town and range with small scale sketch
showing location within the city; and
      (13)   The existing zoning classification and the zoning classification
of adjacent parcels.
   (B)   Proposed design.
      (1)   Layout of proposed streets, walkways, driveways, blocks, lots,
buildings if known, drawn to same scale as existing data;
      (2)   Dimensions scaled to nearest five feet of all lot lines, street
widths, easement widths and lakeshore lengths;
      (3)   Buildable areas of proposed lots;
      (4)   Structure setback lines from streets, lot lines and ordinary high
water mark and a designation of the buildable area on the parcel;
      (5)   Proposed green space with area shown;
      (6)   Proposed public dedication areas other than streets or walkways
with the area shown;
      (7)   Proposed city sewer or water system connections and extensions
existing and proposed with grades shown;
      (8)   Potential locations and estimated depth to water table for all
proposed on-site sewage disposal systems, two per lot;
      (9)   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply;
      (10)   Proposed storm drainage system and erosion control, both during
and after construction activities;
      (11)   Proposed street standards and profiles;
      (12)   Potential principal structure and accessory structure locations
and elevations;
      (13)   Extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations;
      (14)   Proposed covenants;
      (15)   Name of subdivision and proposed street names, which shall not
duplicate or be alike another plat previously recorded; and
      (16)   Stages of development proposed.
   (C)   Evidence of authority. Evidence of authority to subdivide the parcel
consisting of fee ownership or written concurrence of fee owners.
   (D)   Cost/benefit analysis. An analysis of the ongoing cost to the city to
provide services and maintenance to the development shall be prepared using a
form provided by the city. This cost shall be compared on the same form to the
estimated increased valuation of the property and the corresponding tax
revenue. The development shall not be approved if public subsidy is required
for ongoing services and maintenance.
   (E)   Unpaid assessments. All unpaid assessments shall be paid at the time
the final plat, final condominium plat or metes and bounds lot split is filed.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.243 FINAL PLAT OR FINAL CONDOMINIUM PLAT.
   A final plat or final condominium plat shall contain all elements required
by this subchapter and M.S. Ch. 505, 515A or 515B respectively, as they may be
amended from time to time, and the state’s Plat Manual including but not
limited to the following:
   (A)   Conformance with approved preliminary plat or agreed upon portion
thereof;
   (B)   Design standards in conformance with this chapter;
   (C)   Preparation by a licensed surveyor. Signatures of Mayor,
Administrator, County Auditor, County Treasurer and all parties with legal
interest in the fee ownership of the land;
   (D)   Dedication to the public of easements, rights-of-way, walkways and
land to become public;
   (E)   Drainage and utility easements over natural drainageways and
significant wetlands;
   (F)   Reservation of private streets in outlots;
   (G)   Covenants shall be filed concurrently with the plat and shall be
required to create an association of homeowners if a privately maintained
cluster sewer or water system is proposed for subdivision.
      (1)   The association shall consist of all benefitted lot owners;
      (2)   The association shall be responsible for all costs of maintenance
and replacement;
      (3)   The costs shall be uniformly divided by lots served;
      (4)   The costs shall be lienable against the lots by the association if
payment is not forthcoming;
      (5)   The status of the facility shall be clearly stated as subject to
perpetual private maintenance; and
      (6)   Provisions shall be made for emergency access or emergency
maintenance by the city with subsequent reimbursement by the association.
   (H)   Concurrent documents:
      (1)   Title opinion, less than 60 days old, acceptable to the City
Attorney and showing conformance with those parties represented by signature on
the plat as holding interest in the property being divided;
      (2)   Financial security acceptable to the City Attorney in the amount of
125% of the cost estimated by the City Engineer for the uncompleted required
improvements; and
      (3)   Development contract acceptable to the City Attorney, if required.
   (I)   All unpaid assessments shall be paid at the time the final plat, final
condominium plat or metes and bounds lot split is filed.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.244 MINIMUM DESIGN LAYOUT STANDARDS.
   The following design standards shall be considered minimum acceptable
requirements in the review of the proposed subdivision by the Zoning
Administrator, City Attorney, City Engineer, Planning Commission and Council,
except as waived by variance approved by the Board of Adjustment.
   (A)   The land shall be properly zoned and suitable in its natural state for
the intended purpose with minimal alteration required. Land subject to
flooding, land below the ordinary high water mark, wetlands, areas with high
water table, bluffs, lands with slopes exceeding 12% or land containing other
significant constraint(s) upon future intended usage, shall not be considered
in the minimum size of a lot. The suitability analysis for each lot shall also
consider soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development,
severe erosion potential, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment
capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based
recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant
historical sites, or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful
to the health, safety or welfare of future residents of the proposed
subdivision or of the community.
   (B)   All non-conforming structures and uses shall be brought into
conformity during the subdivision process, except as specifically waived by
motion of the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Each lot shall be adjacent to public sewer or shall have a minimum
contiguous lawn area that is free of limiting factors sufficient for the
construction of two standard soil treatment sewage systems.
   (D)   Provisions for water based recreation where near shore aquatic
conditions are unsuitable for direct access.
   (E)   Lot areas and dimensions shall conform to the requirements of this
chapter, without variance.
   (F)   Lot layouts shall be compatible with the existing layout of adjoining
properties and/or shall not constrain the future development of adjacent
properties if those properties were to be developed as per this chapter.
   (G)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight road
lines or radial to curved road lines, radial to lake or stream shores, and
shall not contain bends or jogs unless topographic conditions necessitate a
different arrangement. Existing structures shall not be construed to be a
topographic condition.
   (H)   Each lot shall have a minimum of 33 feet of frontage on a designated
right-of-way. Commonly-owned property or green space used for access in a
planned unit development shall have a minimum of 33 feet of frontage on a
public right-of-way.
   (I)   Proposed streets shall conform to the adopted road plan of the city,
county and state highway plans and existing boundary conditions.
      (1)   Streets shall be related to the topography so as to produce useable
lots and reasonable gradients not in excess of 10% for collector streets and
12% for minor roads.
      (2)   Public access shall be given to adjacent properties unless the
topography clearly indicated future connection is not feasible.
      (3)   When parcels abutting arterial streets or collector streets are
subdivided, no new access points shall be created unless an equal number of
access points are removed, unless access points are created not less than 500
feet apart in which case there shall be no limit on the number of access points
allowed.
      (4)   Half streets or connections of half streets to partial streets
without providing for the full required right-of-way will not be permitted.
      (5)   Streets will be designed as collector streets or local streets in
accordance with the city’s road plan.
      (6)   The number of streets that terminate without a through connection
shall be minimized and the street connected to a cul-de-sac (turnaround) shall
not exceed 1,200 feet in length.
      (7)   Access shall be given to all adjacent properties when required by
the Planning Commission. All streets intended to be extended to adjoining
property, shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac with the sides on a
temporary easement, which will revert to the adjoining lot owner when released
by the city. Landlocked areas shall not be created.
      (8)   Right-of-way shall be dedicated to the public:
 
Arterials streets       100 feet or as determined by Aitkin County
Collector streets       66 feet
Cul-de-sac (turnaround) 68-foot radius
Local streets           66 feet
NOTES TO TABLE:
Additional right-of-way may be required to promote public safety and
convenience if special conditions require such as intersections, sight lines
on corners or excessive cut or fill sections.
 
      (9)   (a)   Street centerlines shall intersect at not less than 75
degrees.
         (b)   Street jogs shall be no less than 200 feet from centerline to
centerline.
         (c)   Gradients at intersections and for 50 feet approaching on each
side of an intersection shall not exceed 2%. The approach shall contain no
grades greater than 7% for 200 feet on each side of the intersection.
      (10)   Roads, driveways and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks
and shall not be placed within bluff and Shore Impact Zones.
      (11)   Street names shall conform to the pattern of the city, continue an
existing name on the same alignment and generally promote direction in the
community. Street names shall be coordinated with the City Administrator.
   (J)   Easements shall be provided for public utilities or drainage where
required by the Planning Commission and shall be the following widths, minimum:
 
Drainageway                               10 feet
Electrical, telephone or cable television 10 feet
Sanitary sewer                            40 feet
Storm sewer                               20 feet
Watermain                                 20 feet
 
   (K)   Lots requiring holding tanks for sewage shall not be allowed.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 348, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.245 SURVEY STANDARDS.
   Survey standards shall be those required by M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be
amended from time to time, including the placement of all monuments including
block corners, lot corners, curve points and lake survey line points on lot
lines. All U.S., state, county and other official bench marks, monuments or
triangulation points in or adjacent to the proposed subdivision shall be
preserved in position unless relocation is approved by the controlling agency.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.246 STREET IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   All streets within the subdivision shall be constructed by the subdivider or
otherwise provided for by agreement in a development contract between the
subdivider and the City Council with all expenses borne by the subdivider.
Local streets and collector streets shall be constructed according with the
established minimum standards and shall be approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.247 SANITARY PROVISION STANDARDS.
   No land shall be subdivided for building purposes unless two adequate sites
are available on the newly created lot for a conforming on-site sewage
treatment system, or the subdivider constructs a cluster system serving the
lots to be owned and maintained by a property owner’s association or the lot is
provided with sanitary service by a city sewer system at the expense of the
subdivider.
   (A)   A city sewer system shall be extended to the lot at the subdivider’s
expense by agreement in a development contract between the subdivider and the
City Council if the existing system is adjacent to the parcel being subdivided
or reasonably close in the opinion of the City Engineer and Planning Commission
or if the density of the proposed development necessitates a municipal sewer
connection. The sewer shall also be extended to the exterior boundary of the
subdivision at locations designated by the City Engineer.
   (B)   On-site systems or cluster on-site systems shall conform to state’s
Pollution Control Agency Standards, Individual Sewage Treatment Systems
Standards, Minn. Rules Ch. 7080, as administered by County Planning and Zoning,
and provide for two treatment sites for drain fields.
   (C)   Municipal sewage facilities shall be designed by a licensed engineer,
approved by the City Engineer, approved by the state’s Pollution Control
Agency, and installed according to Standard Utilities Specifications, City
Engineer’s Association of Minnesota.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.248 WATER SUPPLY STANDARDS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall be responsible to provide the proposed
subdivision with adequate spacing between building sites, on-site sewage
disposal sites and potential well locations to allow the well installations in
conformance with this chapter requirements or the subdivider shall provide the
lot with a cluster water supply system to be owned and operated by a property
owner’s association or the subdivider shall provide municipal water service
(city water system) to the lot.
   (B)   A city water system shall be extended to the lot at the expense of the
subdivider by agreement in the development contract between the subdivider and
the Council if the existing municipal system is adjacent to the parcel being
subdivided or reasonably close in the opinion of the City Engineer and Planning
Commission or if the density of the proposed development necessitates a
municipal water connection. The water main shall also be extended to the
exterior boundary at locations designated by the City Engineer.
   (C)   On-site wells or cluster water systems shall conform to the state’s
Department of Health Rules and Regulations MHD 210-230, Water Well Construction
Code, and the cluster system shall receive the approval of the City Engineer.
   (D)   City water systems shall be designed by a Licensed Engineer, approved
by the City Engineer, approved by the state’s Department of Health and
installed according to Standard Utilities Specifications, City Engineer’s
Association of Minnesota.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.249 DRAINAGE AND GRADING STANDARDS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall consider the retention of natural storm water/
snowmelt drainage patterns in the design of his proposed subdivision. The
subdivider shall be responsible to provide adequate drainage facilitates for
his or her development and upstream properties.
   (B)   All natural drainageways draining properties upstream from the subject
property shall be identified and preserved, and no structures shall be less
than one foot above the water level in the drainageway created by a storm of a
100-year, 24-hour rain event. No filling of areas inundated by the 100-year,
24-hour rain event shall be allowed.
   (C)   Additional runoff for a 100-year, 24-hour rain event from all streets
and building sites at build-out shall be accounted for and maintained within
the development.
   (D)   Natural or human-made storage areas shall be utilized where needed and
shall be designated by drainage and utility easement by the subdivider. All
storage areas shall be vegetated and designed to lower naturally after a storm.
   (E)   All drainage structures or improvements provided shall be sufficient
in size to pass a 100-year, 24-hour storm event through the natural drainage
way.
   (F)   All areas disturbed by grading, street construction or structure
installation shall be covered with a minimum of three inches natural topsoil
and seeded. Drainageways over 2% in gradient shall, at a minimum, be sodded.
   (G)   All parking areas, heavy use areas, storage areas and impervious area
shall be diverted to a basin designed to allow entrapment of silts and
nutrients prior to discharge to a natural drainage way.
   (H)   There shall be no discharge of untreated storm water to a waterbody.
   (I)   Erosion control measures shall be provided as needed to prevent and/or
contain erosion.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.250 DEDICATION TO THE PUBLIC STANDARDS.
   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 462.358, as it may be
amended from time to time, the subdivider shall dedicate, to the public, lands
for highway rights-of-way, street rights-of-way, utility easements, wetland
easements and similar lands required for perpetual and public improvements.
   (B)   In addition, for every new subdivision of land involving three or more
lots which are to be developed for residential purposes, the Planning
Commission, with the concurrence of the City Council, shall require a payment
to the city, in lieu of a land dedication for conservation purposes or for
public use as parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, wetlands or
open space, of a sum not to exceed 10% of the fair market value of the land to
be subdivided. The fair market value of the land to be subdivided shall be the
value as determined by the County Assessor at the time of final plat approval
by the City Council. The amount of the payment shall be set by the Planning
Commission, with the concurrence of the City Council, after taking into
consideration the open space, park, recreational or common areas and facilities
which the applicant proposes to reserve for public use within the subdivision.
Funds received by the city, in lieu of land dedication, shall be placed in a
special fund in accordance with M.S. § 462.358, subd. 2b, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (C)   All dedications shall be included in the dedicated portion of the
plat, included in the development contract, or received by the city in warranty
deed prior to the approval of the final plat, without further restrictions or
reservations.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.251 IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. Whenever an application presented to the city requires or
proposes the installation, construction or dedication of public improvements to
the city, the city shall require financial security or guarantee consistent
with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Development contract. Prior to the submission of a final plat
application and prior to approval of a metes and bounds subdivision, the fee
owner shall provide for the construction of the required improvements at his or
her expense and shall have the work completed or shall enter a development
contract and give bond or other financial assurance satisfactory to the Council
in an amount equal to 125% of the estimated cost of the uncompleted
improvements, except as provided in division (D) below. The bond shall be
released by the City Council upon the recommendation of the City Engineer
indicating the improvements are satisfactorily complete.
   (C)   Conformance. The required improvements shall conform to the standards
of §§
152.240 through
152.251 of this chapter and shall include street cross section, signs and
lighting in conformance with adopted city standards.
   (D)   Assessment of costs. The fee owner may request the city to construct
city sewer or water systems or bituminous street surfacing with all costs to be
assessed against the benefitted properties. If the City Council agrees, the fee
owner shall enter a development contract and give a bond or other financial
assurance satisfactory to the Council in an amount as determined by the City
Council. The assessments shall be paid in full upon sale of the property.
   (E)   Expenses. All costs of the City Engineer, City Attorney, Bond Council,
financial experts and other professional costs borne by the city in writing
and/or executing development contracts, estimates of cost, inspectors,
financial arrangements, assessments and pursuing legal remedies in event of
default by the fee owner, shall be borne by the fee owner or his or her
successors.
   (F)   Record drawings. Before final release of the bond, record drawings
shall be provided by the applicant documenting final locations of improvements
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.265 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the City Council.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator:
      (1)   Determine if applications are complete and comply with the terms of
this chapter;
      (2)   Direct or conduct inspections of sewage systems and other uses of
the land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
      (3)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter including,
but not limited to, maps, amendments, zoning or use permits, conditional use
permits, variances, subdivisions, appeals and applications, and a separate file
for future conditions or expiration of permits;
      (4)   Review, file and forward applications for appeals, variances,
conditional uses, subdivisions and zoning amendments;
      (5)   To review and approve all metes and bounds property divisions
within the city that results in parcels that are greater than ten acres;
      (6)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter by reviewing complaints and
by pursuing contacts with any violator in accordance with standard procedures
as adopted and modified from time to time;
      (7)   Mail notices relative to public hearings for variances, conditional
uses and zoning changes;
      (8)   Under the direction of the Chairperson of the Planning Commission,
prepare and distribute meeting agendas at least one week prior to the meeting;
      (9)   Attend meetings and provide research and findings to the Board of
Adjustment/Planning Commission;
      (10)   Issue approved building permits and zoning permits upon
application for structures on lots conforming to this chapter when the
conditions of this chapter are met; to issue conditional use permits when
directed by the Planning Commission; to issue variances when directed by the
Board of Adjustment; to issue notices of a zoning change when directed by the
City Council;
      (11)   To mail a copy of the findings to applicants;
      (12)   To file copies of conditional use permits, zoning map amendments
and variances with the County Recorder;
      (13)   To communicate with the DNR where required by this chapter or
state law;
      (14)   To ensure that the City Council, Planning Commission and Board
Adjustment review land use applications or public hearing applications as
prescribed by state statutes;
      (15)   To conduct periodic and final inspections of property subject to
conditions of approval relating to variances, conditional use permits and other
land use applications every two years;
      (16)   To issue land use certificates of compliance; and
      (17)   Keep the city up to date with regards to changes in state and
county land use regulations.
   (C)   Floodplain management duties of the Zoning Administrator.
      (1)   To maintain a record of elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) and the elevation to which structures are flood-proofed for all new
structures and alterations or additions to structures within the floodplain;
      (2)   To notify adjacent communities, the Commissioner of the Department
of Natural Resources and the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency of any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse or
bed of a public water;
      (3)   To notify the Chicago Office of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency when any physical changes increase or decrease the 100-year flood
elevation as soon as practicable after any supporting information indicating
the change is made available; and
      (4)   (a)   Floodplain designation; restrictions on removal. The
floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map must not be removed from
floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or
that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood
protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special
exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of the Department
of Natural Resources (DNR) if the Commissioner determines that, through other
measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
         (b)   Amendments require DNR approval. All amendments to this chapter
must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) prior to adoption. The Commissioner must approve the
amendment prior to community approval.
         (c)   Map revisions require ordinance amendments. The floodplain
district regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in §
152.056(B)(3) of this chapter.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.266 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of the members of the Planning
Commission, and shall hold its meetings concurrently with the Planning
Commission meeting on an as-needed basis at the discretion of the Chairperson.
The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Planning Commission shall have the
same duties on the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Board of Adjustment are:
      (1)   To consider appeals from the action of the Zoning Administrator
wherein the Board will take the authority of the Administrator;
      (2)   To hold hearings on variances after proper public notice in the
official newspaper and individual notice by regular mail to any property owners
within a minimum of 350 feet distance of any variance in question. The notice
shall be given at least ten days before the hearing date;
      (3)   To approve or deny variances within the required time frame and
develop findings to justify the action; and
      (4)   To keep a record of its proceedings, notifications and
justifications for its actions.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.267 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Organization of the Planning Commission.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall consist of six members appointed by
the City Council; four members of the general public; one member of the City
Council; and one alternate member. The alternate member shall be a non-voting
member unless a regular member is absent, in which case the alternate member
shall act as a regular voting member. The Council member shall vote only when
needed to decide a tie vote and shall act as a liaison to the City Council.
Each member other than the Council liaison shall hold office for three years
and terms shall be staggered. The Mayor shall appoint the Council liaison on an
annual basis with the City Council concurrence. Vacancies shall be filled for
the remainder of the term by action of the City Council.
      (2)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from
its members for a term of one year.
      (3)   The Commission shall meet a minimum of 11 times a year, once each
month, at a regular meeting unless the docket is empty; in which case, the
Mayor and/or Chairperson can approve suspension of a meeting. Special meetings
shall be advertised in the official newspaper and posted in the City Hall at
least ten days in advance of the meeting.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Planning Commission under this
chapter.
      (1)   To hold hearings after proper public notice in the official
newspaper and individual notice by regular mail of property owners within a
minimum of 350 feet of the subject property. The notices shall be given at
least ten days before the hearing date; and
      (2)   To decide within the required time frame the following:
         (a)   Recommendations to the City Council regarding requested zoning
district boundary changes or amendments to this chapter;
         (b)   To review and provide recommendations to the City Council on
proposed plats and to provide recommendations on final plats to the City
Council;
         (c)   To review and approve all metes and bounds property divisions
within the city that results in parcels that are under ten acres;
         (d)   To review and approve requests for conditional use permits with
complete findings to justify the decision;
         (e)   To periodically review the zoning map and ordinances and
consider their role in shaping the growth of the community and to recommend
changes to the City Council of these documents. To guide growth and current
land use toward the goals of the Comprehensive Plan;
         (f)   To review past actions and direct future actions of the Zoning
Administrator;
         (g)   To recommend on a timely basis that the City Council review the
Comprehensive Plan when appropriate;
         (h)   To keep a record of its proceedings, notifications and
justifications for its actions; and
         (i)   It shall be the duty of each individual member to be present at
all meetings of the Planning Commission and Board of Adjustment. More than
three absences in any one-year period shall be grounds for replacement by the
City Council.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.268 PARK COMMITTEE.
   Duties of the Park Committee under this chapter are:
   (A)   To make recommendations to the City Council on implementation of the
Comprehensive Plan;
   (B)   To make recommendations to the City Council on park dedication fees
and/or land dedications within new subdivisions; and
   (C)   To periodically review the park plan and ordinances and consider their
role in shaping the growth of the community and to recommend changes to the
City Council of these documents to guide growth and current land use toward the
goals of the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.269 CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall have the following duties under this chapter:
   (A)   Appoint the Zoning Administrator by a majority vote or terminate the
Zoning Administrator by a four-fifths vote;
   (B)   Confirm the appointments by the Mayor of members to the Board of
Adjustment/Planning Commission members by a majority vote, or to remove members
by a four-fifths vote; and
   (C)   To decide within the required time frame the following:
      (1)   Recommendations from the Planning Commission for changes in this
chapter and zoning district boundaries;
      (2)   Recommendations from the Planning Commission for acceptance of
proposed plats, final plats, condominium plans and other matters directed to
them;
      (3)   To hear or initiate appeals from the actions of the Board of
Adjustment regarding variances from this chapter;
      (4)   To hear or initiate appeals of the decisions of the Board of
Adjustment on appeals previously heard and considered by the Board;
      (5)   To hear or initiate appeals from the actions of the Planning
Commission on conditional use permits; and
      (6)   To direct enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.270 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Conditional use permits shall run with the property for structures or
other specified uses, as approved by the Planning Commission after a public
hearing. All applications for a conditional use permit shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator 30 days ahead of the hearing date, accompanied by a
certificate of survey (unless waived by the Zoning Administrator) showing the
details of the proposal and an accurate legal description, along with the
appropriate fee. The fee or contract owner of the property shall sign the
application. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all property owners within a
minimum of 350 feet by regular mail and shall advertise the hearing once in the
legal section of the official newspaper at least ten days ahead of the public
hearing. The Zoning Administrator shall send the same notice at least ten days
in advance of this hearing to the DNR if the proposed conditional use permit is
in shoreland or floodplain. At the applicant’s option, the applicant may
request a sketch plan review with no action by the Planning Commission and with
no fee by giving 14-days’ notice thereof to the Zoning Administrator, meeting
time permitted.
   (B)   The applicant shall complete the conditional use permit application
approved by the City Council. The application shall contain submittal
requirements, criteria for approval, procedure for consideration and city
contact information. The city shall not accept applications where the applicant
has past due fees or charges due to the city until the account is made current.
   (C)   Conditional use permit applications in which the property which is the
subject of the application is within floodplain shall be subject to the
following.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit the following information, in addition
to all other information required by this section:
         (a)   Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill storage of
materials, flood-proofing measures and the relationship of the above to the
location of the stream channel; and
         (b)   Specifications for building construction and materials, flood-
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
      (2)   The city may submit the information specified by division (C)(1)
above to a licensed engineer or other expert person or agency for evaluation of
the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the
seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for
protection and other technical matters. All reasonable costs for professional
assistance incurred by the city in evaluating a conditional use permit under
this provision shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance of any
conditional use permit.
   (D)   No conditional use permit application shall be accepted by the Zoning
Administrator from a contractor or property owner having outstanding
violations. Conditional use permits can only be requested by contractors or
property owners with outstanding violations upon resolution of the violation to
the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
   (E)   No conditional use permit application shall be accepted by the Zoning
Administrator for a property located within the floodplain, until the applicant
demonstrates that all required state and federal permits have been obtained.
The applicant shall submit a copy of all required state and federal permits to
the Zoning Administrator concurrently with the required conditional use permit
application form, fee and all other required application materials.
   (F)   In permitting a new conditional use or alteration of an existing
conditional use, the Planning Commission may impose, in addition to the
standards and requirements expressly specified by this chapter, additional
conditions that the Planning Commission considers necessary to protect the best
interest of the surrounding area or the city as a whole. These conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension;
      (2)   Limiting the height, size or location of buildings;
      (3)   Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points;
      (4)   Increasing the street width;
      (5)   Increasing or decreasing the number of required off-street parking
spaces;
      (6)   Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs;
      (7)   Requiring berming, fencing, screening, landscaping or other
facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property;
      (8)   Designating sites for open space;
      (9)   Modifications of waste treatment and water supply facilities;
      (10)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation;
      (11)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed
restrictions; and
      (12)   For properties which are the subject of a conditional use permit
located within a floodplain, the following conditions may also be required:
         (a)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees and other protective measures; and
         (b)   Flood-proofing measures, in accordance with the Building Code
adopted by the city and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or
document certified by a licensed engineer or architect that the flood-proofing
measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area.
   (G)   The Planning Commission shall decide the issue with consideration to
the following:
      (1)   The following must be met:
         (a)   The use or development is an appropriate conditional use in the
land use zone;
         (b)   The use or development, with conditions, conforms to the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan;
         (c)   The use with conditions is compatible with the existing
neighborhood; and
         (d)   The use with conditions would not be injurious to the public
health, safety, welfare, decency, order, comfort, convenience, appearance or
prosperity of the city.
      (2)   The following must be considered.
         (a)   The conditional use should not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose permitted
on that property, nor substantially diminish or impair values in the immediate
vicinity.
         (b)   The conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding vacant property for uses predominant
in the area.
         (c)   The conditional requirements at public cost for public
facilities and services will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the
community.
         (d)   The conditional use will have vehicular approaches to the
property which are so designed as not to create traffic congestion or an
indifference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares.
         (e)   Adequate measures have been taken to provide sufficient off-
street parking and loading space to serve the proposed use.
         (f)   Adequate measures have been taken or will be taken to prevent or
control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration, so none of these will
constitute a nuisance and to control lights and signs in such a manner, that no
disturbance to neighboring properties will result.
         (g)   The conditional use will not result in the destruction, loss or
damage of a natural, scenic or historical feature of major significance.
         (h)   The conditional use will promote the prevention and control of
pollution of the ground and surface waters including sedimentation and control
of nutrients.
      (3)   For properties within floodplain, the following shall also be
considered:
         (a)   The potential danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments;
         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and
the ability of these systems to minimize the potential for disease,
contamination and unsanitary conditions;
         (d)   The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;
         (e)   The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed
use to the community;
         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
         (g)   The availability of viable alternative locations for the
proposed use that are not subject to flooding;
         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Land
Use Plan and floodplain management program for the area;
         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles; and
         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
   (H)   When costs to the city involved in processing and reviewing an
application exceed the original application fees, the applicant shall reimburse
the city for any additional costs. The expenses may include, but are not
limited to, payroll, mailing costs, consultant fees and other professional
services the city may need to retain in reviewing permits.
   (I)   Violations of the conditions of a conditional use permit shall
automatically suspend the permit. A review of the violation shall be conducted
by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation
to the City Council on conditions for reinstating the permit or revocation. The
City Council shall make the final decision on reinstating or revoking the
suspended permit.
   (J)   Failure by the owner to act on a conditional use permit within 12
months, or failure to complete the work under a conditional use permit within
two years, unless extended by the Planning Commission, shall void the permit. A
second extension shall require a new public hearing.
   (K)   A CUP application which has been denied shall not be submitted, in an
exact or substantially similar form, for at least 12 months from the date of
denial.
   (L)   Appeals of an action of the Planning Commission shall be filed with
the City Administrator for consideration and action by the City Council. The
appeal shall be made within 30 days of action by the Planning Commission.
   (M)   Appeals from the action of the city shall be filed with District Court
within 30 days after Council action.
   (N)   The conditional use permit shall be filed with the County Recorder
within 45 days of approval.
   (O)   The conditional use permit shall be filed with the Commissioner of the
Department of Natural Resources within ten days of approval if the property
which is the subject of the conditional use permit is within shoreland or
floodplain.
   (P)   The conditional use permit runs with the land and applies to
subsequent purchasers of the land so long as the conditions are being met.
   (Q)   The following concern §§
152.070 through
152.075,
152.101,
152.102 and
152.220 through
152.225 of this chapter.
      (1)   The applicant may submit a sketch plan to the Planning Commission
for review and discussion at least 14 days prior to the meeting.
      (2)   Based on discussion, the applicant can formally apply by submitting
preliminary documents, prepared with professional help, including as a minimum
the CUP application, and further shall contain the following:
         (a)   Proposed concept of plan operation;
         (b)   Proposed plat or floor plan, if applicable;
         (c)   Proposed recreational amenities;
         (d)   Proposed timing;
         (e)   Proposed final security; and
         (f)   Proposed development contract.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall review the submissions and make a
recommendation to the City Council within a reasonable time frame with a
complete finding of facts.
      (4)   The City Council shall review the recommendations and render a
decision within a reasonable time.
      (5)   The applicant shall then proceed within the time frame accepted
under the preliminary proposal to provide final documents as required,
including:
         (a)   Financial security;
         (b)   Development contract;
         (c)   Title opinion;
         (d)   Final plat or floor plan;
         (e)   Surveyors plat check;
         (f)   Final covenants and associated documents;
         (g)   Final time schedule;
         (h)   Final site plan which will control development; and
         (i)   MPCA/MnDH approval letter on sewage system and water supply.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.271 INTERIM USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses
is:
      (1)   To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent
location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction;
      (2)   To allow a use that is presently acceptable, but that with
anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the future
or will be replaced by a permitted or conditional use allowed within the
respective district; and
      (3)   To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change
to an area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan provided that
the use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is in
keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing uses
and development.
   (B)   General standards. An interim use permit may be granted only if the
City Council finds as follows:
      (1)   The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective zoning
district and conforms to standard zoning regulations;
      (2)   The use will not adversely impact nearby properties through
nuisance, noise, traffic, dust, or unsightliness and will not otherwise
adversely impact the health, safety and welfare of the community;
      (3)   The use will not adversely impact implementation of the
Comprehensive Plan;
      (4)   The date or event that will terminate the use is identified with
certainty;
      (5)   The applicant has signed a consent agreement agreeing that the
applicant, owner, operator, tenant and/or user has no entitlement to future re-
approval of the interim use permit as well as agreeing that the interim use
will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the
public to fully or partially take the property in the future;
      (6)   The user agrees to all conditions that the City Council deems
appropriate for permission of the use including the requirement of appropriate
financial surety to cover the cost of removing the interim use and any interim
structures upon the expiration of the interim use permit;
      (7)   There are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments,
interest or city utility fees due upon the subject parcel; and
      (8)   The term of the interim use does not exceed three years.
   (C)   Application. Applications for an interim use permit shall be made by
the fee owner or authorized representative of the fee owner of the property
upon which the interim use is proposed. All applications shall include the
following:
      (1)   A completed application form signed by the fee owner of the
property or by the fee owners authorized representative;
      (2)   Application fee;
      (3)   Proof of ownership or authorized representation for the property on
which the interim use is requested;
      (4)   A letter from the applicant explaining the proposal and stating the
date or event that will terminate the use;
      (5)   A location map showing the general location of the proposed use
within the community; and
      (6)   A map showing all principal land uses within 500 feet of the parcel
on which the interim use is proposed;
         (a)   For cannabis business interim use permit applications only, an
additional map must be provided showing all school property lines located
within 900 feet of the proposed cannabis business parcel property line, as
found in § 114.03.
      (7)   Development plans for the proposed use showing all information
deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to ensure the community can
determine whether the proposed development will meet all applicable development
standards. The information may include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and existing topography;
         (b)   Location of all buildings and their size, including square
footage;
         (c)   Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces, off-street
loading areas and sidewalks;
         (d)   Landscaping and screening plans, including species and size of
trees and shrubs proposed;
         (e)   Finished grading and drainage plan sufficient to drain and
dispose of all surface water accumulated;
         (f)   Type of business or activity and proposed number of employees;
         (g)   Proposed floor plan and elevations of any building with use
indicated;
         (h)   Sanitary sewer and water plan with estimated flow rates; and
         (i)   Soil type and soil limitations for the intended use. If severe
soil limitations for the intended use are noted, a plan or statement indicating
the soil conservation practice or practices to be used to overcome the
limitation shall be made part of the application.
      (8)   A signed consent agreement, provided by the city, agreeing:
         (a)   The applicant, owner, operator, tenant and/or user has no
entitlement to future re-approval of the interim use permit;
         (b)   The interim use will not impose additional costs on the public
if it is necessary for the public to fully or partially take the property in
the future; and
         (c)   The applicant, owner, operator, tenant and/or user will abide by
conditions of approval that the City Council attaches to the interim use
permit.
      (9)   Any other information that may be reasonably required by the city
to evaluate the application.
   (D)   Planning Commission review and public hearing.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall refer complete applications to the
Planning Commission for consideration and a public hearing at the next
available regular meeting as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Prior to
the meeting, the Zoning Administrator or his or her assign(s) shall complete
the following:
         (a)   Distribute the application to appropriate city departments and
commenting agencies to receive feedback;
         (b)   Publish notice of the purpose, time and place of the public
hearing in the official newspaper of the community, and mail notices to all
property owners located within a minimum of 350 feet of the property described
in the application, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy
of the notice and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was
sent shall be attested to by the responsible person and shall be made a part of
the records of the proceedings. Failure to give mailed notice to individual
property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings;
provided, a bone fide attempt to comply with the provisions of this section has
been made; and
         (c)   Prepare a staff report analyzing the request under city code
requirements for consideration by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   After considering the application, the staff report, testimony from
the applicant and the public and any other relevant information; the Planning
Commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the
request. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to
the City Council as soon as practical, and in a manner which allows the City
Council time to make a final determination on the request within the state
mandated timelines for reviewing land use applications.
   (E)   City Council action. After considering the application, recommendation
of the Planning Commission, any staff reports, testimony from the public
hearing and any other relevant information; the City Council shall take action
on the application through approval, approval with conditions, or denial.
Should the City Council approve the application, the City Council shall make
findings on conformance to the IUP general standards in division (B) above;
specify the term of the interim use permit; the event(s), circumstances or
conditions that shall cause termination; and any conditions of approval.
   (F)   Termination. An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of
the following events, whichever occurs first:
      (1)   The date stated in the permit;
      (2)   Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued;
      (3)   Upon change in the city’s zoning regulations which renders the use
non-conforming; and
      (4)   The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located
to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning
district.
   (G)   Suspension and revocation. The City Council may suspend or revoke an
interim use permit upon finding that the activities allowed under the permit
adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare in ways not anticipated
during approval of the permit. A suspension or revocation of an interim use
permit shall be preceded by written notice to the permittee and a hearing. The
notice shall provide at least ten-days’ notice of the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the violations. The notice shall be
mailed to the permittee at the most recent address listed on the application.
The hearing of a contested case may, at the City Councils option, be before the
City Council or in accordance with M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.60, as they may be
amended from time to time, but informal disposition of a contested case by
stipulation, pursuant to M.S. § 14.59, as it may be amended from time to time,
may provide an adequate basis for imposition of sanctions.
   (H)   Amendments. All requested amendments to an existing interim use permit
shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
   (I)   Renewal. The following process may be used to renew an active interim
use permit that is set to expire. Terminated or suspended interim use permits
cannot be renewed.
      (1)   Application. Application requirements for renewal of an existing
interim use permit shall be the same as for a new application.
      (2)   Review. Upon receiving a complete application for an interim use
permit renewal, the Zoning Administrator shall send notice of the requested
renewal to all property owners within 350 feet of the parcel(s) containing the
interim use. If any objections are raised within ten days of the mailed notice,
the application shall be processed in the manner of a new application. If no
objections are raised, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a resolution of
approval outlining the conditions and stipulations of the renewal for
consideration by the City Council. Council, at its discretion, may approve or
deny the request with findings. Denial of a renewal request does not constitute
termination of the existing interim use permit.
   (J)   Recordkeeping. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all
applications and all interim use permits issued, including information on the
use, location, conditions imposed by the community, time limits, review dates
and such other information as may be appropriate.
(Ord. 347, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 418, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 152.272 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to
time, the Board of Adjustment, may issue variances from the provisions of the
zoning ordinance. A variance is a modification or variation of the provisions
of this chapter as applied to a specific piece of property.
   (B)   Variances shall run with the property and shall be transferable with
the property. Variances shall not be transferred to other properties.
   (C)   Variances shall require a public hearing. All applications for a
variance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator a minimum of 30 days
ahead of the hearing date, accompanied by a certificate of survey (unless
waived by the Zoning Administrator) showing the details of the proposal and an
accurate legal description, along with the appropriate fee. The fee or contract
owner of the property shall sign the application. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify all property owners within a minimum of 350 feet by regular mail
and shall advertise the hearing once in the legal section of the official
newspaper at least ten days ahead of the public hearing. The Zoning
Administrator shall send the same notice at least ten days in advance of this
hearing to the DNR, if the proposed variance is in shoreland or floodplain.
   (D)   The applicant shall complete the variance application approved by the
Board of Adjustment. The application shall contain submittal requirements,
criteria for approval, procedure for consideration and city contact
information. The city shall not accept applications where the applicant has
past due fees or charges due to the city until the account is made current.
   (E)   Variances shall only be permitted:
      (1)   When they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of
the ordinance; and
      (2)   When the variances are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
   (F)   Variances may be granted when the applicant for the variance
establishes that there are “practical difficulties” in complying with the
zoning ordinance:
      (1)   PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES, as used in connection with the granting of
a variance, means that:
         (a)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by this chapter;
         (b)   The plight of the property owner is due to circumstances unique
to the property and not created by the owner; and
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality.
      (2)   Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties; and
      (3)   Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate
access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
   (G)   Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as defined
in M.S. § 216C.06, subd. 14, as it may be amended from time to time, when in
harmony with this chapter.
   (H)   The Board of Adjustment shall not permit as a variance any use that is
not allowed under the zoning ordinance for property in the zone where the
property owner’s land is located with the following exception: the Board of
Adjustment may permit, as a variance, the temporary use of a single-family
dwelling as a two-family dwelling.
   (I)   The Board of Adjustment may impose conditions in the granting of
variances; provided, all conditions are directly related to the variance
request, and each condition bears a rough proportionality to the impact created
by the variance.
   (J)   When costs to the city involved in processing and reviewing an
application exceed the original application fees, the applicant shall reimburse
the city for any additional costs. The expenses may include, but are not
limited to, payroll, mailing costs, consultant fees and other professional
services the city may need to retain in reviewing permits or applications.
   (K)   No variance application shall be accepted by the Zoning Administrator
from a contractor or property owner having outstanding violations. Variances
can only be requested by contractors or property owners with outstanding
violations upon resolution of the violation to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission.
   (L)   No variance application shall be accepted by the Zoning Administrator
for a property located within the floodplain, until the applicant demonstrates
that all required state and federal permits have been obtained. The applicant
shall submit a copy of all required state and federal permits to the Zoning
Administrator concurrently with the required variance application form, fee and
all other required application materials.
   (M)   No variance shall permit a lower degree of flood protection than
required under state law. The following additional variance criteria of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied for all properties
located within floodplain which are the subject of a variance considered under
this section.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued if it is determined by the Board of
Adjustment that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood
heights.
      (3)   Variances shall be issued only upon the determination by the Board
of Adjustment that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
   (N)   The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a variance
that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   The construction below the base or regional flood level increases
risks to life and property. The notification must be maintained with a record
of all variance actions.
   (O)   Failure by the owner to act within 12 months on a variance unless
extended by the Board of Adjustment shall void the variance. A second extension
shall require a new public hearing. This provision shall apply to any variance
outstanding at the time of the ordinance adoption.
   (P)   A variance application which has been denied shall not be submitted,
in an exact or substantially similar form, for at least 12 months from the date
of denial.
   (Q)   Violations of the conditions of a variance shall void the variance.
   (R)   (1)   Appeals of an action of the Board of Adjustment shall be filed
with the City Administrator for consideration and action by the City Council
within 30 days of action by the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   Appeals from the action of the City Council shall be filed with the
District Court within 30 days after Council action.
   (S)   The variance shall be filed with the County Recorder within 45 days of
approval.
   (T)   Decisions of variances granted to properties within floodplain shall
be forwarded by mail to the DNR within ten days of the action by the Board of
Adjustment.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 359, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 152.273 BUILDING PERMITS; ZONING PERMITS.
   (A)   Building permits shall be required for all new construction,
structural alterations and where otherwise required by the Building Code
adopted by the city. Zoning permits are required for all new structures and any
change in structure dimensions, structural components, number of bedrooms,
construction of, or additions to, driveways, walkways and similar construction
and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of
materials or equipment within the floodplain. Building permits and zoning
permits shall only be issued to the owner of the property.
   (B)   All building permits may be reviewed by department heads or designee,
Building Official and Zoning Administrator to assure compatibility with
surrounding uses and ensure adequate safety devices are installed to mitigate
the potential for unplanned issues or incompatible land uses. Any comment or
concern shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator within ten days. The
Zoning Administrator will work with the building permit applicant to see the
safety concern mitigated and incompatible land use abated.
   (C)   Where a proposed use requires action of the Board of Adjustment,
Planning Commission or Council or posting of financial security, the action
shall occur and the conditional use permit, variance, zoning district change,
final plat plan approval, or minor subdivision approval shall be issued or
security posted before any building permit or zoning permit is issued.
   (D)   The city shall not accept applications where the applicant has past
due fees or charges due to the city or the county until the account is made
current.
   (E)   No applications shall be accepted by the Zoning Administrator from a
contractor or property owner having outstanding violations. Permits can only be
issued to contractors or property owners with outstanding violations by
majority vote of the Planning Commission after the violation has been resolved
to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
   (F)   The building permit or zoning permit shall contain the parcel
identification number of the property, the signature of the fee or contract
owner of the property and any other reasonable information needed to determine
compliance with this chapter.
   (G)   Lot corners shall be visible on the lot. The Zoning Administrator may
require a new survey when stakes are not visible or have been removed through
erosion, construction or other action and require that a new certificate with
existing and recorded dimensions shall be provided.
   (H)   Where a covenant is required by this chapter, evidence that such a
covenant has been recorded shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator.
   (I)   Unless extended by the Zoning Administrator, where a building permit
or zoning permit has been issued but no action has occurred within six months,
the building permit or zoning permit shall be null and void. Exterior work on
the structure shall be complete in 12 months from the issuance of the permit.
The time limit may be extended up to six months by the Zoning Administrator for
good cause. A second extension shall be decided by the Planning Commission.
   (J)   Granting of a building permit or zoning permit shall occur when all
requirements of the ordinance have been met, but shall not be considered a
statement of compliance with regional, state or federal codes, statutes or laws
or approval of the design of the structure or accessories or description of the
property. Subsequent actions of the Zoning Administrator shall not be
considered acceptance of structural components or workmanship, but rather shall
be for the purpose of determining general compliance with the ordinance.
   (K)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that any violation of a permit
or other section of the ordinance has occurred, the permit shall become null
and void. Any violation of a building permit or provision of a Building Code
adopted and administered by the city shall be subject to the proper enforcement
procedures under the Building Code or other provision of law, statute or rule
governing the administration and enforcement of the Building Code and this
chapter.
   (L)   A building permit or zoning permit application shall include, in
addition to any other information required by the application, the nature,
location, dimensions and elevations of the lot, all pertinent dimensions,
existing or proposed buildings, structures, significant natural features having
an influence on the permit, any proposed fill, any proposed storage of
materials or equipment, and shall show the location of fill or storage of
materials in relation to the stream channel.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.274 SUBDIVISION.
   Subdivision standards are provided within §§
152.240 through
152.251 of this chapter.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting. At the subdivider’s option, a pre-application
meeting shall be held including the subdivider, City Zoning Administrator, City
Engineer, if requested by the Zoning Administrator and the City Administrator.
Discussion at this meeting shall be limited to procedure, ordinance
requirements and timing.
   (B)   Sketch plan review meeting with Planning Commission. At the
subdivider’s option, a review of a sketch plan will be made by the Planning
Commission prior to a public hearing. Discussion at this meeting shall be
limited to procedure, ordinance requirements and timing.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit nine copies of the sketch plan, 14 days
prior to the normal Planning Commission meeting, and request a position on the
formal agenda.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall not take action on the proposal, but
may make suggestions to facilitate the preparation of an approvable preliminary
plat or plan.
   (C)   Minor subdivision.
      (1)   Purpose. The minor subdivision process allows for the division of
certain property described by metes and bounds legal description and is an
abbreviated review process in which there are fewer requirements than a normal
subdivision. This process may be an administrative review process and the
Zoning Administrator may refer the matter to the Planning Commission, or
consultant if necessary. This process is limited to specific situations as set
forth in this section.
      (2)   Qualification.The following may be considered a minor subdivision
provided that the parcel of land has not been part of a minor subdivision
within the last one year: Division of land into not more than three new lots in
a one-year period fronting on an existing public street which does not:
         (a)   Require any new street;
         (b)   Require the creation of any public improvement;
         (c)   Adversely affect the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property; and
         (d)   Conflict with any provisions of the comprehensive plan, zoning
code, or any other city regulations, including this chapter.
      (3)   Filing and review of application.
         (a)   Application. Before any contract is made for the sale of any
part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure on such
proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner or authorized
agent, shall file an application and secure approval of a minor subdivision.
         (b)   Placement on the Planning Commission agenda. The city must
receive an application form and all of the required information. Upon receipt,
the matter may be placed on the next Planning Commission meeting agenda which
is at least 30 days after the date the application was received. The Zoning
Administrator or appointee may submit copies of the application and required
information to other staff, committees, consultants, or agencies as appropriate
who may make written comments to the Planning Commission if needed.
         (c)   Incomplete application. The city shall have the authority to
request additional information. An application may not be heard by the Planning
Commission if incomplete. The Zoning Administrator or appointee will notify
applicant of missing information within 15 days of receiving the application.
Failure to provide the necessary supportive information may be grounds for
denial of the request.
         (d)   Transportation and Highway Department review. A minor
subdivision abutting any existing or proposed trunk highway, county road or
highway or county state-aid highway shall be subject to review by the Minnesota
Department of Transportation and/or County Highway Department. Written notice
and a copy of the proposed minor subdivision shall be filed with the Minnesota
Department of Transportation and/or County Highway Department for review and
comment. Final action on a minor subdivision shall not be taken until the
required comments and recommendations have been received or until the minimum
30-day review period has elapsed.
         (e)   DNR. When the land in the minor subdivision is located within a
shoreland district or floodplain district, the Department of Natural Resources
shall be notified of the minor subdivision as required by law. Any requirements
of the Department of Natural Resources shall be met prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
         (f)   Watershed. When the land in the minor subdivision is located
within a Watershed District, the Watershed District shall be notified. Any
requirements of the Watershed District shall be met prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
         (g)   Planning Commission meeting. The minor subdivision application
may be submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation.
The Planning Commission shall review and comment on the subdivision's
acceptability in relation to the Comprehensive Plan, zoning code, and any other
city regulation.
         (h)   Attendance at Advisory and Planning Commission meetings, and
Council meetings. Attendance at Advisory and Planning Commission meetings is
mandatory. Attendance at City Council meeting is suggested.
      (4)   Information required for minor subdivision. Unless waived by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning Administrator, all items identified in §
152.242 shall be included on an exhibit.
      (5)   Minor subdivision approval. Where appropriate under the provisions
of this chapter, the subdivider shall submit documents containing the essential
information of a proposed plat or plan as specified in §
152.242 and including dimensions computed to one-hundredth of a foot and
bearing computed to equivalent accuracy to the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Administrator for approval. The resulting legal description must be a
complete legal and not reference a separate legal nor should it be overly
complicated. The review of the Planning Commission need not include a public
hearing.
      (6)   Conditions of approval.
         (a)   All necessary utility and drainage easements are provided for.
         (b)   All new lots created by the minor subdivision conform to lot
area and width requirements established for the zoning district in which the
property is located.
         (c)   The minor subdivision does not require dedication of public
right-of-way for the purpose of gaining access to the property.
         (d)   Any existing structures on site of the minor subdivision, meets
setbacks and all other standards as specified elsewhere in the city's zoning
and subdivision ordinances.
      (7)   Minor subdivision review.
         (a)   The subdivider shall submit five copies of his or her proposal
to the Zoning Administrator 30 days prior to the normal Planning Commission
meeting and pay the corresponding fee.
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the minor subdivision for
compliance with the zoning ordinance including a field review at his or her
discretion. The Zoning Administrator may give final approval or refer the
matter to the Planning Commission.
         (c)   If the matter is referred, the Planning Commission shall decide
on approval of the subdivision within a reasonable time based on the resulting
lots complying with the chapter, the feasibility of the resulting lots for
their intended purpose, and the provision for access to adjacent properties.
Conditions may be attached to an approval requiring appropriate improvements.
No more than three lots shall be allowed in a one-year period of time using the
minor subdivision process. An additional parcel for right-of-way or commonly
owned driveway access may also be allowed.
         (d)   The resulting land descriptions shall be prepared and signed by
a licensed surveyor and shall comply with all provisions of this chapter.
         (e)   Failure of the subdivider to act after an approval of a minor
subdivision within one year shall void the approval unless extended by the
Planning Commission.
   (D)   Lot consolidation/lot line adjustment.
      (1)   Purpose. The lot consolidation/lot line adjustment process is an
administrative review process in which there are limited requirements to
combine multiple lots into one parcel or to adjust a common lot line affecting
existing parcels. Parcels resulting from these procedures must be consistent
with all zoning code requirements and other applicable regulations. Lot
consolidation is required prior to a building permit being issued. In areas
which are not will defined, or where lots are irregular in shape and/or are
included in more than one plat, the city may require that lot line adjustment/
lot consolidation occur through the preliminary and final subdivision platting
requirements.
      (2)   Qualifications.
         (a)   Lot consolidation. Two or more parcels, not separated across a
street, ally or right-of-way with one or more common lot lines whether recorded
platted lots or not, may be consolidated into one parcel.
         (b)   Lot line adjustment. Properties must be adjacent with one or
more common lot line and the resulting lot line adjustment may not create
additional lots, create or increase a nonconforming use on either property or
create an unbuildable lot.
         (c)   Rezoning. If the adjustment or combination would cause one of
the parcels to have two different zoning classifications, the applicant must
rezone the property to achieve a consistent zoning classification for the newly
created parcel.
         (d)   Easements. Any easements that becomes unnecessary as a result of
the combination of parcels must be vacated. In addition, new easement must be
established where appropriate.
      (3)   Filing and review of application.
         (a)   Before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof,
and before any permit for the erection of a structure on such proposed property
shall be granted, an application, payment of corresponding fee and approval of
a lot consolidation or lot line adjustment is required.
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and
required information to determine conformance with the comprehensive plan,
zoning code, and any other city regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall give
final approval. In reviewing the application, the Zoning Administrator may
refer the matter to the Planning Commission, or consultant if necessary.
      (4)   Information required for lot consolidation/lot line adjustment.
Unless waived by the Planning Commission, all items identified in §
152.242 shall be included on an exhibit.
      (5)   Lot consolidation/lot line adjustment approval.
         (a)   Lot line adjustment. Where appropriate under the provisions of
this chapter, the applicant shall submit documents containing the essential
information as specified in §
152.242 and including dimensions computed to one-hundredth of a foot and
bearing computed to equivalent accuracy to the Zoning Administrator for
approval. The resulting legal description must be a complete legal and not
reference a separate legal nor should it be overly complicated. A lot line
adjustment conveyance document shall be prepared by the applicant, reviewed by
the Zoning Administrator, County Recorder and County Land Surveyor and recorded
in the Office of the County Recorder.
         (b)   Lot consolidation. A lot combination conveyance document shall
be prepared by the applicant, reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and County
Recorder and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder.
      (6)   Conditions of approval.
         (a)   All necessary utility and drainage easements are provided for.
         (b)   The lot consolidation/lot line adjustment does not create
additional lots or an increase a non-conforming use or create an unbuildable
lot on either parcel.
         (c)   The lot consolidation/lot line adjustment does not require
dedication of public right-of-way for the purpose of gaining access to the
property.
         (d)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed lot
consolidation/lot line adjustment tor compliance with the Zoning Ordinance
including a field review at his or her discretion.
         (e)   The resulting land descriptions shall be prepared and signed by
a licensed surveyor and shall comply with all provisions of this chapter. The
land descriptions shall be accompanied by a survey exhibit when determined
necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
         (f)   Failure of the applicant to act after an approval of a minor
subdivision within one year shall void the approval unless extended by the
Planning Commission. A second extension shall require a new public hearing.
   (E)   Preliminary plat or preliminary condominium plat approval. The
preliminary plat or preliminary condominium plat approval constitutes formal
approval of the concept and design of the subdivision. The Planning Commission
review shall include a public hearing and may include a field review at their
discretion. All reports of city staff, DNR, road authorities and Park Committee
as well as citizen comments shall be reviewed and included in the hearing
record. Related variance requests, rezoning requests and conditional use
requests shall be heard concurrently with a subdivision request.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit nine copies of his or her proposed plat
or condominium plat to the Zoning Administrator 30 days prior to the normal
Planning Commission meeting, pay the required fees and request a public
hearing.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify all property owner's within
350 feet by regular mail and shall advertise the hearing once in the legal
section of the official newspaper at least ten days ahead of the public
hearing, including sufficient legal property description in the advertisement.
The Zoning Administrator shall distribute:
         (a)   One copy to each Planning Commission member;
         (b)   If the proposal is adjacent to a County Highway, one copy to the
County Engineer;
         (c)   If the proposal is in shorelands or flood plain, one copy to the
DNR; and
         (d)   If the proposal is adjacent to or abutting state highway, one
copy to the Minnesota Department of Transportation postmarked at least ten days
before the public hearing for review and comment.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed plat or plan as
to content standards, necessary variances from the zoning ordinance and this
chapter, necessary rezoning or necessary Conditional Use Permits, and advise
the subdivider and the Planning Commission of his or her findings.
      (4)   The subdivider shall make additional application for the necessary
permits at least 30 days prior to the normal Planning Commission or Board of
Adjustment meeting as applicable, if subdivider desires to have a concurrent
public hearing for variance, conditional use or rezoning.
      (5)   The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing and may
continue the hearing as it deems necessary to allow all factual input it deems
necessary to allow a decision. Lack of submission of comments by outside
agencies shall be construed to mean the agency has no objections.
      (6)   The Planning Commission shall recommend the approval or disapproval
of the preliminary plat or preliminary condominium plat to the Council within
120 days of submission, and the findings shall be sent to the subdivider. The
Planning Commission shall consider the following in its decision:
         (a)   Is the property zoned properly?
         (b)   Does the proposal conform to the Comprehensive Plan?
         (c)   Does the proposal conform to the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance?
         (d)   Does the proposal conform to the requirements of the Subdivision
Ordinance?
         (e)   Have the concerns of the affected agencies been addressed?
      (7)   The City Council shall review the findings and recommendations of
the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting and make the final
determination.
      (8)   The City Council will hear any appeal within 30 days of the
Planning Commission action and will re-notify anyone noticed for the public
hearing. The appeals will be filed with the City Administrator within 15 days
of the decision.
      (9)   Failure of the subdivider to act after an approval of preliminary
plat or preliminary condominium plat within one year shall void the approval
unless extended by the Planning Commission. A second extension shall require a
new public hearing.
   (F)   Final plat or final condominium plat approval. Upon approval by the
Planning Commission, the subdivider shall cause the final plat or final
condominium plat, documents and concurrent documents to be prepared and
submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation to the City Council.
All coincident variance requests, conditional use permit requests and/or
rezoning requests shall either have been decided or be pending approval
simultaneously with the final plat.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit nine paper copies of the final plat or
final condominium plat and concurrent documents to the Zoning Administrator 30
days prior to the Planning Commission meeting.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall distribute the information received
to the City Attorney, the City Engineer and an independent licensed surveyor,
who shall review the submission for conformance with the standards and comment
thereupon to the Planning Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall compare
the final plat to the preliminary plat and comment thereupon. The City Attorney
shall ascertain that all parties with an interest in the parcel to be divided
are indicated as signers of the documents. The City Engineer shall determine
that the improvements required have been completed or have been included in a
development contract and that the required security has been posted with the
City Council. The independent licensed surveyor shall compare the approved
preliminary plat with the final plat, provide a plat check of the final plat
and verify that the final plat meets the survey standards required by state
statutes.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall review the reports of the City
Attorney, City Engineer, Zoning Administrator and independent licensed surveyor
and make recommendation to the City Council within 45 days of submission. The
Planning Commission shall consider the following:
         (a)   Has the applicant complied with all conditions and requirements
upon which the preliminary approval is expressly conditioned wither through
performance or execution of appropriate agreements assuring performance?
         (b)   Does the final plat or final condominium plat agree with the
preliminary plat or preliminary condominium plat?
         (c)   Does the City Attorney agree that all parties with an interest
in the property are shown as signers of the document?
         (d)   Does the City Engineer agree that all improvements required are
satisfactorily completed or are guaranteed by contract with adequate financial
security?
         (e)   Does an independent licensed surveyor agree the final document
meets the statutory requirements?
         (f)   Has financial security been posted in the appropriate amount?
      (4)   The City Council shall review the proposal at its next regular
meeting and decide the approval or denial within 60 days of the submission of
the final plat or final condominium plat to the city.
      (5)   Following approval by the City Council, the subdivider shall submit
to the Zoning Administrator, two double mounted cloth backed prints on card
stock (hard-shells) and two Mylar prints of the final plat or final condominium
plat for signature by the Mayor and City Administrator.
      (6)   Upon signature, the subdivider shall file all pertinent documents
with the County Recorder. Failure to file a final plat or plan, within two
years shall void the approval unless extended by the City Council.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 418, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 152.275 FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Applicable fees are established in §
152.015 of this chapter. No permit shall be issued, or request brought before
the Board of Adjustment or Planning Commission until the fees are paid.
      (2)   All applications where work has already started shall require the
payment of an after-the fact fee as outlined in §
152.015 of this chapter.
   (B)   The city shall not accept applications where the applicant has any
past due fees or charges due to the city until the account is made current.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.276 FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applications will not be accepted as complete where an applicant has
any utility charges, delinquent taxes, delinquent assessments or other fees
past due with the city or county. The past due account must be paid to bring
the account current before an application will be accepted.
   (B)   (1)   When costs associated with processing or reviewing an
application exceed the original application fees, the applicant shall reimburse
the city for any additional costs. The expenses may include, but are not
limited to, payroll, mailing costs, consultant fees and other professional
services the city may need to hire in reviewing permits.
      (2)   Outstanding fees shall be paid before issuance of the permit and
any construction of the project begins.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.277 REQUIRED DECISION MAKING TIME FRAMES.
   The city shall make land use decisions pursuant to time frames established
in state statutes. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to submit a
completed application packet, which shall by definition include the application
forms approved by the city, site plan with all information required by this
chapter and remit proper fees for the land use application. The review time
frame shall commence once the Zoning Administrator or designee determines the
application and all required materials to be complete. An extension of the
application review time frame may be granted by the Planning Commission
consistent with state statutes.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 152.278 NON-CONFORMITIES.
   (A)   A use, structure or occupancy of land which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions.
   (B)   Historic structures, as defined in §
152.003(B) of this chapter, are subject to the provisions of divisions (B)(1)
through (B)(7) below.
      (1)   Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures or occupancies within
the Floodway District is prohibited.
      (2)   Any addition or structural alteration to a non-conforming structure
or non-conforming use which would result in increasing its flood damage
potential must be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in
accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood-proofing techniques
(i.e., FP-1 through FP-4 flood-proofing classifications) allowable in the
state’s Building Code, except as further restricted in divisions (B)(3) through
(B)(7) below.
      (3)   If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions
exceeds 50% of the market value of any non-conforming structure, then the
entire structure must meet the standards of this chapter for new structures.
For property subject to floodplain overlay ordinance restrictions herein
depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe
District, respectively, the cost of all structural alterations and additions
must include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost
placed on all manpower or labor.
      (4)   If any non-conforming use, or any use of a non-conforming
structure, is discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the
premises must conform to this chapter. The Assessor must notify the Zoning
Administrator in writing of instances of non-conformities that have been
discontinued for a period of more than one year.
      (5)   If any non-conformity is substantially damaged, as defined in §
152.003(B) of this chapter, it may not be reconstructed, except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing
new uses or new structures in §
152.056(D) and (E) of this chapter will apply depending upon whether the use or
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe, respectively.
      (6)   If any non-conforming use or structure experiences a repetitive
loss, as defined in §
152.003(B) of this chapter, it must not be reconstructed, except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
      (7)   Any substantial improvement, as defined in §
152.003(B) of this chapter, to a non-conforming structure requires that the
existing structure and any additions must meet the requirements of this
chapter. Properties subject to the floodplain overlay ordinance must also meet
the requirements of §
152.056(D) and (E) of this chapter for new structures, depending upon whether
the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator who is hereby designated the enforcing officer. If the violation
of this chapter constitutes a criminal violation, it shall be the duty of the
city’s Police Department to investigate and implement any such action, with the
prosecution of the criminal violation to be pursued by the City Attorney.
   (B)   In the event of a violation or a threatened violation of this chapter,
the City Council may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate the violations or threatened violations. It shall be
the duty of the Zoning Administrator and/or the city’s Police Department and/or
City Attorney to institute the action.
   (C)   Any taxpayer or taxpayers of the city may institute mandamus
proceedings in the District Court to compel specific performance by the proper
official or officials of any duty required by this chapter.
   (D)   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the
misrepresentation or declaration of any false statement in any document
required to be submitted under the provisions hereof by any person, firm or
corporation shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished by
a fine as set forth in §
10.98 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. The owner of the subject property and any contractor(s)
involved shall be considered jointly liable.
   (E)   The contractor(s) performing any work requiring a permit under this
chapter shall be in violation of this chapter if working on the site prior to
the issuance of a permit.
   (F)   Any persons in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to administrative penalties as established by the city in addition to
any other fines, actions or penalties prescribed herein.
   (G)   Every person who shall construct, establish, substantially change,
alter or repair any existing structure or use, or permit the growth of any tree
without having complied with the provision of §
152.059 or who, having been granted a permit or variance under the provisions
of §
152.059, shall construct, establish, substantially change or substantially
alter or repair any existing growth or structure or permit the growth of any
tree, except as permitted by the permit or variance, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. The Airport Zoning Administrator may enforce all provisions
of this chapter through the proceedings for injustice relief and other relief
as may be proper under the laws of M.S. § 360.073, as it may be amended from
time to time, and other applicable law.
(Ord. 332, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 337, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. passed 3-15-
2018)
APPENDIX A: ZONING MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1117.jpg]
 
APPENDIX B: AFFECTED SECTIONS OF LAND; MAPS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1119.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1121.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1123.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1125.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b90eed57deda6c6fa9790dd46eb953d6fae57538/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1127.jpg]
 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
III.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS AND LICENSES
      
IV.   NAMING AND NUMBERING STREETS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
49       5-16-1904   Adding Jenkins’ Second Addition to the city.
118      4-7-1937    Adding Block One of Jenkins’ Third Addition to the city.
144      9-7-1961    Annexing 11.4 acres of Potter’s First Addition to the
                     city.
                     Extending the corporate city limits to include
157      1-6-1971    unincorporated, platted and unplatted land not exceeding
                     200 acres in area abutting upon the city limits.
                     Extending the corporate city limits to include
158      3-10-1971   unincorporated, platted and unplatted land not exceeding
                     200 acres in area abutting upon the city limits.
                     Extending the corporate city limits to include
161      12-17-1971  unincorporated and unplatted land not exceeding 200 acres
                     in area abutting upon the city limits.
                     Extending the corporate city limits to include
186      9-4-1979    unincorporated, platted and unplatted land not exceeding
                     200 acres in area abutting upon the city limits.
                     Extending the corporate city limits to include
188      - -1979     unincorporated, platted and unplatted land not exceeding
                     200 acres in area abutting upon the city limits.
                     Extending the corporate city limits to include
194      1-6-1981    unincorporated, platted and unplatted land not exceeding
                     200 acres in area abutting upon the city limits.
                     Extending the corporate city limits to include
210      9-20-1982   unincorporated and platted land not exceeding 200 acres in
                     area abutting upon the city limits.
                     Extending the corporate city limits to include
215      8-15-1983   unincorporated and platted land not exceeding 200 acres in
                     area abutting upon the city limits.
                     Annexing the west 990 feet of the northeast quarter of the
370      12-24-2014  southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 47, Range 27 to
                     the city.
376      10-12-2015  Annexing portions of Township 47, Range 27, Sections 26
                     and 35 to the city.
                     Annexing 24.22 acres of the northeast quarter of the
401      2-7-2022    northeast quarter, Section 35, Township 47, Range 27 to
                     the city.
                    
 
TABLE II: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
338      4-19-2010   Rezoning the Aitkin Tire Shop parcel of land (429 7th
                     Avenue NE) from Urban Residential (UR) to Commercial (C).
                     Rezoning the Bernard and Ruth Egstad parcel of land (590
339      4-19-2010   Air Park Drive) from Residential/Agricultu ral/Open Space
                     (R1) to Urban Residential (UR).
                     Rezoning the Calvery Baptist Church (also known as
342      5-17-2010   Westside Church) parcel of land (810 2nd Street NW) from
                     Multiple Residence District (R-4) to Urban Residential
                     (UR).
                     Rezoning the Aitkin Realty Company parcel of land (1100
343      5-17-2010   Minnesota Avenue S) from Urban Residential (UR) to Highway
                     Commercial (C).
                     Rezoning the Cecil and Stephanie Riley Properties parcel
344      5-17-2010   of land (34498 U.S. Highway 169) from Low Single-Family
                     Residential (R-2) to Rural Residential (RR).
346      7-6-2010    Rezoning the following parcels of land from Low Single-
                     Family Residential (R-2) to Urban Residential (UR):
                   (1) Thomas M. Druar (865 Minnesota Avenue S);
                   (2) Richard J. Fannamel (703 Minnesota Avenue S);
                   (3) Hugh and Debra Janzen (901 Minnesota Avenue S);
                   (4) Robert and Betty Jo Monroe (875 Minnesota Avenue S);
                   (5) Keith Nentl (833 Minnesota Avenue S);
                   (6) Deborah J. Smith (845 Minnesota Avenue S); and
                   (7) Scott and Sheryl Wold (913 Minnesota Avenue S).
349      9-7-2010    Rezoning the following parcels of land from Low Single-
                     Family Residential (R-2) to Urban Residential (UR):
                   (1) Debra Marie Heins (35865 400th Avenue);
                   (2) Lucille Franzen (190 Bunker Hill Lane);
                   (3) Terry and Tom Betley (Bunker Hill Lane); and
                   (4) Trevor Scott Betley and Melinda D. Arness (Bunker Hill
                     Drive/Lane).
350      9-7-2010    Rezoning the following parcels of land from Low Density
                     Single-Family Residential (R-2) to Industrial (I):
                   (1) Terry and Patricia Betley (Bunker Hill Drive);
                   (2) Trevor Scott Betley and Melinda D. Arness (Bunker Hill
                     Drive/Lane);
                   (3) Tom Betley (Bunker Hill Lane);
                   (4) Tom, Terry and Patricia Betley (Bunker Hill Drive);
                     and
                   (5) Samuel and Michelle Virginia (Bunker Hill Drive).
                     Rezoning the Samuel and Michelle Virginia parcel of land
351      9-7-2010    (768, 780 and 812 4th Street SE) from Mobile Home
                     Residence (R-5) to Industrial (I).
                     Rezoning the Bremer Bank National Association parcel of
352      9-7-2010    land (Bunker Hill Drive) from Planned Unit Development
                     (PUD) to Industrial (I).
                     Rezoning the Tom Betley parcel of land (209 2nd Avenue NW)
353      9-7-2010    from High Density Single-Family (R-3) to Downtown Mixed
                     Use (DMU).
                     Rezoning the Senram Development Group, LLC, parcel of land
368      5-5-2014    (located on Westwood Drive in between the St. James
                     Catholic Church and Westwood Drive) from Rural Residential
                     (RR) to Urban Residential (UR).
371      12-24-2014  Rezoning the unaddressed Paul Fischer parcel of land to
                     Urban Residential (UR).
                     Rezoning two parcels of land from Rural Residential (RR)
392      1-7-2019    to Open Space (OS) and two parcels of land from Rural
                     Residential (RR) to Industrial (I).
397      9-8-2020    Rezoning lots in Block 28 from Industrial (I) to Downtown
                     Mixed Use (DMU).
398      9-8-2020    Rezoning lots in Blocks 1 and 2 from Industrial (I) to
                     Urban Residential (UR).
399      12-7-2020   Rezoning parcels in Section 36, Township 47, Range 27 from
                     Commercial Highway (C) to Urban Residential (UR).
402      12-6-2021   Rezoning certain parcels in Section 36, Township 47, Range
                     27 to Urban Residential (UR).
409      10-2-2023   Rezoning lots in Block 28 from Downtown Mixed Use (DMU) to
                     Light Industrial/Commercial Transition (LI-CT).
                    
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS AND LICENSES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
244  10-15- Granting a 25-year natural and/or mixed gas distribution system to Northern
     1990   Minnesota Utilities. (Repealed by Ord. 374, passed 10-5-2015.)
296  1-27-  Granting a cable system franchise to CC VIII Operating LLC, d/b/a Charter
     2003   Communications.
333  5-19-  Authorizing The Beanery, an Internet café LLC, to sell intoxicating malt
     2008   liquors at on-sale without an additional license.
361  6-3-   Authorizing Hawkeye’s, Inc., d/b/a The Tuscan Room, to sell intoxicating malt
     2013   liquors at on-sale without an additional license.
374  10-5-  Granting a ten-year natural gas distribution franchise to Minnesota Energy
     2015   Resources, a subsidiary of WEC Energy Group.
384  10-16- Implementing a natural gas franchise fee on Minnesota Energy Resources.
     2017
     11-6-  Granting a franchise to Consolidated Telephone Company d/b/a Consolidated
385  2017   Telecommunications Company for the construction and operation of a cable
            system.
           
 
TABLE IV: NAMING AND NUMBERING STREETS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
85       2-4-1925    Naming/renaming certain streets throughout and in the
                     city.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cites Code Section
M.S. Cites               Code Section
13                       30.01
14.59                    152.271
14.57— 14.60           152.271
14.57—14.69            110.11,
                         110.37
15.73, subd. 3           91.03
15.99                    152.059
16B.62, subd. 1          150.15
16B.65, subd. 1          150.15
16B.69                   150.15
16B.70                   150.15
16B.69                   150.99
28A                      112.21
65A.50                   32.02
84.787, subd. 7          71.02
84.90                    71.02
84.92, subd. 8—10      71.02
93.44—93.51            152.003
                         152.002,
103F                     152.056,
                         152.058
103F.48                  152.003
103F.221                 152.057
103F.361—103F.377      152.057
103F.367, subd. 1        152.003
103F.369                 152.003
103G                     152.058
103G.005, subd. 15       152.003
103G.005, subd. 15a      152.003
103G.245                 152.056
115                      152.002
115.01, subd. 8          53.01
115.07                   53.01
116                      152.002
120A.05                  114.01
120A.24                  114.01
144.391                  113.01
144.397 et seq.          110.09,
                         110.35
144.414                  113.03
144.4167                 113.03,
                         113.06
                         113.02,
144.4167 subd. 4         113.03,
                         113.06
144.50—144.56          152.003
145A.05, subd. 1         130.02
152                      152.003
152.0263, subd. 5        96.03,
                         114.01
157                      112.21
168.10                   95.04 ,
                         97.14
168B                     97.14
168B.011, subd. 2        95.04,
                         152.003
168B.06                  97.14
168B.09                  95.04
168B.10                  95.04
169                      70.01
169.01 et seq.           70.99
190.05, subd. 5b         32.01
190.05, subd. 5c         32.01
216B.02, subd. 4         91.03
216B.02, subd. 6         91.03
216C.06, subd. 14        152.272
216D                     91.05,
                         91.11
216D.01—216D.09        91.11,
                         91.19
216D.04, subd. 3         91.03
237.16                   91.01
                         91.01,
237.162                  91.03,
                         91.13
237.162, subd. 4         91.03
                         91.01,
237.163                  91.03,
                         91.13
237.163, subd. 2(b)      91.02
237.163, subd. 6         91.24
237.79                   91.01
237.81                   91.01
238                      91.03
238.086                  91.01
245.462, subd. 23        114.01
297F.01, subd. 3         113.02
297F.01 subd. 13a        113.06
299C.72                  111.02
300.06                   91.05
303.06                   152.198
307.08                   152.003,
                         152.057
308A                     91.03
325J.04, subd. 2         152.201
326B.101—326B.194      150.15
326B.121, subd. 1        150.16,
                         150.17
326B.133, subd. 1        150.16
326B.148                 150.17
327.23—327.35          152.102
329                      112.03
333.01                   152.198
340.409, subd. 8         110.30
                         110.01,
                         110.02,
340A                     110.09,
                         110.25,
                         110.26,
                         110.35
340A.101                 152.003
340A.101 subd. 17A       152.003
340A.22, subd. 2         152.003
340A.22, subd. 4         152.003
340A.24                  152.003
340A.24, subd. 2         110.03
340A.26                  152.003
340A.285                 110.03,
                         152.003
340A.301, subd. 6        152.003
340A.301, subd. 6(c)     110.03
340A.301, subd.(6)(i)    110.03
340A.301, subd.(6)(j)    110.03
340A.315                 152.003
340A.33                  152.003
340A.34                  152.003
340A.404, subd. 5        110.28
340A.405                 110.03
340A.408                 33.01
                         110.03,
340A.409                 110.04,
                         110.30
340A.413, subd. 4        110.28
340A.414                 110.10,
                         110.36
340A.503, subd. 1(a)(1)  130.02
340A.504, subd. 3        110.03
340A.504, Subd. 4        110.38
340A.509                 110.02,
                         110.26
340A.701                 110.09,
                         110.35
340A.702                 110.09,
                         110.35
340A.703                 110.09,
                         110.35
340A.801                 110.04;
                         110.30
340A.802                 110.04,
                         110.30
Ch. 342                  114.01,
                         114.02
342.01                   114.01
342.0263, subd. 5        96.01,
                         96.03
342.08, subd. 3          114.03
342.09, subd. 1(2)       96.03
342.09, subd. 1(7)(iii)  96.03
342.11                   114.02
342.13                   114.02
342.13(c)                114.01
342.13(f)                114.02
342.17                   114.01
342.22                   114.01,
                         114.02
342.22, subd. 4(b)       114.02
342.22, subd. 5(e)       114.02
342.24                   114.02
342.24, subd. 4          114.03
342.25, subd. 4          114.03
342.25, subd. 7          114.03
342.27, subd. 9          114.03
342.27, subd. 10         114.03
342.28, subd. 3          114.03
342.29, subd. 3          114.03
342.39, subd. 2          114.04
344.02, subd. 1(a)—(d) 152.003
360.063                  152.059
360.068, subd. 2         152.059
360.063, subd. 6a        152.059
360.073                  152.059
364.03, subd. 2          152.198
364.06                   30.01
364.09                   30.01
366.011                  31.01
366.012                  31.01
394.22, subd. 10         152.003
412.022                  30.15
412.221, subd. 23        95.02,
                         152.003
412.221, subd. 24        152.003
412.581                  30.17
412.591                  30.17
412.925                  97.14
415.01                   31.01,
                         97.33
429                      91.18
429.061                  94.28
                         94.28,
429.101                  94.43,
                         151.08,
                         151.09
453                      91.03
453A                     91.03
461.12                   113.99
                         91.18,
462                      152.056,
                         152.058
462.351—462.364        30.30,
                         152.002
462.357                  114.01
462.357, subd. 6         152.272
462.358                  152.250
462.358, subd. 2b        152.250
462.3593                 152.016
462.3593, subd. 9        152.016
462.367, subd. 14        114.03
463.15—463.26          94.20,
                         94.22
463.17                   94.42
466.04                   111.09
469.190                  32.27
471.59                   152.003
471.6985                 110.27
                         152.003,
505                      152.243,
                         152.245
515A                     152.003,
                         152.243
515A.2-110               152.003
515B                     152.243
515B.1-100 et seq.       152.003
515B.2-121, subs. (f)(1) 152.003
609.293—609.352        152.180
609.415                  97.21
617                      152.178
617.293 et seq.          152.180
626.84, subd. 1          96.99
626.862                  10.20
631.48                   10.99
                         
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        4-8-2008    10.98
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
49       5-16-1904   TSO I
85       2-4-1925    TSO IV
118      4-7-1937    TSO I
144      9-7-1961    TSO I
149      7-12-1967   30.30
157      1-6-1971    TSO I
158      3-10-1971   TSO I
161      12-17-1971  TSO I
                     90.20—
265      - -1971     90.24,-
                     90.99
186      9-4-1979    TSO I
188      - -1979     TSO I
194      1-6-1981    TSO I
210      9-20-1982   TSO I
211      9-20-1982   51.01—
                     51.04
215      8-15-1983   TSO I
                     151.01—
238      11-20-1989  151.09,
                     151.99
244      10-15-1990  TSO III
246      8-19-1991   50.01,
                     50.99
                     95.01—
253      1-6-1992    95.04,
                     95.99
                     94.40—
254      2-3-1992    94.43,
                     94.99
259      9-21-1992   70.04,
                     70.99
                     131.01—
275      12-16-1996  131.04,
                     131.99
                     70.01,
284      9-14-1998   70.02,
                     70.99
292      3-20-2000   30.15
296      1-27-2003   TSO III
                     94.20,
300      4-21-2003   94.22—
                     94.28,
                     94.99
                     93.01—
302      6-16-2003   93.07,
                     93.99
328      11-5-2007   110.09
                     150.15—
350      11-1-2004   150.17,
                     150.99
305      11-24-2004  150.15
312      8-1-2005    31.01—
                     31.08
                     92.01—
313      9-19-2005   92.11,
                     92.99
                     52.01—
                     52.04,
                     52.12,
315      5-1-2006    52.14,
                     52.16—
                     52.18,
                     52.99
320      8-21-2006   30.16
321      11-6-2006   91.01—
                     91.25
325      4-2-2007    70.03,
                     70.99
328      11-5-2007   110.09
                     70.15—
327      11-19-2007  70.17,
                     70.99
329      11-19-2007  10.98
                     152.001—
                     152.015,
                     152.030—
                     152.040,
                     152.055—
                     152.059,
                     152.070—
                     152.075,
                     152.090—
                     152.104,
                     152.120—
                     152.125,
332      5-19-2008   152.140—
                     152.155,
                     152.170—
                     152.181,
                     152.195—
                     152.208,
                     152.220—
                     152.225,
                     152.240—
                     152.251,
                     152.265—
                     152.278,
                     152.999
333      5-19-2008   TSO III
                     130.03,
336      1-20-2009   130.04,
                     130.99
335      2-2-2009    32.01
                     152.003,
337      12-21-2009  152.008,
                     152.999
338      4-19-2010   TSO II
339      4-19-2010   TSO II
340      4-19-2010   152.006
                     90.01—
341      4-19-2010   90.07,
                     90.20,
                     90.99
342      5-17-2010   TSO II
343      5-17-2010   TSO II
344      5-17-2010   TSO II
345      7-6-2010    152.036
346      7-6-2010    TSO II
347      7-6-2010    152.003,
                     152.271
348      9-7-2010    152.244
349      9-7-2010    TSO II
350      9-7-2010    TSO II
351      9-7-2010    TSO II
352      9-7-2010    TSO II
353      9-7-2010    TSO II
                     152.015,
354      11-1-2010   152.121—
                     152.123
-        3-15-2011   152.059
355      6-6-2011    32.02
                     150.01—
356      8-15-2011   150.04,
                     150.99
358      4-16-2012   130.02,
                     130.99
359      8-6-2012    152.003,
                     152.272
360      1-22-2013   30.01
361      6-3-2013    TSO III
                     112.01—
364      12-16-2013  112.07,
                     112.99
                     71.01,
                     71.02,
366      2-18-2014   71.35—
                     71.40,
                     71.99
                     71.02,
367      2-18-2014   71.15—
                     71.21,
                     71.99
368      5-5-2014    TSO II
                     152.037,
369      10-20-2014  152.040,
                     152.096
372      12-15-2014  152.003,
                     152.040
370      12-24-2014  TSO I
371      12-24-2014  TSO II
                     32.15—
373      6-1-2015    32.27,
                     32.99
374      10-5-2015   TSO III
376      10-12-2015  TSO I
                     111.01—
377      10-19-2015  111.09,
                     111.99
375      10-20-2015  130.01,
                     130.99
379      7-5-2016    152.016
                     110.01—
381      1-9-2017    110.11,
                     110.99
                     52.01-
315      3-22-2017   52.19,
                     52.99
                     110.25—
382      6-5-2017    110.37,
                     110.99
383      10-16-2017  30.17
384      10-16-2017  TSO III
385      11-6-2017   TSO III
387      8-20-2018   Adopting Ordinance
                     113.01—
388      11-5-2018   113.12,
                     113.99
390      1-7-2019    94.60—
                     94.78
392      1-7-2019    TSO II
391      2-4-2019    112.20—
                     112.28
393      6-3-2019    152.040
                     152.003,
                     152.013,
394      8-5-2019    152.030,
                     152.057,
                     152.058,
                     152.071
395      9-3-2019    152.073
397      9-8-2020    TSO II
398      9-8-2020    TSO II
399      12-7-2020   TSO II
                     71.01,
                     71.02,
366      9-7-2021    71.35—
                     71.40,
                     71.99
389      9-7-2021    130.05
                     94.01—
400      9-7-2021    94.08,
                     94.99
                     71.02,
367      9-27-2021   71.15—
                     71.21,
                     71.99
402      12-6-2021   TSO II
                     152.034,
403      12-6-2021   152.035,
                     152.040
404      12-6-2021   152.040,
                     152.095
401      2-7-2022    TSO I
405      4-4-2022    152.003,
                     152.040
                     152.003,
406      4-4-2022    152.040,
                     152.095
407      4-4-2022    152.040
408      1-3-2023    94.05,
                     152.037
409      10-2-2023   TSO II
                     96.01—
410      11-6-2023   96.03,
                     96.99
412      12-2-2024   114.01—
                     114.08
413      12-2-2024   152.040
                     10.98,
                     10.99,
414      4-7-2025    94.60—
                     94.78,
                     94.99
415      6-2-2025    33.01
                     10.98,
416      7-7-2025    97.01—
                     97.33,
                     97.99
                     110.09,
417      7-21-2025   110.28,
                     110.35
                     152.003,
                     152.035,
                     152.040,
                     152.091,
418      10-20-2025  152.106,
                     152.121—
                     152.123,
                     152.271,
                     152.274
419      1-5-2026    33.01
                    
 
