ARDEN HILLS, MN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through Ordinance 2025-006, passed 12-8-2025
and Zoning Map October 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
Chapter 1 - Code Introduction
Section 100 - General Provisions
100.01   Code Designation; Citation.
   The chapters, articles, sections and subdivisions embraced in this Code of
Ordinances shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Ordinances of the
City of Arden Hills," and may be so cited. This code may also be cited as the
"Arden Hills City Code." Internal references to the Arden Hills City Code may
be made as "this code" or "the code." All references and citations to this code
shall be deemed to include all additions and amendments to the code. All
references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this
code unless otherwise specified.
   State law reference - Authority to codify ordinances, M.S. §§ 412.191 (5),
415.021
100.02   Additions.
   New ordinances proposing amendments or additions to the code shall be
assigned appropriate code numbers and shall be incorporated into the code as of
their effective date. Reference or citation to the code shall be deemed to
include such amendments and additions. When an ordinance is integrated into the
code, there may be omitted from the ordinance the title, enacting clause,
section numbers, definitions of terms identical to those contained in this
code, the clause indicating date of adoption, and validating signatures and
dates. In integrating ordinances into the code, the city administrator, in
cooperation with the city attorney, may correct obvious grammatical,
punctuation and spelling errors; change reference numbers to conform with
sections, articles and chapters; substitute figures for written words and vice
versa; substitute dates for the words "the effective date of this ordinance";
and perform like actions to insure a uniform code of ordinances without,
however, altering the meaning of the ordinances enacted.
100.03   Numbering.
   Each section number of this code consists of two component parts separated
by a decimal. The first digit of the number refers to the chapter number and
the digits after the period refer to the position of the section within the
chapter. If the chapter is divided into parts, the figure immediately to the
left of the decimal corresponds to the part number.
100.04   Title Headings; Cross References.
   Chapter, part, section, subdivision and other titles shall not be considered
part of the subject matter of this code but are intended for convenience only
and not necessarily as comprehensive titles.
100.05   Copies.
   Copies of this code shall be kept in the office of the city administrator
for public inspection or sale for a reasonable charge, as determined by the
City Council.
100.06   Existing Rights and Liabilities.
   The repeal of prior ordinances and adoption of this code are not to be
construed to affect in any manner rights and liabilities existing at the time
of repeal and the enactment of this code. Insofar as provisions in this code
are substantially the same as pre existing ordinances, they shall be considered
as continuations and not as new enactments. Any act done, offense committed or
right accruing or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or
assessed prior to the effective date of this code is not affected by the
enactment of the code.
100.07   Effect of Repeals or Amendments.
   The repeal or amendment of any portion of this code shall not revive any
ordinance in force before or at the time the code or amendment took effect. The
repeal of any section shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred
before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending
at the time of such repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising
under the section repealed.
100.08   Severability of Parts of Code.
   The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by the valid
judgment of decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity,
unenforceability or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this code.
Section 110 - Rules of Construction and Definitions
110.01   General.
   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of this city, the
following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed, unless such
construction or definitions would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the City Council, would be repugnant to the context of the provisions or the
context clearly requires otherwise. All words and phrases shall be construed
and understood according to the common and approved usage of language; but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to
such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
110.02   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this code, and unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given them in
this section.
   ∙   Alley. A minor public or private way which is used primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or side of a property abutting on a
street.
   ∙   Boulevard. That portion of a street lying between the lateral line of
the roadway portion thereof (i.e., the back of the curb or curbline) and the
right-of-way (property) line of abutting properties which may contain within
its boundaries a sidewalk or portion of a driveway.
   ∙   City. The statutory City of Arden Hills in the County of Ramsey, State
of Minnesota.
   ∙   City Council. The governing body of the City.
   ∙   Code. This Code of Ordinances as designated and cited in Subsection
100.01.
   ∙   County. The County of Ramsey in the State of Minnesota.
   ∙   In the City. Includes any territory within the corporate limits of this
City and the police jurisdiction thereof, and any other territory over which
regulatory power has been conferred on the City by general or special act,
except as otherwise specified.
   ∙   Law. Any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the United
States, the state, the county, the City or any agency thereof, as well as the
rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate.
   ∙   Month. A calendar month.
   ∙   Oath. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear"
and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
   ∙   Owner. When applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by
the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   ∙   Pathway; Pedestrian Way. A way, public or private, running across or
located within a platted lot or block or an unplatted parcel of land, used
primarily for the principal use of pedestrians.
   ∙   Person. A firm, partnership, association, corporation, organization,
club, society, group acting as a unit, company, joint stock association or body
politic and corporate, as well as to an individual.
   ∙   Personal Property. Money, goods, chattels, evidences of debt, things in
action, and any other species of property, except real property.
   ∙   Preceding; Following. Shall mean the next before and the next after,
respectively.
   ∙   Property. Includes real, personal and mixed real and personal property.
   ∙   Public Place. Any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open space
adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or business open to
the use of the public in general, open to public view or to which the public
has access.
   ∙   Public Way. Any street, sidewalk, pathway, pedestrian way or other
thoroughfare granted, dedicated or reserved for public use and used by the
public for vehicular or pedestrian purposes.
   ∙   Real Property. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   ∙   Residence. The place adopted by a person as his or her place of
habitation, and to which, whenever he or she is absent, he or she has the
intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another,
the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed to be his or her residence.
   ∙   Roadway. The entirety of a private street and that portion of a public
street improved, designed or intended for the principal use of vehicular
traffic extending from the back of the curb (i.e., the curbline) on one side to
the back of the curb (i.e., the curbline) on the other side.
   ∙   Sidewalk. A way, public or private, comprising a portion of the
boulevard of a street which is improved, designed or intended for the principal
use of pedestrians.
   ∙   Signature; Subscription. Aa mark when the person cannot write, when his
or her name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes
his or her own name as witness.
   ∙   State. The words "The State" or "This State" shall mean the State of
Minnesota.
   ∙   Street. A way, public or private, for the conveyance principally of
vehicular traffic whether designated as a street, avenue, parkway, road, lane,
throughway, expressway, highway, place or however otherwise designated,
consisting of a roadway and boulevard, the latter of which may contain a
sidewalk.
   ∙   Tenant; Occupant. When applied to a building or land, shall mean any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   ∙   Writing; Written. Includes typewriting, printing on paper and any other
mode of representing words and letters.
   ∙   Year. A calendar year.
   State law reference - Similar provisions, M.S. §§ 645.15, 645.44.
110.03   Special Interpretations.
   ∙   Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females, and vice versa, and both shall apply to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males.
   ∙   Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural,
and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.
   ∙   Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code
they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use
in the City.
   ∙   Officials, Employees, Boards, Commissions, etc. Whenever reference is
made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the City
by title only, i.e., "mayor," "city administrator," "chief of police," etc.,
they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, employees, boards, commissions
or other agencies of this City.
   ∙   Shall; May. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is
discretionary.
   ∙   Tense. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future
as well as the past or present.
110.04   Delegation of Authority.
   Whenever a provision appears in this code requiring an officer of the City
to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize
such officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision
or section expressly designates otherwise.
110.05   Joint Authority.
   Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise specifically declared.
110.06   Reasonable Time.
   "Reasonable Time" shall mean all cases where any section of this code or
City ordinance shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or
reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed
to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such
duty, or compliance with such notice.
110.07   Exception to Rules of Interpretation.
   The rules of construction and definitions set forth in this section shall
not be applied to any section of this code or City ordinance which shall
contain any express provision excluding such construction or definition, or
when subject matter or context of such provisions or ordinance may be repugnant
thereto.
110.08   Incorporation by Reference.
   All standard codes, rules, regulations and other subject matter referenced
in this code or hereafter properly incorporated by reference, together with
subsequent amendments thereto, shall be kept and preserved in the office of the
city administrator.
110.09   Parenthetical and Reference Matter.
   The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections in this code is for
information only and is not a part of this code. Citations to ordinances
indicate only the source of such section and the text may or may not be changed
by this code.
110.10   Conflicts.
   If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter. If
conflicting provisions be found in different sections of the same chapter, the
provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter. Where
the above rules do not resolve conflicts, the more restrictive regulation shall
apply.
Section 120 - Violations and Penalties
120.01   Police Power Extended to City Property.
   The police power of the City is hereby extended to include all lands or
property owned or leased by the City or any agency of the City and the general
ordinances of the City shall be applicable on such property.
120.02   Altering Code.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby; provided,
that supplementation of this code by authorized persons shall be permitted.
120.03   General Penalty.
   Subd. 1.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the fine listed in the fee schedule appendix to this
code, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. In either case,
the costs of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   Subd. 2.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code which is a petty offense, defined by this code to be a petty
misdemeanor, shall upon conviction be subject to the fine listed in the fee
schedule appendix to this code.
   Subd. 3.   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is specifically provided
for such failure.
   State law reference - Misdemeanor and petty misdemeanor penalties, see M.S.
§ 609.02 (3) and (4)(a); ordinance violations and penalties, see M.S. §§
412.231 and 609.034
120.04   Issuances of Summonses.
   The persons listed below, as employees or agents of the City, shall have the
power to issue summonses incorporating complaints in the form adopted by the
courts. Any issuance by those listed below shall relate only to offenses
involving this code, building construction, building operation or maintenance,
fire and fire prevention, public health and sanitation, and zoning. No employee
or agent authorized to issue a summons under this subsection shall be
authorized to arrest or otherwise take an alleged violator into custody or to
secure a promise to appear in court in lieu of arrest. The employees or agents
who shall be authorized to issue summonses under this subsection shall be as
follows:
   Subd. 1   Building inspector;
   Subd. 2   Fire chief and assistant fire chief of the City's designated fire
protection services provider;
   Subd. 3   Health officer;
   Subd. 4   Plumbing inspector;
   Subd. 5   Mechanical inspector;
   Subd. 6   Electric inspector; and
   Subd. 7   Employees or agents as shall from time to time be authorized by
the Council.
   State law reference - Penalties for violation of ordinances, M.S. §§
412.231, 609.032
Chapter 2 - Administration
Section 200 - Elections
200.01   Date of Election.
   The regular City election shall be held biennially on the Tuesday after the
first Monday in November in every even numbered year.
   State law references - Elections, general and special, M.S. Ch. 203; conduct
of elections, M.S. Ch. 204; municipal elections, M.S. Ch. 205
200.02   Absentee Ballot.
   Subd. 1   Precinct Established. There shall hereby be continued an absentee
ballot precinct within the City which shall handle all absentee ballots of the
electorate of the City received during any election.
   Subd. 2   Polling Place. The absentee ballot precinct shall be the precinct
which contains the City Hall.
   Subd. 3   Election Board. The election board of the precinct which contains
the City Hall shall be the election board of the absentee ballot precinct.
   Subd. 4   Duties. Unless otherwise provided in the State of Minnesota
election laws, the absentee ballot precinct shall:
      A.   Receive all absentee ballots of the electorate of the City for any
election;
      B.   Check the registration of each absentee ballot;
      C.   Determine the precinct of each absentee ballot voter and report the
results of such election to each precinct with such results to be tabulated
with that precinct;
      D.   Prepare a list for submission to each precinct within the City prior
to the close of the election day for precinct officials to check against the
voter registration file to ascertain if any absentee ballot voter voted by
person;
      E.   Reject any absentee ballots of persons who had voted at a precinct
making a notation on the envelope of the absentee ballot as to the reason for
rejection; and
      F.   Count the absentee ballots after the polls have closed by opening
them and tabulating the vote of each absentee ballot voter in a manner which
will indicate each vote of the absentee voter and designate that the vote was
received by absentee ballot.
      G.   Confirm that the vote was not cast in person at the precinct.
Section 210 - City Council*
210.01   Terms of Councilmembers; Mayor.
   Two (2) Councilmembers shall be elected for four year terms at each biennial
election. The Mayor shall be elected for a four year term.
210.02   Salaries
(revised 9/9/24)
   Subd. 1   The salary of the Mayor shall be $8,250 per annum and shall be
paid in one (1) or more installments as determined by City Council Resolution.
   Subd. 2   The salary of each Councilmember shall be $7,452 per annum and
shall be paid in one (1) or more installments as determined by City Council
Resolution.
   Subd. 3.   The salary of the Mayor and Councilmembers shall be reviewed
every six years or earlier as determined by the City Council.
210.03    Council Meetings
   Subd. 1    Regular Meetings. The City Council shall have regular meetings on
the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m. and shall have regular
workshops on the second and fourth Monday of each month at 5:30 p.m. If a
regular or workshop meeting date falls on a holiday, the meeting shall be
conducted on the next following business day. The first meeting of the year
shall be held on the second Monday of January. All meetings shall be held in
the City Hall except as otherwise, from time to time, may be designated by City
Council Resolution. (revised 12/11/2023)
   Subd. 2   Adjournment. The Council may at any time, by a majority vote of
those present, adjourn from time to time to a specific date and hour whether or
not a quorum is present.
   Subd. 3   Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or
any two (2) members by written request filed with the City Administrator at
least three (3) days, Sundays and holidays excepted, prior to the time
specified for such meeting. The City Administrator shall mail or otherwise
deliver a notice at least two (2) days before the meeting to all members of the
time and place of the meeting and the purpose of the meeting. Written notice of
any special meeting shall be posted giving the date, time, place and purpose of
the meeting at least three days before the meeting. Written notice shall be
mailed at least three days before the meeting to anyone who has filed a written
request for notice of special meetings. In calculating three days, if the last
day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the next regular business
day shall be counted as the third day. (revised 10/25/10)
   Subd. 4   Emergency Meetings. An emergency meeting may be called by the
Mayor or any two members of the Council for the purpose of dealing with a
situation which due to the circumstances requires the immediate consideration
of the Council. Actual notice of the meeting must be attempted to be given to
all members of the Council, and notice provisions of state law must also be
met.
   Subd. 5   Initial Meeting. At the first Council meeting held in January of
each year the Council shall: (Revised 11/28/2022)
      A.   Designate the depositories of City funds;
      B.   Designate the official newspaper;
      C.   Choose one of the Councilmembers as acting Mayor, who shall perform
the duties of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor from the
City or, in case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, until a successor has
been appointed and qualifies; and
      D.   Appoint such officers and employees and such members of boards,
commissions, departments and committees as may be necessary.
   Subd. 6   Presiding Officer. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the
Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the acting Mayor shall preside. In the
absence of both, the Councilmembers shall elect one of their number as
temporary chairperson. The acting Mayor and temporary chairperson when
occupying the place of the Mayor shall have the same privileges as other
members.
   Subd. 7   Quorum; Compelling Attendance. At all meetings of the Council, a
majority of the Councilmembers shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a
minority may adjourn from day to day and may, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
compel the attendance of absentees unless a reasonable excuse be offered.
   Subd. 8   Meetings Public. All meetings of the Council shall be public and
shall comply with the open meeting law.
210.04   Rules and Procedures.
   Subd. 1   Purpose. These rules and procedures of the Council are adopted to
facilitate the transaction of Council business and functions. They should not
be permitted to defeat or hinder the plainly expressed intent and desire of the
Council. Informal compliance and substantial performance shall be sufficient
under the following rules in the absence of objection timely taken. Objection
is hereby declared not to have been timely taken as to procedural matters
provided for herein if a Councilmember present at a meeting fails to object
during the meeting and request compliance with these rules, and such objection
shall not be seasonably taken if taken by an absent member later than the next
regular meeting after the proceedings to which objection is made.
   Subd. 2   Amendment of Rules. The rules governing meetings of the Council,
or any of them, may be temporarily suspended by consent of a majority of all
Councilmembers, and shall not be repealed, altered, or amended, unless by
concurrence of a majority of the whole Council, and upon notice given at some
preceding meeting.
   Subd. 3   Robert's Rules. In all points not covered by this section, the
Council shall be governed in its procedure by Robert's Rules of Order, Revised.
   Subd. 4   Authority of Mayor Generally. The Mayor shall preserve order and
decorum and shall decide questions of order subject to an appeal to the
Council. The Mayor may make motions, second motions, or speak on any question.
In order to do so, upon demand of any one Councilmember, he or she shall vacate
the chair and designate a Councilmember to preside temporarily. The Mayor shall
be entitled to vote like other members of the Council.
   Subd. 5   Voting Generally. When a question is put to the Council by the
chair, every member present shall vote unless for special reasons the Council
shall excuse him or her; or a conflict of interest may exist, he or she shall
not vote. In cases where the direction of the vote is in doubt, the chair may
direct, or any member may demand, that a division vote be taken. The yeas and
nays shall be called upon a requisition by the chair or any member, in which
case the names of the members voting are required to be recorded in the
minutes. Except as otherwise provided in this code, or when a different vote is
required by law, a majority vote of those present shall be sufficient to
approve any question posed to the Council.
210.05   Minutes.
   Minutes of all Council meetings shall be kept by the City Administrator.
They shall be signed by the City Administrator and shall constitute an official
record of the Council proceedings. Upon approval of the minutes at a subsequent
meeting of the Council, the Mayor shall sign the minutes. Lack of such Mayor's
signature or Council approval shall not invalidate such minutes as official
records.
210.06   Execution of Ordinance; Ordinance
   After an ordinance shall have passed, a complete and accurate copy as
amended shall be made by the City Administrator and shall be signed by the
Mayor or in his or her absence by the acting Mayor, and deposited with the City
Administrator who shall attest, seal, number, file and record or place the same
permanently in the City's ordinance book. Entry of the complete ordinance as
amended directly into the ordinance book and original signatures and seal
thereon shall be in compliance with this section. The affidavit of publication
shall be permanently inserted in the ordinance book after each ordinance.
Section 220 - Boards, Committees and Commissions
(revised 2/14/22)
220.01   General.
   The following regulations apply to all Boards, Committees, Commissions, and
Appointed Bodies of the City of Arden Hills.
   Subd. 1   Quorum. A majority of the members of any Board, Committee,
Commission and other Appointed Body appointed by the City Council shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of the business coming before such
Board, Committee, Commission or Appointed Body.
   Subd. 2   Voting Required. Each member of any Board, Committee, Commission
and other Appointed Body shall be required to vote on matters coming before
that body unless such member shall have a conflict of interest concerning the
matter to be considered.
   Subd. 3   Minimum Requirement for Action. Unless otherwise specifically
provided, a majority of the members of any Board, Committee, Commission and
other Appointed Body present and voting any meeting thereof, shall be required
for any action or decision of such Board, Committee, Commission or other
Appointed Body.
   Subd. 4   Committees. Committees may be established by the City Council as
may be needed from time to time for the efficient operation and administration
of the affairs of the City. In the event Committees are established, the
members thereof shall be appointed by the City Council. (Revised 2/13/2023)
   Subd. 5   Compensation. All members of Boards, Committees, Commissions and
other appointed bodies shall serve without compensation.
   Subd. 6   Residency Requirements. Unless otherwise specifically provided,
each member of any Board, Committee, Commission or other appointed body shall
be a resident of the City during their term of service.
   Subd. 7   Length of Term. Unless otherwise specifically provided, each
Member of any Board, Committee, Commission or other appointed body shall serve
for a term of three (3) years.
      A.   Number of Terms. Each Member may serve for no more than three (3)
consecutive three-year terms.
      B.   Staggered Terms. One-third of each Board, Committee, Commission or
other appointed body shall be appointed at the beginning of each fiscal year.
   Subd. 8   Removal of Members. Any Member of a Board, Committee, Commission
or other appointed body may be removed by a majority vote of the entire City
Council.
   Subd. 9   Attendance at Meetings. A Member of a Board, Committee, Commission
or other appointed body who has unexcused absences from three (3) consecutive
meetings or a total of one-third of all meetings in a calendar year, shall
automatically be removed from office without City Council action. The City
Administrator shall notify the Member of his or her removal.
   Subd. 10   Officers. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the City
Council shall annually appoint one (1) Member to serve as Chair of each Board,
Committee, Commission or other appointed body. The Chair shall be responsible
for meeting agendas, presiding at meetings, minutes of meetings, and reports
and recommendations to the City Council. Subcommittees of the Board, Committee,
Commission or other appointed body may be formed, from time to time, based upon
the needs of the City. The Board, Committee, Commission or other appointed body
may appoint a Member to serve as Vice-Chair. (Revised 2/13/2023)
   Subd. 11   Meetings and Reports. The Board, Committee, Commission or other
appointed body shall hold meetings at regularly scheduled times or more
frequently as needed. Meetings shall be open to the public and proper notice of
the meeting shall be given as set forth in the City Codes. Boards, Committees,
Commissions and other appointed bodies shall keep minutes which shall be
forwarded to the City Council.
   Subd. 12   Administrative Staff Liaison. Unless otherwise specifically
provided, the City Administrator shall assign an official staff liaison to each
Board, Committee, Commission, or other appointed body. The Staff Liaison shall
be responsible for the keeping of minutes and reports.
   Subd. 13   Vacancies. In the event of death, resignation, removal, or
ineligibility of a Member of a Board, Committee, Commission, or other appointed
body, the City Council shall declare a vacancy in the position and shall
appoint a person to fill the vacancy as soon as conveniently possible for the
remainder of the term. (Revised 2/13/2023)
   Subd. 14   Council Liaison. The City Council shall appoint a council member
to serve as a liaison to each Board, Committee, Commission or other Appointed
Body. (Revised 2/13/2023)
220.02    Economic Development Authority.
   Subd. 1   Authorization. Pursuant to Resolution 96-8, the City has created
an Economic Development Authority to be known as the "Economic Development
Authority of the City of Arden Hills" ("EDA"). The EDA has all of the powers,
rights, duties, and obligations set forth in Minnesota Statutes §469.090
through §469.1081, as amended, from time to time.
   Subd. 2   Governing Board. The EDA shall be governed by a Board of seven (7)
Commissioners. Five (5) of the commissioners shall be Members of the City
Council, which term shall coincide with their term of office. The two (2)
remaining members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council from the membership of the Economic Development Commission for six-year
terms, which terms shall coincide with their terms on the Economic Development
Commission. If there is a vacancy in the term of a commissioner, then the
Council by majority vote shall appoint a commissioner to serve the remainder of
the unexpired term in the manner the original appointment was made. (Revised
12/8/2025)
220.03   Planning Commission.
   Subd. 1   Composition. At the first Council Meeting of the calendar year,
the City Council shall appoint a Planning Commission consisting of seven (7)
members and two (2) alternative members. (Revised 2/13/2023)
   Subd. 2   Powers and Duties. The Planning Commission shall fulfill the
function of the City's Planning Agency and its Board of Adjustments and
Appeals. It shall exercise the duties conferred on it by the City Council and
shall have the powers prescribed for such agency and Board pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes §462.351 through §462.364, as may be amended from time to
time, including but not limited to the following:
      A.   The Planning Commission shall prepare the City's Comprehensive
Municipal Plan, periodically review the Comprehensive Municipal Plan, and make
recommendations to the City Council regarding the adoption or amendment of the
Comprehensive Plan.
      B.   The Planning Commission shall review the proposed acquisitions and
disposal of real property and proposed public improvements to real property and
shall advise the City Council in writing whether such acquisitions, disposals,
or improvements are in compliance with the City's Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
Failure of the Planning Commission to report on the proposal within forty-five
(45) days after referral by the City Council or within such other reasonable
period as may be designated by the City Council shall be deemed to have
satisfied this review requirement. The City Council may, by resolution adopted
by an affirmative vote of four (4) Council Members, dispense with this review
requirement if in its judgment the City Council determines that such proposal
has no relationship to the City's Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
      C.   The Planning Commission shall hear appeals and make recommendations
to the City Council where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an Administrative Officer in the
enforcement of the City's official controls.
      D.   The Planning Commission shall hear requests for variances and make
recommendations to the City Council.
   Subd. 3   Rules of Procedure. The Planning Commission shall prescribe its
own rules of procedure to the extent permissible under statute and to the
extent that such rules are consistent with the City's Code.
   Subd. 4   Records. The Planning Commission shall provide a written record of
its proceedings, including the minutes of its meetings, findings and the
actions taken by that Planning Commission on each matter referred to it or
heard by it including the final recommendation.
   Subd. 5   Hearings. Hearings shall be held by the Planning Commission in all
matters where public hearings are required by State law or this Code and as
otherwise directed by the City Council. A hearing may be afforded to any
interested party on any matter where the Planning Commission deems it
appropriate.
   Subd. 6   Reports. The Planning Commission shall submit reports directly to
the City Council. The reports shall contain the findings, conclusions and
recommendations of the Planning Commission as to the action to be taken by City
Council.
   Subd. 7   Voting Rights of the Alternate Member. In the event that any of
the regular members are not able to attend a properly noticed meeting of the
Planning Commission, the alternate member may enjoy the full voting and any
other privileges of a regular member during the meeting.
220.04   Economic Development Commission.
   Subd. 1   Establishment of Commission. An Economic Development Commission is
hereby established to facilitate positive interaction with the business
community and advise the City Council and the Economic Development Authority on
economic development, redevelopment and related community development issues.
   Subd. 2   Composition. The Economic Development Commission shall consist of
nine (9) members appointed by the City Council. The membership is open to any
resident or non-resident affiliated with an Arden Hills business who is
interested in the business climate and economic development direction of the
City. There shall be at least four (4) Arden Hills residents represented on the
Commission. One additional member may be appointed by the City Council as a
Youth Commissioner. The Youth Commissioner will have the same voting rights as
other members of the commission. The Youth Commissioner’s term will last for
one year from September 1st through August 31st. The Youth Commissioner must be
a Sophomore, Junior or Senior enrolled in a high-school or PSEO program; and be
enrolled in a school district that serves Arden Hills or a resident of Arden
Hills attending a school outside of the City’s typical school districts. At no
time shall there be more than two (2) members who meet the criteria of Youth
Commissioner serving on the commission. (Revised 6/10/2024)
   Subd. 3   Duties and Functions. The duties and functions of the Commission
shall be included in the Annual Resolution appointing new members and may be
changed by Council Resolution, from time to time, based upon the needs of the
City.
220.05   Parks, Trails and Recreation Committee.
   Subd. 1   Establishment of Committee. The Parks, Trails and Recreation
Committee is hereby established to review and evaluate the City's Parks, Trails
and Recreation Programs.
   Subd. 2   Composition. The Parks, Trails and Recreation Committee shall
consist of up to twelve (12) members appointed by the City Council. The
membership is open to any resident, or non-resident affiliated with an Arden
Hills business, non-profit, or community organization that is interested in the
City's Parks, Trails and Recreation Programs. At all times, a majority of the
Committee membership shall be current residents of Arden Hills. Geographical
balance may be used as criteria for selecting new members. One additional
member may be appointed by the City Council as a Youth Committee Member. The
Youth Committee Member will have the same voting rights as other members of the
committee. The Youth Committee Member’s term will last for one year from
September 1st through August 31st. The Youth Committee Member must be a
Sophomore, Junior or Senior enrolled in a high-school or PSEO program; and be
enrolled in a school district that serves Arden Hills or a resident of Arden
Hills attending a school outside of the City’s typical school districts. At no
time shall there be more than two (2) members who meet the criteria of Youth
Committee Member serving on the Committee. (Revised 6/10/2024)
   Subd. 3   Duties and Functions. The duties and functions of the Committee
shall be included in the Annual Resolution appointing new members and may be
changed by Council Resolution, from time to time, based on the needs of the
City.
Section 230 - Emergency Operations
230.01   Adoption of Emergency Operations Plan.
   The "City of Arden Hills Emergency Operations Plan" or "EOP" is adopted by
reference and incorporated as if set out in full herein. The EOP shall be
reviewed and updated annually. A copy of the EOP shall be kept on file with the
Arden Hills administrative office and may be reviewed during normal business
hours.
Section 240 - Background Investigations
(added 1/21/09)
240.01   Background Investigations.
   The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will
allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's Computerized Criminal History
information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background checks
for the positions described below and for licensing background checks for the
licenses listed below.
   The Ramsey County Sheriff's Department is authorized, as the exclusive law
enforcement agency for the City of Arden Hills, to do a criminal history
background investigation on the applicants and contractors for the following
positions and licenses within the City:
   ∙   Regular full-time and part-time positions
   ∙   Associate positions
   ∙   Volunteer positions
   ∙   Independent contractors for the Recreation Division
   ∙   Liquor License
   ∙   Tobacco License
   ∙   Massage Therapy License
   ∙   Gambling License
   ∙   Solicitor License
   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to
screen employment applicants, volunteers, certain independent contractors, and
license applicants, the Ramsey County Sheriff's Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension's (BCA)
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Ramsey County
Sheriff's Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement
official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized
Criminal History data may be released by the Ramsey County Sheriff's Department
to the hiring/licensing authority, to include the City Administrator or their
designee and/or consultants as appropriate.
   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant/volunteer/independent
contractor/license applicant must authorize the Ramsey County Sheriff's
Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. Failure to
provide consent may disqualify the individual from the prospective position or
may disqualify the license applicant from the prospective license. The written
consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statute Chapter 13
regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. For positions
of employment, background checks will only be conducted on finalists.
   Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the
City will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the
applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the
position of employment sought. If the City rejects the applicant's request on
this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing, including all of
the information as required in Minnesota Statute 364.05.
Chapter 3 - Licenses and Regulations
Section 300 - General Provisions
300.01   Purpose.
   It is the intention of the Council to regulate and license certain types of
businesses, occupations, and activities to the end that the public welfare
shall be protected and promoted. Differentiation in the license fees charged
under this chapter is based upon the judgment of the Council as to the probable
expense involved in policing and inspecting various businesses. In some cases
insurance coverage shall be required, where in the opinion of the Council a
business offers an unusual opportunity for loss or damage.
300.02   License Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business, occupation,
or activity for which a license fee is imposed by the provisions of this
chapter without first obtaining a license so to do.
300.03   Persons Subject to Chapter.
   Whenever a license is required by this code for the maintenance, operation
or conduct of any business or establishment, or engaging in any activity or
occupation, any person who by himself or herself or through an agent, employee
or partner, holds himself or herself forth as being engaged in the business,
occupation or activity or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively,
or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business, occupation or
activity in the City, shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter and
shall be responsible for obtaining the required license.
300.04   Applications Generally.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided for, applications for all licenses
required by this code shall be made in writing to the City Administrator. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the license desired, the
location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid. Each
application shall also contain such additional information as may be needed for
the proper guidance of the City Officials in the issuing of the license applied
for.
300.05   Forms.
   Forms for all licenses, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and
kept on file by the City Administrator.
300.06   Liability Insurance.
   Subd. 1   When Required. Where specifically required by any other provision
of this code, no license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter
unless the applicant shall furnish proof of the required liability insurance.
   Subd. 2   Conditions. The liability insurance policy, or a certificate
thereof, shall be filed with the City Administrator and shall be kept in full
force and effect during the terms of any subject license. The policy shall be
with an insurance company authorized to do business in this state; shall show
at least the limits required by the appropriate provision of this code; and
shall also contain a provision that the policy shall not be canceled until
after thirty (30) days' written notice to the City of such intended
cancellation, and within such time the licensee must obtain and file proof of
new or substituted coverage as required hereunder, or the license shall be
subject to immediate cancellation.
300.07   Compliance with Law.
   In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all licensees shall conform
to and comply with all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations
and applicable provisions of this code.
300.08   Inspections and Investigations.
   Upon the receipt of an application for a license, where provisions of this
code necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of the
license, the City Administrator shall refer the application to the proper
officer for making the investigation within forty-eight (48) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation
or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten
(10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. The City may
request the county health officer to make or cause to be made all inspections
in connection with such licenses for the protection of health, the care and
handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and of the spread of disease. The
building inspector shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative
to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations,
except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of the City's
designated law enforcement provider or by some other officer designated by the
Mayor.
300.09   Duty of Licensees.
   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
provisions of this division, article or chapter, or are reasonably necessary to
secure compliance with any such provision or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to
be inspected, to admit to the premise for the purpose of making such
inspection, any officer or employee of the City who is authorized or directed
to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to
secure conformance with any provision of this code or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of any licensee whose business is governed by
such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the
municipality requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or
commodity for such analysis upon request.
300.10   Expiration.
   Unless otherwise provided by this code, all annual licenses or annual permit
fees shall expire on the thirty first day of December of each year.
300.11   Change of Locations of Premises.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the location of any
licensed business, occupation, or activity may be changed, provided ten (10)
days' notice of the change is given to the City Administrator, and provided
that the building, zoning and frontage requirements of this code are complied
with at the new location.
300.12   Posting of Licenses.
   It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business,
occupation, or activity in the City to keep his or her license posted in a
prominent place on the premises used for such business, occupation or activity
at all times.
300.13   Suspension or Revocation.
   Subd. 1   Authorized. The City Council may suspend for a period not
exceeding sixty (60) days, or revoke any license issued under this code
whenever the licensee, its owner, manager or employees or agents of the
licensee have engaged in any of the following conduct:
      A.   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the
securing of the license;
      B.   Conduct adverse to the interests of public health, safety, welfare
or morals;
      C.   Conviction of an offense which relates to the conduct of the
licensed business, occupation or activity.
      D.   Violation of any provision of this code or any other federal, state
or local law, rule or regulation; or
      E.   Failure to comply with any of the provisions or conditions of the
license, the conditions of licensure or engaging in conduct which would be
grounds for denial of an initial application for licensure.
   Subd. 2   Hearing. A licensee or permittee shall be granted a hearing upon
at least ten (10) days' prior written notice before revocation or suspension is
ordered. The notice shall state the time, date and place of the hearing and the
nature of the charges against the licensee.
Section 310 - Fees
310.01   Establishment of Fees by Ordinance.
   License and investigative fees for all licenses required by the City
pursuant to the provisions of this code and for the following types of licenses
shall be established by Ordinance and adopted by the City Council:
      •   Alcoholic beverage (intoxicating liquor);
      •   On-sale wine and combination beer-wine;
      •   Malt beverage (3.2 beer);
      •   Amusement facility (including bowling alley, arcade, dance hall,
movie theater, pool/billiard tables and/or hall, indoor tennis and/or
racquetball and/or squash facility, skating facility, outdoor tennis facility,
driving range, shooting gallery and facilities for similar functions or
activities);
      •   Mechanical/electronic recreation devices (including mechanical and
coin operated amusement device, mechanical amusement ride, mechanical musical
device and devices of a similar nature);
      •   Bulk storage plant or dealership;
      •   Tobacco sales;
      •   Dog kennel operator;
      •   Garbage, refuse, and recycling collector; (adopted:12/20/07)
      •   Retail sales vendor or dealer including, but not limited to, antique
dealer, boat dealer, optometrist, laundry, mortuary, video sales and rental
dealer, candy vendor, butcher, dry cleaning establishment, equipment rental
dealer, caterer, automobile dealer, and dealers and vendors selling or renting
goods not otherwise listed;
      •   Restaurant, café, public dining room or eating house;
      •   Service station and self service gas/diesel station and convenience
store;
      •   Sign or billboard;
      •   Hotel or motel;
      •   Grocery, food market or supermarket;
      •   Drive-through or drive-in restaurant and fast food restaurant;
      •   Charitable gambling and bingo;
      •   Installation or construction of courtesy benches and shelters; and
      •   Massage, rap and sauna parlors.
      •   Tree Registrations (adopted 11/14/16)
      •   Mobile Food Units (adopted 12/11/17)
      •   Event Center (adopted 9/23/24)
      •   Adult Cannabis Registrations (added 12/9/24)
310.02   Payment Required.
   The license fees established by the City Council as provided in Subsection
310.01 shall be charged and collected annually, unless another or different
term is stated in the Ordinance, before any license shall be issued under the
provisions of this chapter or any other provision of this code.
310.03   Penalties for Late Payment.
   In the event of late payment of license fees established in the Ordinance, a
penalty shall be imposed as provided in the fee schedule established by
Subsection
310.01.
Section 320 - Limited, Temporary Permits amended 4/22/24
320.01   Required.
   Before any person shall engage in or operate any business, occupation or
activity within the City which shall be for a limited time period or of a
temporary nature as mentioned and provided for in this section, he or she shall
first obtain a permit therefor.
320.02   Application.
   Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this section
shall make application therefore to the City Administrator.
320.03   Waiver of Fees.
   Fees required for permits under the provisions of this section may be waived
by the Council for schools, nonprofit organizations, governmental agencies and
similar institutions or organizations, provided it first adopts a resolution
setting forth the reasons for such waiver.
320.04   Limited Temporary Permits - Issuance.
   Permits required by the provisions of this section shall be issued upon
payment of such fee as is required for the particular business, occupation or
activity in the Ordinance adopted by the Council and as provided by this
section.
320.05   Duration.
   Permits issued under the provisions of this section shall be valid for the
period of time stated in the permit.
320.06   Additional Regulations.
   The City Council may impose additional regulations governing any permit
required by the provisions of this section as it may determine to be in the
public interest.
320.07   Cancellation.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this section may be canceled by
the City Council if such cancellation is determined to be in the public
interest.
320.08   Limited Temporary Permits - Permit Fees Established by Ordinance.
   The permit fees for a permit to engage in the following types of business,
occupations and activities shall be as established by Ordinance adopted by
Council:
      ∙   Christmas tree sales;
      ∙   Circuses and carnivals;
      ∙   Commercial advertising distribution;
      ∙   Flea markets and commercial sidewalk sales;
      ∙   Group picnics and camping; and
      ∙   Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants (Cross reference -
Peddlers and Solicitors, see
Section 340)
320.09    Businesses, Occupations, and Activities for which Permit Fee not
Required.
(Revised 4/22/2024)
   The activities for which permit fees shall not be required, but nevertheless
a permit shall be required, are as follows:
      ∙   Purchase of fireworks and operation of fireworks display or program;
      ∙   Boutique or garage sale; and
      ∙   Newspaper distribution locations. (Amend 6/13/2022)
320.10   Approval.
(Revised 4/22/2024)
   Approval of an application for a permit to engage in the following type of
activity shall be granted by the body, department or officer of the City
indicated across therefrom in the following schedule:
      ∙   Circuses and carnivals: City Council;
      ∙   Commercial advertising distribution: City's designated law
enforcement provider and City Administrator;
      ∙   Installation or construction of courtesy benches or shelters: City's
designated law enforcement provider and City Administrator, if such a bench or
shelter is to abut a county road, county permission must also be obtained;
      ∙   Fireworks purchase and/or display: City Council;
      ∙   Flea markets or commercial sidewalk sales: City Council;
      ∙   Boutiques or garage sales at a private home: City's designated law
enforcement provider and City Administrator;
      ∙   Group picnics or camping: park director and City Administrator;
      ∙   Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants: City Administrator;
      ∙   Newspaper distribution locations: City's designated law enforcement
provider and City Administrator;
      ∙   Outdoor concerts: City Council; and
      ∙   Roadside stands: City Administrator. (Amend 6/13/2022)
320.11   Limit on Duration and Occasion of Garage Sales.
   Each boutique or garage sale at a private home shall be limited to three (3)
days or less in duration, and no more than two (2) such sales shall be
permitted to any one homeowner per year.
Section 330 - Licensed Businesses, Occupations and Activities
330.01   Amusement Facilities.
   Subd. 1   Driving Ranges.
      A.   No license for a public driving tee shall be granted unless the
distance from the place of driving to the nearest building or road in the
direction in which the balls shall be driven is nine hundred (900) feet or
more. Such tees shall be so designed as to permit driving of golf balls in one
(1) general direction, which direction shall be away from the nearest public
road.
      B.   The public driving tee shall be so lighted as to effectively
illuminate all entrances and exits, and lights used upon the premises shall be
placed in such a manner as not to shine upon or unreasonably interfere with
surrounding property.
      C.   In no event shall public driving tees operate between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   Subd. 2   Coin-Operated Amusement Devices.
      A.   Coin-Operated Amusement Devices.
         1.   The term "Coin-Operated Amusement Device" or "Device," as used
herein means a mechanical amusement device of any of the following types:
            a.   A machine or contrivance, including a pinball machine; a
mechanical miniature pool table, bowling machine, shuffle board, electric rifle
or gun range; a miniature and mechanical device and game or other amusement
patterned after baseball, basketball, hockey or similar games; a video or
computerized game; or a game which may be played solely for amusement and not
as a gambling device, which machine or contrivance is played by the insertion
of a coin, slug or other token, or at a fee fixed and charged by the
establishment in which such machine or contrivance is located and which
contains no automatic payoff features for the return of money, coins,
merchandise, checks, tokens or any other thing or item of value; provided,
however, that such machine or contrivance may be equipped to permit a free play
or game; or
            b.   An amusement device designed for and used exclusively as a
ride by children such as, but not limited to, a kiddie car, miniature airplane
ride, mechanical horse or other miniature mechanical device, not operated as
part of or in connection with any carnival, circus, show or other entertainment
or exhibition.
         2.   No person shall keep, operate, maintain or permit to be operated
or maintained upon premises within his or her direct or indirect control any
coin-operated amusement device without having first procured a coin-operated
amusement device license.
         3.   The application for a coin-operated amusement device license
shall include not only the information required by Subsection
300.04, but also the following additional information:
            a.   The name and address of all persons owning or having an
interest in the business which keeps, operates or maintains the coin-operated
amusement devices requiring a license and, in the case of a corporation, the
names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation and all
shareholders who have a beneficial interest in five (5%) percent or more of the
issued shares of the corporation's stock;
            b.   Whether any of the persons whose names appear on the
application have ever been engaged in the business of operating coin-operated
amusement devices anywhere during the last five (5) years and, if so, where;
            c.   Whether any of the persons whose names appear on the
application have been convicted of a crime or have had an application for a
coin-operated amusement device license denied, revoked or suspended within the
last five (5) years and, if so, the date and place of the conviction or denial,
revocation or suspension and a statement of the crime or the reason for such
denial, revocation or suspension; and
            d.   A statement that the applicant, or all principal officers,
directors and shareholders of a corporate applicant, and managers of the
licensed activity, if requested by the City Administrator, will permit a record
of his, her or their fingerprints to be made by the City's designated law
enforcement provider for the purpose of additional investigation to determine
whether or not the application should be issued or the license denied,
suspended or revoked.
         4.   As provided in Subsection
310.01, the fee for a coin-operated amusement device license shall be
established in an Ordinance adopted by Council.
         5.   A license to operate a coin-operated amusement device shall be
issued by the City Administrator. If requested by the City Administrator,
however, the City's designated law enforcement provider shall investigate any
application and shall submit a recommendation to the City Administrator prior
to issuance or denial of the license as provided in Subsection
300.08.
         6.   Existence of any of the following conditions shall render the
applicant ineligible for a license unless the Council determines that the
applicant has shown sufficient extenuating circumstances to warrant the
issuance of a license regardless of such existence:
            a.   If the applicant or the manager of the licensed business is
under eighteen (18) years of age or an illegal alien; or
            b.   If the applicant, manager or person owning the licensed
activity is not a person of good moral character and repute, has been convicted
of an offense which relates to the conduct of the licensed business or has been
denied a license to conduct a similar activity or has had such license
suspended, revoked or canceled.
         7.   The foregoing shall not be the only grounds, however, for denial
of the license. If the coin-operated amusement device is one of the types
described in Subpart A of this subsection the applicant shall also submit along
with his or her application a policy of liability insurance applicable to death
or injury caused by the operation of the licensed device in such amounts and
containing such coverages as the City Administrator reasonably requires.
         8.   The license for the aggregate of coin-operated amusement devices
licensed hereunder shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises under
the direct or indirect control of the licensee, upon which they are located, as
required by Subsection
300.12.
         9.   No person or entity licensed to sell intoxicating liquor at
retail shall be subject to comply with the provisions of Subpart 3, 5 or7 or
all of 5, except the first sentence thereof. Subparts 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9 and 10
shall, however, be applicable to such licensee.
         10.   Nothing in this section of the Arden Hills Code shall be held to
apply to any coin-operated amusement device held or kept for sale or storage
and which is not actually in use or displayed for use.
      B.   Amusement arcades.
         1.   For purposes of this division, the terms defined below shall have
the meaning given them:
            a.   Coin-Operated Amusement Device or Device. The type of
mechanical amusement device which is described in this subsection.
            b.   Amusement Arcade. Any building, structure or tract of land, or
any portion thereof, which is devoted primarily to the operation of four (4) or
more coin-operated amusement devices and is open for public use and
participation.
         2.   No person shall own, operate or permit the operation of an
amusement arcade on premises owned, leased or operated by him or her or engage
in the business of operating an amusement arcade in the City unless he or she
shall have first obtained a license therefore.
         3.   The application for an amusement arcade license shall include not
only the information required by Subsection
300.04, but also the following additional information:
            a.   The name and address of all persons owning or having an
interest in the business which keeps, operates or maintains the coin-operated
amusement devices requiring a license hereof and, in the case of a corporation,
the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation and
all shareholders who have a beneficial interest in five (5) percent or more of
the issued shares of the corporation's stock;
            b.   Name and address of the manager or managers who will supervise
the licensed operation or activity;
            c.   Whether any of the persons whose names appear on the
application have ever been engaged in the business of operating an amusement
arcade anywhere during the last five (5) years and, if so, where;
            d.   Whether any of the persons whose names appear on the
application have been convicted of a crime or have had an application for an
amusement arcade license denied, revoked or suspended within the last five (5)
years and, if so, the date and place of the conviction or denial, revocation or
suspension and a statement of the crime or the reason for such denial,
revocation or suspension; and
            e.   A statement that the applicant, or all principal officers,
directors and shareholders of a corporate applicant, and managers of the
licensed activity, if requested by the City Administrator, will permit a record
of his, her or their fingerprints to be made by the City's designated law
enforcement provider for the purpose of additional investigation to determine
whether or not the application should be issued or the license denied,
suspended or revoked.
         4.   As provided in Subsection
310.01, the fee for an amusement arcade license shall be established by
Ordinance adopted by the Council.
         5.   Granting of licenses.
            a.   Any application for a license subject to this section shall be
referred to the chief of the City's designated law enforcement provider and to
such other persons on the City's staff as the City Council shall deem
necessary. The City Official to whom the application has been referred shall
investigate the location wherein the applicant is proposing to operate the
amusement arcade; shall ascertain if the applicant, or the manager of the
licensed business, is under eighteen (18) years of age, an alien or a foreign
corporation; and shall ascertain whether the applicant, manager or person
owning the proposed licensed activity is of good moral character and repute,
has not been convicted of an offense which relates to the conduct of the
licensed business, has operated a similar business elsewhere which was not
violative of the provisions of this section, and has never been denied a
license to conduct a like or similar activity or had such a license suspended,
revoked or canceled. The chief and any other City Official to whom the
application has been referred shall recommend approval or disapproval of the
application within the time limits set forth in Subsection
300.08.
            b.   Upon receipt of the written reports and recommendations of the
chief of the City's designated law enforcement provider, City Administrator and
any other Officials to whom the application has been referred, the City
Administrator shall cause to be published in the legal newspaper of the City,
at least ten (10) days in advance, a notice of public hearing to be held by the
City Council setting forth the day, time and place when the hearing will be
held, the name of the applicant, and the location where the business is
proposed to be conducted.
            c.   The application, together with the recommendations of the
chief of the City's designated law enforcement provider, City Administrator and
other Officials to whom the application has been referred, shall be submitted
to the City Council at the hearing. After the hearing, the Council may grant or
deny the license. In granting the license, the Council may impose special
conditions if it deems such conditions to be necessary because of particular
circumstances relative to the application.
         6.   Existence of any of the following conditions shall render the
applicant ineligible for a license unless the Council determines that the
applicant has shown sufficient extenuating circumstances to warrant the
issuance of a license regardless of such existence:
            a.   If the applicant or the manager of the licensed business is
under eighteen (18) years of age; or
            b.   If the applicant, manager or person owning the licensed
activity is not a person of good moral character and repute, has been convicted
of an offense which relates to the conduct of the licensed business or has been
denied a license to conduct a similar activity or has had such license
suspended, revoked or canceled.
         7.   The foregoing shall not be the only grounds, however, for denial
of the license. If the coin-operated amusement devices to be operated in the
amusement arcade are of the type described herein, the applicant shall also
submit along with his or her application a policy of liability insurance
applicable to death or injury caused by the operation of the licensed devices
in such amounts and coverages as are prescribed by the City Administrator.
         8.   The following conditions shall govern the issuance and holding of
all amusement arcade licenses granted pursuant to this section.
            a.   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain
order on the premises of the amusement arcade, and in and upon any parking lot
appurtenant thereto, and adjacent premises, at all times.
            b.   The consumption of alcoholic beverages, whether classified as
intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor, or the use of any controlled substance shall
not be permitted on any part of the premises of the amusement arcade, except
that alcoholic beverages may be served in appropriate sections of bowling
alleys as authorized by law.
            c.   On all Saturdays, and on weekdays from and including June 1
through August 31, an amusement arcade shall be open only between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
            d.   The licensee shall provide a full time manager of at least
eighteen (18) years of age upon the premises of the amusement arcade during all
hours in which it is open for business.
            e.   The premises of the amusement arcade, and the licensee, shall
fully comply with all applicable state, federal and local regulations
whatsoever dealing with the operation of the licensed business or activity.
            f.   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee, or his or her
manager, to see that the premises of the amusement arcade do not become
overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of the persons
therein.
            g.   The premises of the amusement arcade shall have adequate
entrances and exits at the front and rear thereof but may have no entrances to
or exits from adjoining buildings.
            h.   The smoking of tobacco or any other product in an amusement
arcade shall be prohibited. The licensee shall be responsible to ensure that
this restriction is complied with. Tobacco products shall not be sold anywhere
upon the premises of the amusement arcade.
            i.   The interior of the amusement arcade shall be so illuminated
as to ensure proper and complete observation of patrons at all times. The
building inspector shall recommend standards for lighting levels to carry out
the intent of this subsection.
            j.   In a conspicuous place somewhere on the premises of the
amusement arcade shall be posted the amusement arcade license as required by
this chapter.
         9.   No person or entity licensed to sell intoxicating liquor at
retail shall be subject to the provisions of Subpart B, with the exception of
Subpart 8 to which any such licensee shall be subject. The term "Premises of
the Amusement Arcade," used therein, shall be deemed to mean, in the case of
the liquor licensee, the licensed premises thereof.
330.02   Gambling.
   Subd. 1   Definitions.
   Gambling Equipment. As used in this section, those devices known as bingo
cards, bingo numbers, paddle wheels, tip boards, pull-tabs (or ticket jars) or
apparatus used in conducting bingo and other gambling games as those various
devices are described and defined in M.S. Ch. 349, as amended from time to
time.
   Net Profit. Mean gross revenues, less prizes paid, less allowable expenses,
less applicable taxes. (added 1/28/12)
   Trade Area. The corporate boundaries of the City and each City immediately
contiguous to the City.
   Subd. 2   Lawful Gambling Permitted. The City of Arden Hills hereby reserves
all rights to regulate lawful gambling as regulated by Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 349. It may be amended from time to time including the right to approve
premise permits for lawful gambling subject to the conditions the City Council
deems necessary. Lawful gambling is permitted in the City if the organization
conducting such activities meets the following criteria:
      A.    Is licensed by the Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
      B.   Is a tax exempt organization pursuant to 501(c) of the Internal
Revenue Code or has a 501(c) application pending with the Internal Revenue
Service.
      C.   Complies with all of the provisions of this Chapter - Licenses and
Regulations (§330.02 Gambling). (revised 1/28/13)
   Subd. 3   License or Permit Required. No person shall keep, operate,
maintain or permit to be operated or maintained upon premises within his or her
direct or indirect control any gambling equipment without having first procured
a gambling license from the state, and as approved by the City, or in the case
of operations exempt from licensing by state law, without a permit issued by
the City.
   Subd. 4   Permit Fee. As provided in Subsection
310.01, the fee for various types of gambling device permits shall be
established by Ordinance adopted by the Council.
   Subd. 5   Application. Applications for City approval or a permit shall be
submitted to the City Administrator at least sixty (60) days before the
proposed effective date of the permit. Criteria for the issuance of premises
permits shall be adopted from time to time by Council resolution.
   Subd. 6   Approval of License or Issuance of Permit. No permit to operate a
gambling operation, or approval of a state license, shall be issued by the City
Administrator earlier than fifteen (15) days after the application has been
submitted. If requested by the City Administrator, however, the City's
designated law enforcement provider shall investigate any application and shall
submit a recommendation to the City Administrator prior to issuance or denial
of the permit or license approval.
   Subd. 7   Investigation Fee. Applicants shall pay the City a non-refundable
investigation fee as from time to time set by Council resolution when
submitting the application for the permit or license authorization.
   Subd. 8   Unauthorized Gambling Prohibited. No person shall conduct lawful
gambling within the City unless such activity is in compliance with the
provisions of the Minnesota Lawful Gambling Act and this section. If the
provisions of the Minnesota Lawful Gambling Act and this section are
inconsistent, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
   Subd. 9   Local Gambling Tax. The Council may, pursuant to state law, impose
a local gambling tax on all organizations licensed to conduct lawful gambling
within the City. The tax shall be set by the City Council but shall not exceed
three (3%) percent of the organization's gross receipts from all lawful
gambling, less prizes actually paid out by the organization. Proceeds of the
tax shall only be used for the purpose of regulating all gambling activities
within the City, including but not limited to the reimbursement of the City's
administrative, legal and consulting costs. (revised 2/12/07)
   Subd. 10   Financial Reports.
      A.   Any organization applying for a renewal permit shall provide the
City with certified copies of the following documents:
         1.   The prior year's income and loss statement which clearly
indicates the organization's gross receipts from lawful gambling activities
within the City and total prizes actually paid out for lawful gambling
activities within the City.
         2.   A statement of the organization's treasurer projecting the
organization's gross receipts and total prizes for lawful gambling activities
to be conducted in the City during the year in which the permit renewal will be
effective.
      B.   Any organization applying for a new permit, shall provide the City
with a certified statement containing the organization's projection of gross
receipts and total prizes for all lawful gambling activities to be conducted in
the City during the year in which the permit will be effective.
   Subd. 11   Lawful Gambling Fund. All organizations permitted to conduct
lawful gambling within the City shall contribute ten (10%) percent of their net
profits derived from lawful gambling activities within the City to a special
fund to be administered by the City Council for reimbursement of police, fire
and public safety related services, equipment and training; and for Charitable
Contributions, as defined in Minn Statutes Section 349.12 Subd. 7.a. Payments
to the fund shall be calculated for quarterly periods ending on the last days
of March, June, September, and December of each year. Quarterly installment
payments shall be submitted together with verifiable supporting documentation,
no later than the 20th day of the month following the end of the quarterly
period. (revised 2/12/07)
   Subd. 12   Trade Area Restriction. An organization authorized and permitted
to conduct lawful gambling within the City shall expend seventy-five (75%)
percent of its net profit on lawful purposes conducted or located within the
trade area.
(revised 1/28/13)
   Subd. 13   Location of Lawful Gambling Operations. No gambling operation
shall be maintained except on the premises listed in the license. The listed
location shall comply with all state regulations and City zoning regulations.
   Subd. 14   Number of Licenses Authorized. No more than nine (9) lawful
gambling licenses or permits of all classes shall be issued and outstanding at
the same time.
   Subd. 15   Reports.
      A.   All authorized and permitted organizations shall submit to the City
Administrator a copy of any reports it is required to make or has made to the
board. Any applicant for a license or renewal of a license shall submit a copy
of its application to the City Administrator.
      B.   On or before February first of each year, organizations licensed or
permitted to conduct lawful gambling within the City shall submit a report to
the City Administrator indicating how the net profits derived from lawful
gambling activities conducted by the organization have been spent for lawful
purposes and such other reports as may be required from time to time by Council
resolution.
   Subd. 16   Inspection of Premises and Records. The City Administrator, City
attorney, City law enforcement officers, City Official and/or City employee
having a duty to perform with reference to this section or lawful gambling
activities may inspect and examine the records concerning lawful gambling
activities of any organization upon twenty four (24) hours' advance notice and
may inspect the premises upon which the organization is conducting lawful
gambling activities at all reasonable times without advance notice. It shall be
a misdemeanor to falsify any reports required to be submitted pursuant to this
section.
   Subd. 17   Age Limit. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be
permitted to engage in any lawful gambling activity including bingo and
raffles. No permitted organization shall allow any person under the age of
eighteen (18) to engage in any lawful gambling activity including bingo and
raffles.
330.03    Massage, Rap and Sauna Parlors.
(repealed 4/11/05)
330.04    Massage Therapy Establishments and Massage Therapists.
   Subd. 1   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to regulate
Massage Therapy Establishments and Massage Therapists in order to protect and
promote the public health, safety and welfare by:
      A.   Providing standards for education and training of Massage
Therapists.
      B.   Providing a clean, sanitary, healthy and safe environment in which
Massage Therapists can operate.
      C.   Requiring insurance coverage.
      D.   Recognizing massage therapy as a legitimate business occupation.
   Subd. 2   Definitions. As used herein the following terms shall mean:
   Massage Therapy. Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the
external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil,
powder, crème, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.
   Massage Therapist. Any person who offers the services of massage therapy as
part of a commercial transaction.
   Massage Therapy Establishment. Any place wherein massage therapy is
conducted by a Massage Therapist.
   Subd. 3   Prohibitions. Except as hereinafter provided, no person, party,
firm or corporation shall:
      A.   Act in the capacity of a Massage Therapist without first obtaining a
license as hereinafter provided.
      B.   Operate a Massage Therapist Establishment without first obtaining a
license as hereinafter provided.
      C.   Submit an application for a Massage Therapist or Massage Therapy
Establishment License which contains false, inaccurate or misleading
information.
      D.   Act in the capacity of a Massage Therapist or operate a Massage
Therapy Establishment contrary to the provisions of this Section.
      E.   Provide Massage Therapy to a person that does not at all times have
the sexual or genital parts of their body covered with a nontransparent
covering.
      F.   Act in the capacity of a Massage Therapist without having the upper
and lower parts of their body completely covered at all times with a
nontransparent covering or nontransparent clothing.
      G.   Place their hand or hands upon, touch with any part of their body,
or fondle in any manner a sexual or genital part of any other person.
   Subd. 4   Exemptions. The following people are exempt from compliance with
the provisions of this Chapter provided that they are rendering massage therapy
within their scope of employment and at their normal place of business:
      A.   Persons duly licensed in the State of Minnesota to practice
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic and physical therapy, podiatry and
nursing; and individuals performing massage therapy under the direction of such
persons;
      B.   Athletic directors and trainers certified by the National Associate
of Athletic Trainers;
      C.   Beauty culturists and barbers, who do not give, or hold themselves
out to give, massage therapy as defined herein, other than as is customarily
given in such places of business for the purposes of beautification;
   Subd. 5   License Application and Fee. An application for a Massage
Therapist or Massage Therapy Establishment shall be submitted on forms provided
by the City Administrator which shall be fully, truthfully and accurately
completed. The license fee, as determined from time to time by Council
Resolution, shall be submitted with the application. Licenses shall expire
December 31st of each year.
   Subd. 6    Law Enforcement Review. Upon receipt, the City Administrator
shall forward copies of all application to the City's law enforcement agency.
The City's law enforcement agency shall report, in writing, to the City
Administrator, as to any police record of the applicant which may reflect upon
moral character or responsibility.
   Subd. 7   Requirements for Massage Therapist's License. A Massage Therapist
shall:
      A.   Be eighteen (18) years of age or older, verified by a birth
certificate or driver's license.
      B.   Have received a Comprehensive Certificate of Massage from a school
recognized by the Minnesota Higher Education Board with a minimum of 500 class
credit hours and is a member in good standing of the Minnesota Therapeutic
Massage Network or the American Massage Therapy Association or other
organizations possessing the same or similar standards and having an
enforcement code of ethics.
   Subd. 8   Massage Therapy Establishment Restrictions. A Massage Therapy
Establishment shall comply with the following regulations:
      A.   The premises shall comply with applicable Zoning, Fire, Health, and
Building Codes.
      B.   The premises and equipment shall be clean, sanitary and well
maintained.
      C.   The holding of a license hereunder does not negate the requirement
to hold other licenses or permits which may be applicable.
      D.   No gambling shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
      E.   No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on or permitted to be
brought onto the licensed premises.
      F.   No person who is visibly under the influence of alcoholic beverages
or drugs shall be allowed on the licensed premises.
      G.   No person shall be permitted to engage in disorderly conduct on the
licensed premises and the licensee shall obey any reasonable order of the
city's law enforcement agency to terminate or prevent such disorderly conduct.
      H.   Licensees shall comply with City, County, State of Federal laws,
rules and regulations which are applicable to the licensed premises.
      I.   The licensed premises shall be closed between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
      J.   There shall be a waiting room for patrons which is separate from any
area wherein massage therapy is performed.
      K.   Licensee shall permit inspections during regular business hours by
the City's law enforcement agency, building inspector, or appropriate fire or
health officials to determine compliance with the City regulations or other
appropriate state or county regulations.
   Subd. 9   Massage Therapy Home Occupation Restrictions. A Massage Therapy
Home Occupation shall comply with the following regulations:
      A.   The premises shall comply with applicable Zoning, Fire, Health, and
Building Codes.
      B.   The premises and equipment shall be clean, sanitary and well
maintained.
      C.   The holding of a license hereunder does not negate the requirement
to hold other licenses or permits which may be applicable.
      D.   No gambling shall be permitted on the licensed premises while
customers of the home occupation are on the premises.
      E.   No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on or permitted to be
brought onto the licensed premises by customers of the home occupation. Nor
shall alcoholic beverages be offered to or provided to the customers of the
home occupation.
      F.   No person who is visibly under the influence of alcoholic beverages
or drugs shall be allowed on the licensed premises.
      G.   No person shall be permitted to engage in disorderly conduct on the
licensed premises and the licensee shall obey any reasonable order of the
City's law enforcement agency to terminate or prevent such disorderly conduct.
      H.   Licensees shall comply with the City, County, State or Federal laws,
rules and regulations which are applicable to the licensed premises.
      I.   The licensed premises shall be closed between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and shall be closed between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends. The licensed premises shall also be closed
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on holidays.
      J.   Customer appointments shall be scheduled so that there shall not be
a need for a waiting room. If a waiting room is determined to be necessary it
shall be separate from any area wherein massage therapy is performed.
      K.   Licensee shall permit inspections of the home occupation during
regular business hours by the City's law enforcement agency, building
inspector, or appropriate fire or health officials to determine compliance with
the City regulations or other appropriate state or county regulations.
      L.   Licensee shall comply with all other parts of this code unless
otherwise stated.
      M.   Licensee shall comply with the Home Occupation regulations
established in the City's Zoning Ordinance and shall comply with the conditions
of the Special Use Permit establishing the Massage Therapy business as a home
occupation.
      N.   Any change in ownership of the home shall negate the license of the
massage therapy establishment as a home occupation and the Special Use Permit
for such home occupation shall also become invalid.
   Subd. 10   Display of Permits. The license of the Massage Therapy
Establishment and of every Massage Therapist employed thereby, shall be
displayed in an open and conspicuous place on the premises and shown to law
enforcement officers upon request.
   Subd. 11   Changed Conditions. All licensees must notify the City
Administrator, in writing, as soon as practicable, but in no event later than
ten (10) days, of each and every material change in circumstances with respect
to material and information contained in or a part of the license application.
   Subd. 12   Insurance. Massage Therapist Licensees must have and maintain in
full force and effect, during the license period, a policy of liability and
malpractice insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in
the state of Minnesota covering death, personal injury and property damage in
the minimum amount of Three Hundred Thousand ($300,000) Dollars per person per
occurrence.
Section 335 - Residential Rental Unit Registration (revised 6/8/09)
335.01   Purpose and Scope.
   The City recognizes a need for an organized registration program for
residential rental properties with less than five dwelling units in order to
identify and quantify rental units and to provide information and a method to
enforce standards to meet City and State safety, health, fire, and zoning
codes. The implementation of a rental registration program is a mechanism to
help ensure that rental units will not become a nuisance to the neighborhood;
will not foster blight and deterioration; and/or will not create a disincentive
to reinvestment in the community. Furthermore, the operation or rental units
entails certain responsibilities. Owners of rental units are required to take
the reasonable necessary steps to ensure that the citizens who occupy rental
units may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of life in the
surrounding area that are: safe, secure, and sanitary; free from crimes and
criminal activity, noise, nuisances or annoyances; free from unreasonable fears
about safety of persons and security of property; and suitable for raising
children.
335.02   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined as set
forth below.
      ∙   Agent. A person designated in writing by the Owner as the Owner's
representative.
      ∙   City Administrator. The City Administrator or the City
Administrator's designated agent.
      ∙   Dwelling Unit. Any residential building, or portion thereof that
contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, and
sanitation.
      ∙   Occupant. A person(s) who lives or sleeps in a dwelling unit.
      ∙   Owner. A person who is the record owner of the dwelling unit.
      ∙   Rent. To permit occupancy of a dwelling unit or portion of a dwelling
unit by a person other than the legal Owner thereof, pursuant to a written or
unwritten agreement, whether or not a fee is required by the agreement.
      ∙   Rental Unit. A dwelling unit which has been leased by the owner to a
tenant.
      ∙   Tenant. Any person granted temporary use of a rental dwelling
pursuant to a lease with the owner of the dwelling unit.
335.03   General Registration Provisions.
   Subd. 1   Rental Unit Registration Required. Except as hereinafter provided,
it is unlawful for any person to rent to another person for occupancy any
dwelling unit unless such dwelling unit has been issued a Rental Unit
Certificate registered pursuant to this Chapter. The following uses shall be
exempt from the registration requirement:
      A.   Structures with five or more dwelling units (i.e. apartment
buildings).
      B.   On-campus student housing, off-campus student housing operated by a
college or university in structures with five or more dwelling units, nursing
home units, and hotels/motels.
      C.   Dwelling units where the owner occupies the unit along with the
tenant.
      D.   Group residential housing as defined in Minnesota Statute 2561 as
amended from time to time.
   Subd. 2   Registration Application. The owner of a rental unit shall file an
application for a Rental Unit Certificate on forms provided by the City
Administrator. The form shall include at least the following information:
      A.   Name, address, phone number, birth date, and driver's license/
identification number of the property owner. If the owner is not a natural
person (i.e., a partnership, corporation, or other similar business entity),
the name, address, phone number, and driver's license/identification of a
designated agent for the owner shall be provided.
      B.   Owners who do not reside within the counties of Anoka, Carver,
Chisago, Dakota, Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott, or Washington Counties (the
"Metropolitan Area") shall appoint an agent who resides within the Metropolitan
area to be responsible for maintenance of the structure and property, receipt
of violation notices, receipt of compliance orders, institution or remedial
action to effect such orders, and acceptance of all service of process pursuant
to law. The name, address, phone number, birth date, and driver's license/
identification number of the agent shall be provided.
      C.   The street address of the rental property.
      D.   The number and type of rental units on the property (sleeping room
(s), single family, duplex, triplex, or fourplex).
      E.   Number of bedrooms, bedroom size in square feet, and bathrooms in
each dwelling unit.
      F.   The number of people living in the rental unit.
   Subd. 3   Registration of Existing Rental Units. An owner of an existing
rental unit must apply for a Rental Unit Certificate pursuant to this Chapter
no later than 120 days following the effective date of this Chapter.
   Subd. 4   Duration of Rental Unit Certificate. All Rental Unit Certificates
shall expire on midnight of December 31 of each year unless otherwise suspended
or revoked prior thereto. (revised 5/13/13)
   Subd. 5   Fees. Registration fees and penalty fees shall be prescribed by
ordinance by the City Council. The required fees shall be submitted along with
the application for a new or renewal Rental Unit Certificate.
   Subd. 6   Renewal of Registration. An Owner or its Agent may continue to
rent a dwelling unit after the expiration date of the rental registration
provided that the Owner or its Agent has filed with the City Administrator, on
or before the expiration date, the appropriate renewal registration application
and fee.
   Subd. 7   Changes in Ownership and Amended Unit Certificate. A Rental Unit
Certificate shall not be transferable to another person, to another rental
unit, or to a new property owner. Any changes occurring in the ownership of a
rental unit shall require a new Rental Unit Certificate. The new owner must
obtain a new Rental Unit Certificate within thirty (30) days of acquiring the
property. The fee paid for the new Rental Unit Certificate shall be the fee
required for an initial Rental Unit Certificate. If any changes occur in any
information required on the registration application, the owner must submit an
amended registration application to the City within thirty (30) days of the
change.
335.04   Condition of Use. The registration approval shall be contingent upon
the following:
   Subd. 1   Conformance to Laws. Owners of registered dwelling units shall
comply with applicable City Codes, including but not limited to
Chapter 14, Property Maintenance. A dwelling unit may not be rented to, nor
occupied by, more than one family, as defined in
Chapter 13.
   Subd. 2   Real Estate Taxes and Utility Bills. The real estate taxes and
municipal utility bills for the property shall be in good standing prior to
issuing a rental registration certificate. Real estate taxes will not be
considered to be due and payable for the purposes of this Chapter while a
proper and timely appeal of such taxes is pending and is diligently pursued to
completion by the registrant.
   Subd. 3   Inspections. The Building Official, Building Inspector, Fire
Department personnel, law enforcement officers and their respective
representatives are authorized to make inspections reasonably necessary to
enforce this Chapter and its subsections. All authorized inspectors have the
authority to enter any rental unit at all reasonable times. Each occupant shall
give the owner, the owner's agent or authorized City official access to any
part of such rental unit at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection,
maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the
provisions of this Chapter. If any owner, owner's agent or occupant of a rental
unit fails or refuses to permit entry to a rental unit for an inspection
pursuant to this Chapter, the inspector may seek an administrative search
warrant authorizing such inspection.
   Subd. 4   Tenant Register. The Owner or its Agent shall keep or cause to be
kept, a current register of occupancy for each dwelling unit which shall be
made available to the City upon request.
335.05   Registration Suspension or Revocation.
   A Rental Unit Certificate may be suspended or revoked by the City Council as
provided herein. Prior to suspension or revocation, the Owner or its Agent
shall be notified in writing at least seven (7) days prior to the City
Council's consideration of such action. In the event that a Rental Unit
Certificate is suspended or revoked by the City Council, it shall be unlawful
for the Owner or its Agent to thereafter permit any new occupancies for vacant,
or thereafter vacated rental units, until the Rental Unit Certificate has been
reinstated. Issuance of a new Rental Unit Certificate after suspension or
revocation shall be made in the manner provided for obtaining an initial
registration. A Rental Unit Certificate may be suspended or revoked for any of
the following reasons:
   Subd. 1   Failure of Owner or its Agent to operate or maintain the rental
units in compliance with the provisions of the City's regulation.
   Subd. 2   The registration was procured by misrepresentation of material
facts, by fraud, by deceit or by bad faith.
   Subd. 3   The Owner or its Agent made oral or written misrepresentations of
material facts in or accompanying the application.
   Subd. 4   The Owner or its Agents has failed to comply with any condition
set forth in any other permits granted by the City for the property.
   Subd. 5   The activities of the Owner or its Agent create or have created a
serious danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
   Subd. 6   The Owner or its Agent manages and operates the dwelling unit in a
manner that creates a public nuisance; creates a nuisance affecting health,
safety and welfare; or violates any of the following rules or regulations:
      A.   Violation of laws relating to the possession of controlled
substances as defined in Minnesota Statute 152.01 et seq.
      B.   Violation of laws relating to disorderly conduct as defined in
Minnesota Statutes 609.72.
      C.   Violation relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor as defined in
Minnesota Statutes 340A.701, 340A.702 or 340A.703.
      D.   Violation of laws relating to prostitution or acts relating to
prostitution as defined in Minnesota Statutes 609.321.
      E.   Violation of laws relating to unlawful use or possession of a
firearm as defined in Minnesota Statute 609.66 et seq. on the registered
premises.
      F.   Violation of laws relating to assault, including domestic assault as
defined in Minnesota Statute 609.2242.
      G.   Violation of laws relating to contributing to the need for
protection or services or delinquency of a minor as defined in Minnesota
Statute 260C, etc. seq.
      H.   Violation of laws which prohibit gambling as defined in Minnesota
Statute 609.75 through 609.76.
335.06   Violation.
   Except as provided in Section
335.03, Subd. 1 A-C, any person that maintains a rental unit without having the
required Rental Unit Certificate or after the Rental Unit Certificate for the
property has been revoked or suspended, or who permits new occupancy in
violation of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
335.07   Authority.
   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the City from taking action under any
applicable rule, standard, statute or ordinance for violations thereof and to
seek either injunctive relief or criminal prosecution for such violations as
therein provided.
335.08   No Warranty by the City.
   By enacting and undertaking to enforce this Ordinance, neither the City, its
designees, the City Council, or its officers, agents or employees warrant or
guarantee the safety, fitness or suitability of any dwelling in the City.
Owners or occupants should take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect
their interests, health, safety and welfare. A warning in substantially the
foregoing language shall be printed on the face of the rental registration.
335.09   Severability.
   If any provision of this Chapter or amendment thereto, or the application
thereof to any person, entity or circumstance, is held invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
Chapter shall remain in full force and effect and the application thereof to
other persons, entities or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
335.10   Non-City Regulations.
   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent owners or homeowner associations from
enacting regulations more restrictive than those adopted by the City. The City
shall not be responsible for verifying any of the requirements adopted by
owners or homeowner associations and Rental Unit Certificates shall not be
contingent upon conformance to non-City regulations.
Section 340 - Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants
(revised 2/13/06)
340.01   Purpose.
   This section is not intended to interfere with the legitimate business
activities of peddlers, solicitors or transient merchants. These provisions are
intended only to, as nearly as possible, regulate and control all those who
would use their unique presence on property within the City to create
nuisances, commit theft, or engage in other unlawful activities.
340.02   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this section, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
      ∙   Peddler. Any person who goes from place to place; conveying or
transporting goods, wares or merchandise; offering the goods, wares or
merchandise for sale; making sales; and delivering goods, wares and
merchandise. It does not include vendors of milk, bakery products or groceries
who distribute their products to regular customers on established routes.
      ∙   Solicitor. Any person who goes from place to place soliciting
donations or taking orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise for
future delivery or for services to be performed in the future.
      ∙   Transient Merchant. Any person who engages in a temporary business,
either in one locality, or in any traveling from place to place, selling goods,
wares and merchandise; and who, for purpose of carrying on such temporary
business, hires, leases, occupies or uses a building, shelter, vacant lot,
vehicle, trailer, tent, boat, public room in a hotel, motel or lodging house,
apartments or any other place within the City for the exhibition and sale of
such wares, goods and merchandise.
340.03   Application for Certificate of Registration.
   Except as provided in Section
340.07, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants shall not conduct business
in the City of Arden Hills without a certificate of registration. An
application for a certificate of registration shall be submitted to the City
Administrator or designee, on forms provided by the City, at least twenty one
(21) days before the applicant desires to conduct business within the City. A
completed application shall include the following:
   Subd. 1   Sworn Statement. The sworn statement shall provide:
      A.   Applicant's full legal name, date of birth, and the social security
number.
      B.   The permanent home address of the applicant, the address of the
place of business or the firm or occupation which the applicant represents,
and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from which proposed
sales will be made.
      C.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold.
      D.   If employed, the name and address of the employer.
      E.   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
      F.   The place or location where the goods proposed to be sold are
manufactured, stored, and the manner in which goods shall be delivered to the
customer.
      G.   A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of filing the application. The picture shall be
approximately two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
      H.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than
traffic violations and the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefore.
      I.   Minors under 18 years of age who are working for an exempt
organization are not required to submit information regarding their name,
address, phone number, or age to the City. The City of Arden Hills requires
that an adult supervisor complete the application materials and be deemed
responsible for the activities of this organization while working within the
City. Please review section
340.07 for the City's definition of an exempt organization.
   Non-exempt organization that are utilizing minors under the age of 18 to
peddle or solicit goods and services must identify on the application materials
the names, addresses, phone numbers, ages of these individuals. The City of
Arden Hills requires that an adult supervisor complete the application
materials and be deemed responsible for the activities of this organization
while working within the City.
      J.   A transient merchant must also provide:
         1.   Proof of appropriate permission to operate on proposed site.
         2.   A copy of the form or individual's sales tax permit. The sales
tax permit must be posted at the site.
         3.   Proof that the transient merchant sales are permitted within the
zoning district where the business will be conducted.
      K.   A list of the last five (5) municipalities wherein the applicant has
conducted business as a transient merchant.
   Subd. 2   Fees. The application fee as adopted from time to time by City
Council ordinance. The application fee is to cover the administrative costs of
processing and investigating the application.
340.04   Investigation and Issuance.
   Subd. 1   Upon receipt of a completed application, it shall be referred to
the Ramsey County Sheriff's Department for a background investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character as deemed necessary for the protection
of the public good.
   Subd. 2   If the applicant has been convicted of a violation within the past
five years from the date of the application for any Federal or State statutes
or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the
person's ability to conduct the business for which the certificate of
registration is being sought in an honest and legal manner or that will not
adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City.
Such violations shall include but not be limited to: burglary, theft, larceny,
swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or
threatened physical harm against another person.
   Subd. 3   Upon successful completion of the registration process and
investigation, the City Administrator or designee shall issue to the applicant
a certificate of registration. The certificate of registration is non-
transferable.
340.05   Regulations.
   The registrant and its employees shall comply with the following
regulations:
   Subd. 1   Signs. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, unless
invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of
another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least
three and three quarter (3-3/4) inches long and three and three quarter (3-3/4)
inches wide with print of a least 48 points in size stating "Peddlers,
Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited", or other comparable
statements. No person, other than the property owner or tenant, shall remove,
deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign.
   Subd. 2   Refusing to Leave. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant to enter upon premises owned, leased or rented by another
and refuse to leave such premises after having been notified by such owner or
occupant to leave.
   Subd. 3   Misrepresentation. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the
quality of the goods or services which are being offered for sale.
   Subd. 4   Hours of Operation. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or
solicitor to conduct business within the City between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
the following morning, except by specific appointment with an invitation from
the perspective customer.
   Subd. 5   False Information. It shall be unlawful for any reason to give any
false or misleading information in connection with the application for a
certificate of registration.
   Subd. 6   Display of Permit. Registrants are required to exhibit their
permit at the request of a citizen.
340.06   Duration of Certificate of Registration.
   Every certificate of registration shall be valid for the period of time
stated thereon, but in no event shall any such certificate be issued for a
period of time in excess of thirty (30) days.
340.07   Exempt Organizations.
   Subd. 1   Exempt List. The provisions of Section
340.03 shall not apply to the following organizations:
   A.    Bona fide residents of the state selling farm and/or garden produce
cultivated by themselves, provided that such sales can be conducted without
creating traffic hazards.
   B.    Children age eighteen or younger, soliciting for school sponsored
activities.
   C.    Garage sales, flea market and estate sales.
   D.    The acts of merchants or their employees in delivering goods in the
regular course of business.
   E.    Solicitations by organizations for philanthropic religious, political,
charitable, non-profit or educational causes.
   Subd. 2   Application for Exemption. An application for exemption shall be
submitted to the City Administrator or designee on forms provided by the City
at least ten (10) days before the applicant desires to conduct business within
the City. A completed application shall include the following information:
   A.    Name and purpose of the cause for which the exemption is sought;
   B.    Name of the individual in the organization responsible for the
solicitations;
   C.    Period during which solicitation is to be carried on; and
   D.    Certificate of non-profit status, if applicable, from the state where
organized.
   E.    Political Organizations. Political organizations that request
permission to canvass in the City are required to complete a legal affidavit
and file it with the City Administrator or designee.
340.08   Revocation.
   Certificates of registration may be revoked by the City Administrator for a
violation of any provision of this section. The decision of the City
Administrator shall be final.
Section 350 - Tobacco Products
350.01   Purpose and Intent.
Because the City recognizes that:
   Tobacco use has been shown to be the cause of several serious health
problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of
government; this ordinance is intended to regulate the sale of tobacco,
tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine or lobelia
delivery products for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws,
and to protect youth and young adults against the serious effects associated
with use and initiation.
   The use of tobacco products has devastating health and economic
consequences. Tobacco use is the foremost preventable cause of premature death
in America. It causes half a million deaths annually and has been responsible
for 20.8 million premature deaths in the U.S. over the past 50 years since the
first Surgeon General’s report on smoking in 1964. This leads to more than $300
billion in health care and lost worker productivity costs each year. In
Minnesota, smoking was responsible for $3.19 billion in excess medical
expenditures and the deaths of 6,312 individuals in 2014.
   Youth and young people are particularly susceptible to the addictive
properties of tobacco products, and are particularly likely to become lifelong
users. An estimated 5.6 million youth aged 0 to 17 are projected to die
prematurely from a tobacco-related illness if prevalence rates do not change.
National data show that about 95 percent of adult smokers begin smoking before
they turn 21. The ages of 18 to 21 are a critical period when many smokers move
from experimental smoking to regular, daily use. Electronic delivery device use
among youth has recently tripled. Young minds are particularly susceptible to
the addictive properties of nicotine. As a result, approximately 3 out of 4
teen smokers end up smoking into adulthood.
   Public health research and tobacco industry documents and marketing reveal
that tobacco companies have used fruit, candy, and alcohol flavors as a way to
target youth and young adults. The presence of flavors such as menthol in
tobacco products can make it more difficult for youth, young adults, and adult
tobacco users to quit.
   This ordinance is intended to regulate the sale of tobacco, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery products
to protect the public, especially youth and young adults, and to further the
official public policy of the state in regard to preventing young people from
starting to smoke as stated in Minn. Stat. § 144.391, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   In making these findings, the City Council accepts the conclusions and
recommendations of the U.S. Surgeon General reports, “E-cigarette Use Among
Youth and Young Adults” (2016), “The Health Consequences of Smoking—50 Years of
Progress” (2014) and “Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults”
(2012); a BlueCross BlueShield of Minnesota report, “Health Care Costs and
Smoking in Minnesota: The Bottom Line” (2017); the Institute of Medicine in
their study, “Public Health Implications of Raising the Minimum Age of Legal
Access to Tobacco Products” (2015); the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention in their studies, “Tobacco Use Among Middle and High School
Students—United States, 2011– 2015,” and “Selected Cigarette Smoking Initiation
and Quitting Behaviors Among High School Students, United States, 1997”; and of
the following scholars in these scientific journals: Xin Xu et al., Annual
Healthcare Spending Attributable to Cigarette Smoking: An Update, Am. J. Prev.
Med. 48(3): 326-33 (Mar. 2015); Giovino GA, “Epidemiology of Tobacco Use in the
United States,” Oncogene (2002) 21, 7326-40; Khuder SA, et al., “Age at Smoking
Onset and its Effect on Smoking Cessation,” Addictive Behavior 24(5):673-7,
September-October 1999; D’Avanzo B, et al., “Age at Starting Smoking and Number
of Cigarettes Smoked,” Annals of Epidemiology 4(6):455-59, November 1994; Chen,
J & Millar, WJ, “Age of Smoking Initiation: Implications for Quitting,” Health
Reports 9(4):39-46, Spring 1998; and Everett SA, et al., “Initiation of
Cigarette Smoking and Subsequent Smoking Behavior Among U.S. High School
Students,” Preventive Medicine, 29(5):327-33, November 1999; copies of which
are adopted by reference.
(amd. 3/25/19)
350.02   Definitions.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning. The term "shall" means mandatory and
the term "may" means permissive. The following terms shall have the definitions
given to them:
   ∙   Child-Resistant Packaging. Packaging that meets the definition set forth
in Code of Federal Regulations, title 16, section 1700.15(b), as in effect on
January 1, 2015, and was tested in accordance with the method described in Code
of Federal Regulations, title 16, section 1700.20, as in effect on January 1,
2015.
   ∙    Compliance Checks. A system used to investigate and ensure that those
authorized to sell licensed products are following and complying with the
requirements of this ordinance. Compliance checks shall involve the use of
persons under the age of 21 as authorized by this ordinance. Compliance checks
shall also mean the use of persons under the age of 21 who attempt to purchase
licensed products for educational, research, and training purposes as
authorized by state and federal laws. Compliance checks may also be conducted
by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal,
state, or local laws and regulations relating to licensed products.
   ∙   Electronic Delivery Device. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption
through the inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product. Electronic
delivery device includes, but is not limited to, devices manufactured,
marketed, or sold as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pens, mods, tank
systems, or under any other product name or descriptor. Electronic delivery
device includes any component part of a product, whether or not marketed or
sold separately. Electronic delivery device does not include any product that
has been approved or certified by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an
approved purpose.
   ∙    Flavored Product: Any licensed product, whether natural or synthetic,
that contains a taste or smell other than the taste or smell of tobacco, that
is distinguishable by an ordinary consumer either prior to or during the
consumption of the product, including, but not limited to, any taste or smell
relating to chocolate, cocoa, menthol, mint, wintergreen, vanilla, honey,
fruit, or any candy, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb, or spice. A public
statement or claim, whether express or implied, made or disseminated by the
manufacturer of a tobacco or tobacco product, tobacco-related device,
electronic delivery device, and nicotine or lobelia delivery device, or by any
person authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate
public statements concerning such products, that a product has or produces a
taste or smell other than tobacco will constitute presumptive evidence that the
product is a flavored product.
   ∙   Indoor Area. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50
percent of the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the
perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or
other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. A standard window
screen (0.011 gauge with an 18 by 16 mesh count) is not considered a wall.
   ∙    Licensed Products: Any product containing, made of, or derived from
tobacco, nicotine, or lobelia, regardless of source, whether natural or
synthetic, that is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed,
whether inhaled, absorbed, or ingested by any other means, including but not
limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus,
Tobacco Related Device, or any component, part, or accessory of the same,
whether or not containing tobacco or nicotine, including but not limited to
filters, rolling papers, blunt or hemp wraps, hookahs, and pipes. “Licensed
Product” also includes any electronic delivery device. “Licensed Product”
excludes any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for legal sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and
sold solely for such an approved purpose.
   ∙    Loosies. The common term used to refer to a single or individually
packaged cigarette or any other licensed product that has been removed from its
intended retail packaging and offered for sale. The term "loosies" does not
include individual cigars with a retail price, before any sales taxes, of more
than $2.00 per cigar.
   ∙    Moveable Place of Business. Any form of business operated out of a
truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address, store front or other permanent type of structure
authorized for sales transactions.
   ∙    Retail Establishment. Any place of business where licensed products are
available for sale to the general public. The phrase shall include, but not be
limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, restaurants, drug stores and
on-sale or off-sale liquor establishments.
   ∙    Sale. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other
consideration.
   ∙    Self-Service Merchandising. Open display of licensed products in any
manner where any person shall have access to the licensed products, without the
assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The
assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the
licensed products between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-
Service sales are interpreted as being any sale where there is not an actual
physical exchange of the product between the clerk and the customer.
   ∙    Smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated product, whether
natural or synthetic, containing, made, or derived from nicotine, tobacco,
marijuana, or other plant, that is intended for inhalation. Smoking also
includes carrying or using an activated electronic delivery device.
   ∙    Tobacco Products Shop. A retail establishment that has an entrance door
opening directly to the outside, that cannot be entered at any time by persons
younger than 21 years of age, and that derives more than 90 percent of its
gross revenue from the sale of tobacco, tobacco-related devices, and electronic
delivery devices, as defined in Minn. Stat. section 609.685, and in which the
sale of other products is merely incidental.
   ∙    Tobacco Related Devices. Tobacco-related devices includes any pipe,
rolling papers, ashtray, or other device intentionally designed or intended to
be used with tobacco products. Tobacco-related devices shall include components
of tobacco-related devices, which may be marketed or sold separately.
   ∙    Vending Machine. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type
of device which dispenses licensed products upon the insertion of money, tokens
or other forms of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the licensed product.
(amended 3/25/19; amd. 11/13/23; amd. 9/23/24)
350.03   License.
   No person shall sell or offer to  sell any licensed product at a retail
establishment without first having obtained a license to do so from the City.
License applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk together with the
license fees determined from time to time by the City Council. A license shall
be issued for the specific premises identified in the application. (amended 3/
26/07)
Subd. 1 Application.
   A. An application for a license to sell licensed products at a retail
establishment shall be made on a form provided by the City. The application
shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and
business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which
the license is sought, and any additional information the City deems necess
ary.
   B.    Upon receipt of a completed application and any investigation required
thereby, the City Clerk shall forward notice of the application to the City
Council for action at a regularly scheduled Council meeting. If the City Clerk
determines that an application is incomplete, the application shall be returned
to the applicant with notice of the information required to complete the
application.
   Subd. 2   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license,
or it may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete
any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If
the City Council shall approve the license, the City Clerk shall issue the
license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license, a notice of
the denial shall be given to the applicant containing the City Council's reason
for denial.
   Subd. 3   Terms. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid until
December 31 of the year the license is issued.
   Subd. 4   Number of Licenses. The maximum number of licenses issued by the
City at any time is limited to six (6). When the maximum number of licenses has
been issued, the City may place persons seeking licensure on a waiting list and
allow them to apply on a first-come, first-served basis, as existing licenses
are not renewed or are revoked. A new applicant who has purchased a business
location holding a valid license will be entitled to first priority, provided
the new applicant meets all other application requirements in accordance with
this chapter.
   Subd. 5   Tobacco Products Shop. Prohibition. No business, person, or entity
shall establish or expand a Tobacco Products Shop within the City. The City
shall not accept, process, or act on any tobacco license application, site
plan, building permit, or zoning approval for a new or expanded Tobacco
Products Shop. Tobacco Products Shops does not apply to the following: (1)
renewal of a tobacco license for a Tobacco Products Shop lawfully existing
prior to September 23, 2024; and (2) the continued operation of a Tobacco
Products Shop lawfully existing prior to September 23, 2024.
   Subd. 6   Revocation and Suspension. Any license issued under this section
may be revoked or suspended as provided in Subsection
350.11 Administrative Fine, Suspension or Revocation.
   Subd. 7   Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid
only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person
or entity to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another
location or person or entity shall be valid without the prior approval of the
City Council.
   Subd. 8   Moveable Place of Business. No license shall be issued to a
moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to
be licensed under this section.
   Subd. 9   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view
of the general public on the licensed premises.
   Subd. 10   Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section
shall be handled in the same manner as the original application. The request
for a renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days, but no more than sixty
(60) days before the expiration of the current license.
   Subd. 11   Issuance is a privilege and not a right. The issuance of a
license issued under this section shall be considered a privilege and not an
absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an
automatic renewal of the license.
   Subd. 12   Smoking. Smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke
within the indoor area of any establishment with a retail tobacco license.
Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco and tobacco-related products is
prohibited.
   Subd. 13   Samples Prohibited. No person shall distribute samples of any
licensed product free of charge or at nominal cost.
   Subd. 14   Minimum Clerk Age. Individuals employed by a person licensed
under this ordinance must be at least 18 years of age to sell licensed
products.
(amd. 3/25/19) (amd. 9/23/24)
350.04   Fees.
   No license shall be issued or renewed under this section until the
appropriate license fee is paid in full. The annual license fee shall be
established by Ordinance as adopted by the Council.
350.05    Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license.
Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter
include but are not limited to the following:
   Subd. 1   The applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21) years;
   Subd. 2   The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of
any violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to licensed products;
   Subd. 3   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products revoked
within the preceding twelve (12) months of the date of the application;
   Subd. 4   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information; and/or
   Subd. 5   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license. However, except as may
otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial
does not mean that the City must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly
issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the
person was ineligible for the license under this chapter.
(amd. 3/25/19)
350.06   Prohibited Sales.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell or
offer to sell any licensed products as follows:
   Subd. 1   No person shall sell any licensed product to any person under the
age of 21.
         A.   Age Verification. Licensees must verify by means of government-
issued photographic identification that the purchaser is at least 21 years of
age. Verification is not required for a person over the age of 30. That the
person appeared to be 30 years of age or older does not constitute a defense to
a violation of this subsection.
         B.   Signage. Notice of the legal sales age and age verification
requirement must be posted at each location where licensed products are offered
for sale. The required signage, which will be provided to the licensee by the
city, must be posted in a manner that is clearly visible to anyone who is or is
considering making a purchase.
   Subd. 2    No person shall sell or offer for sale any flavored products,
whether natural or synthetic.
   Subd. 3   By means of any type of vending machine.
   Subd. 4   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not
need to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed
premises in order to receive the licensed product and whereby there is not a
physical exchange of the licensed product between the licensee, or the
licensee's employee, and the customer.
   Subd. 5   By means of "loosies" as defined in
350.02 Definitions.
   Subd. 6    Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled substances
except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as
part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the intention of
this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes or other
tobacco products.
   Subd. 7   No person shall sell or offer for sale any liquid, whether or not
such liquid contains nicotine, which is intended for human consumption and use
in an electronic delivery device, in packaging that is not child-resistant.
Upon request, a licensee must provide a copy of the certificate of compliance
or full laboratory testing report for the packaging use.
   (B)    It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell or
offer to sell any product by any means, to any other person, or in any other
manner or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance
provision, or other regulation.
(amd. 7/8/19; amd. 11/13/23)
350.07    Self-Service Sales.
   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of
licensed products by any means whereby the customer may have access to those
items without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee's
employee and whereby it is not a physical exchange of the licensed product
between the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer. All licensed
products shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely
accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and
accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling licensed products at the
time this section is adopted shall comply with this section within 90 days
following the effective date of this section.
(amd. 3/25/19; amd. 9/23/24)
350.08    Responsibility.
   All licensees under this section shall be responsible for the actions of
their employees in regard to the sale of licensed products on the licensed
premises, and the sale of an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by
the license holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
the City from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate
under this section, state or federal law, or other applicable law or
regulation.Y
(amd. 3/25/19)
350.09    Compliance Checks and Inspections.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspections by the City police or
other authorized City official during regular business hours. From time to
time, but at least twice per year, the City shall conduct compliance checks by
engaging persons over the age of 15, but less than 21 years to enter the
licensed premise to attempt to purchase licensed products. Prior written
consent of a minor’s parent or guardian is required for any person under the
age of 18 who participates in a compliance check. Persons used for the purpose
of compliance checks shall be supervised by City designated law enforcement
officers or other designated City personnel. No persons under age 21 used in
compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting
the person's age, and all persons under the age of 21 lawfully engaged in a
compliance check shall answer all questions about the person's age asked by the
licensee or his or her employee, and shall produce any identification, if any
exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational,
research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular
state or federal law. (amended 3/26/07)
(amd. 3/25/19)
350.10    Other Illegal Acts.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
section.
   Subd. 1   Illegal Sales. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person to sell or otherwise provide any licensed product to any person under
the age of 21.
   Subd. 2   Illegal Procurement. It shall be a violation of this section for
any person, aged 21 or older, to purchase or otherwise obtain licensed products
on behalf of a person under the age of 21. It shall further be a violation for
any person, aged 21 or older, to coerce or attempt to coerce a person under age
21 to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any licensed products.
   Subd. 3   Use of False Identification. It shall be a violation of this
section for any person to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of
a false form of identification whether the identification is that of another
person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with
to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
(amd. 3/25/19)
350.11    Administrative Fine, Suspension or Revocation.
   Any violation of the City's regulations relating to the issuance of Tobacco
Products License or of any conditions/ restrictions attached to the issuance of
such license shall be cause for the imposition of an administrative fine, the
suspension of the license, or the revocation of the license. A licensee whose
license has been revoked shall not be eligible for another Tobacco Product
License for one year from the date of license revocation.
   If the violation relates to the sale of licensed products to persons under
the age of 21 by licensee or licensee's employees, the following administrative
fines, suspensions, or revocations shall be imposed by the City: (amended 3/26/
07)
   Subd. 1   The first such violation shall subject the licensee to the payment
of an administrative fine of $1,000;
   Subd. 2   The second violation within 36 months shall subject the licensee
to the payment of an administrative fine of $2,000 plus 3-day license
suspension;
   Subd. 3   The third violation within 36 months shall subject the licensee to
the payment of an administrative fine of $2,000 plus 7-day license suspension;
   Subd. 4   The fourth violation within 36 months shall subject the licensee
to license revocation.
   In accordance with Minn. Stat. § 461.12, subd. 2a, a tobacco retail license
will be suspended for no less than seven (7) days and may be revoked for
certain cannabis-related violations by the licensed tobacco retailer on the
licensed premises.
   Licensees, whose licenses have been revoked, shall not be eligible for
another Tobacco Product License for one year from the date of license
revocation.
(amd. 3/25/19; amd. 11/13/23; amd. 12/11/23; amd. 9/23/24)
350.12   Hearing.
   A licensee may appeal the imposition of an administrative fine, a suspension
of license, a revocation of license, or any combination of administrative fine,
suspension, or revocation, in writing within fourteen (14) days of the mailing
of the notice of the imposition of said fine, suspension, or revocation. All
appeals shall be scheduled for a hearing before the City Council at the next
regularly scheduled council meeting, except that if the notice of appeal is
received by the city three (3) or fewer days before the next regularly
scheduled meeting, the hearing shall be scheduled for the following regular
council meeting. The failure to submit a written notice of appeal within
fourteen (14) days of the mailing of the notice of a fine, suspension, or
revocation shall constitute the waiver of any right to appeal said fine,
suspension, or revocation.
(amd. 11/13/23)
350.13   Exceptions and Defenses.
   Nothing in this section shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices to a person under age 21 as part of a
lawfully recognized religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony. It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this section for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.
(amd. 3/25/19)
350.14   License Requirements.
   A license shall comply with all applicable regulations of the State of
Minnesota relating to the sale or dispensing of licensed products. If there is
a conflict between the regulations of the State and regulations of the City,
the more restrictive regulations shall control. (amended 3/26/07)
(amd. 3/25/19)
350.15   Severability Clause.
   If any provision of this ordinance, or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance, is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other
provision of this ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application. Each invalid provision or application of this
ordinance is severable.
(amd. 3/25/19)
Section 360 - Rights-of-Way
(revised 10/20/11)
360.01   Findings, Purpose and Intent.
(revised 09/25/17)
   Subd. 1 To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and
to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-
of-way, the City strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair
and free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   Subd. 2 Accordingly, the City hereby enacts this section relating to right-
of-way permits and administration. This section imposes reasonable regulation
on the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within
its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time as authorized by
law or the City. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies. Under this section, persons excavating and obstructing the
rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this
section provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons
using the public rights-of-way.
   Subd. 3 This section shall be interpreted consistently with state
telecommunications and right of way statutes, in particular 1997 Session Laws,
Chapter 123, and 2017 Session Laws, Chapter 94, Article 9, substantially
codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81 and 238.086, the
"Act," as amended from time to time, and the other laws governing applicable
rights of the City and users of the right-of-way. This section shall also be
interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules Parts 7819.0050 through 7819.9950,
as amended from time to time, where possible. To the extent any provision of
this section cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Statutes or
Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable
statutory and case law is intended. This section shall not be interpreted to
limit the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
360.02   Election to Manage the Public Rights-of-Way.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the City under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the City hereby elects pursuant M.S.
§ 237.163 (2)(b), as amended from time to time, to manage rights-of-way within
its jurisdiction.
360.03   Definitions.
   The following definitions apply in this section of this code. References
hereafter to "sections" are unless otherwise specified references to sections
in this section. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.
      ∙   Abandoned Facility. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
      ∙   Applicant. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.
      ∙   City. The City of Arden Hills, Minnesota. For purposes of Subsection
360.28, City means its elected Officials, officers, employees and agents.
      ∙   Collocate or collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to
an existing wireless support structure that is owned privately or by a local
government unit.
      ∙   Commission. The State Public Utilities Commission.
      ∙   Congested Right-of-Way. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the
public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new
underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing
lateral facilities in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04 (3), as amended from time
to time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
      ∙   Construction Performance Bond. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee's option:
         ∙   Individual project bond;
         ∙   Cash deposit;
         ∙   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73 (3), as
amended from time to time;
         ∙   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the City;
         ∙   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the City; or
         ∙   A blanket bond for projects within the City, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the City.
      ∙   Degradation. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
      ∙   Degradation Cost subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100. The cost to
achieve a level of restoration as determined by the City at the time the permit
is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set
forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
      ∙   Degradation Fee. The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the City to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the
degradation cost.
      ∙   Inspector. Any person authorized by the City to carry out inspections
related to the provisions of this section.
      ∙   Delay Penalty. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays
in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration as established
by permit.
      ∙   Emergency. A condition that:
         ∙   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of
property; or
         ∙   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to
restore service to a customer.
      ∙   Equipment. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.
      ∙   Excavate. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
      ∙   Excavation Permit. The permit which, pursuant to this section, must
be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An "Excavation
Permit" allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described
in such permit.
      ∙   Excavation Permit Fee. Money paid to the City by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in Subsection
360.12.
      ∙   Facility or Facilities. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide utility service.
      ∙   Five-Year Project Plan. Shows projects adopted by the City for
construction within the next five years.
      ∙   High Density Corridor. A designated portion of the public right-of-
way within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
      ∙   Hole. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length less than the width of the pavement.
      ∙   Local Representative. A local person or persons, or designee of such
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
section.
      ∙   Management Costs. The actual costs the City incurs in managing its
rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right-of-way or small
wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration
projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting or moving user facilities during
right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and the
opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless
facility permits. "Management Costs" do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way,
unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by a local government unit
as part of managing its public rights-of-way, including but not limited to any
third-party contractor fee tied to or based upon customer counts, access lines,
revenue generated by the telecommunications right-of-way user, or revenue
generated for a local government unit; the fees and cost of litigation relating
to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; M.S. §§
237.162 or 237.163, as amended from time to time, or any ordinance enacted
under those sections, or the City fees and costs related to appeals taken
pursuant to Subsection  
360.29.
      ∙   Micro wireless facility. A small wireless facility that is no larger
than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior
antenna, if any, is no longer than 11 inches.
      ∙   Obstruct. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
      ∙   Obstruction Permit. The permit which, pursuant to this section, must
be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein.
      ∙   Obstruction Permit Fee. Money paid to the City by a permittee to
cover the costs as provided in Subsection
360.11.
      ∙   Patch or Patching. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary
in nature. A "Patch" consists of:
         ∙   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base; and
         ∙   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A "Patch" is
considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the City's
five year project plan.
      ∙   Pavement. Any type of improved surface that is within the public
right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous,
concrete, aggregate or gravel.
      ∙   Permit. The meaning given "right-of-way permit" in M.S. § 237.162, as
amended from time to time.
      ∙   Permittee. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the City under this section.
      ∙   Person. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this
state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or
foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate or
political.
      ∙   Probation. The status of a person that has not complied with the
conditions of this section.
      ∙   Probationary Period. One year from the date that a person has been
notified in writing that they have been put on probation.
      ∙   Registrant. Any person who:
         ∙   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any
right-of-way; or
         ∙   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-
of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
      ∙   Restore or Restoration. The process by which an excavated right-of-
way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the
same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
      ∙   Restoration Cost. The amount of money paid to the City by a permittee
to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission rules.
      ∙   Right-of-Way Permit. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction
permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this section.
      ∙   Right-of-Way, Public. An area dedicated to public use, in which the
public has a dedicated interest, for travel purposes and public utility
infrastructure. In addition to the roadway, a right-of-way may include, but is
not limited to, curbs, sidewalks, boulevards, lighting, and drainage
accommodations.
         ∙   Right-of-Way, improved. The portion of the public right-of-way
that contains roads and/or sidewalks for public use.
         ∙   Right-of-Way, unimproved. The portion of the public right-of-way
that is not being actively used for roadway and/or sidewalks, also referred to
as the boulevard.
      ∙   Right-of-Way User.
         ∙   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. §
237.162 (4), as amended from time to time; or
         ∙   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that
is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a
right under law, franchise or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
      ∙   Service or Utility Service.
         ∙   Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. §
216B.02 (4) and (6), as amended from time to time;
         ∙   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information;
         ∙   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in M.S. Ch.
238, as amended from time to time;
         ∙   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by the City;
         ∙   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Ch. 308A, as amended from time to time; and
         ∙   Water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating services.
         ∙   Small wireless facility.
            (1)   a wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
               (i)   each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within an
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
               (ii)   all other wireless equipment associated with the small
wireless facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment, is in aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or
            (2)   a micro wireless facility.
      ∙   Supplementary Application. An application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that
had already been issued.
      ∙   Temporary Surface. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the City's two-year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.
      ∙   Trench. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
      ∙   Telecommunication Right-of-Way User. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless
service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information.
For purposes of this section, a cable communication system defined and
regulated under M.S. Ch. 238, as amended from time to time, and
telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric
energy services, a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as amended from
time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under
M.S. Chs. 453 and 453A, as amended from time to time, or a cooperative electric
association organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, as amended from time to time are not
telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this section, except to
the extent these entities are offering wireless services.
      ∙   Two-Year Project Plan. Shows projects adopted by the City for
construction within the next two years.
      ∙   Utility pole. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
      ∙   Wireless facility.
         (a)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of
wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including:
            (1) equipment associated with wireless service;
            (2) a radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration; and
            (3) a small wireless facility.
         (b)   "Wireless facility" does not include:
            (1) wireless support structures;
            (2) wireline backhaul facilities; or
            (3) coaxial or fiber-optic cables (i) between utility poles or
wireless support structures, or (ii) that are not otherwise immediately
adjacent to or directly associated with a specific antenna.
      ∙   Wireless service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless
service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including a cable service under United
States Code, title 47, section 522, clause (6).
      ∙   Wireless support structure. A new or existing structure in a public
right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless
facilities, as reasonably determined by a local government unit. 
      ∙   Wireline backhaul facility. A facility used to transport
communications data by wire from a wireless facility to a communications
network.
360.04   Administration.
   The City Administrator is the principal City Official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits and the ordinances
related thereto. The City Administrator may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder.
360.05   Registration and Right-of-Way Occupancy.
   Subd. 1 Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the City and obtain any
required permits. Registration will consist of providing application
information and paying a registration fee. All fees or charges will be as set
by state law or city fee ordinance.
   Subd. 2 Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install,
repair, remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or
any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being registered with the
City and obtain any required permits.
   Subd. 3   Exceptions. Persons maintaining the unimproved portion of the
right of way between their property and the edge of the pavement of a roadway
shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way. Such persons shall
conform to the provision in Section
360.30. Nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of
the M.S. Ch. 216D, Gopher One Call Law, as amended from time to time.
360.06   Registration Information.
   Subd. 1   Information Required. The information provided to the City at the
time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      A.   Each registrant's name, Gopher One Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      B.   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
      C.   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         1.   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or a form of self insurance acceptable to the City;
         2.   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the:
            a.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees; and
            b.   Placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-
way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees,
including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from
completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of
property;
         3.   Naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverages
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverages;
         4.   Requiring that the City be notified thirty (30) days in advance
of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
         5.   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability
coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by the City in
amounts sufficient to protect the City and the public and to carry out the
purposes and policies of this section.
         6.   The City may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
         7.   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate
required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as amended from time to time, as
recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
      D.   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate
from said commission or other state or federal agency.
   Subd. 2   Notice of Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the City
information as to changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on which
the registrant has knowledge of any change.
360.07   Reporting Obligations.
   Subd. 1   Operations.
      A.    Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December
1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for facilities
with the City. Such plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the
City and shall contain the information determined by the City to be necessary
to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations
and obstructions of rights-of-way.
      B.    The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         1.    The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of
all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
"next-year project"); and
         2.    To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated
beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years
following the next calendar year (in this section, a "five-year project").
         3.    The term "project" in this section shall include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
      C.    By January 1 of each year the City will have available for
inspection in the City's office a composite list of all projects of which the
City has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for
keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
      D.    Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project
in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the City and all other
registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant
listed by the other registrant.
   Subd. 2   Additional Next-Year Projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
City will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to
include a project in a plan submitted to the City if the registrant has used
commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
360.08   Permit Requirement.
   Subd. 1   Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or place any facilities or
structures within the right-of-way, without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the City to do so.
      A.   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      B.   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-
of-way by placing equipment described therein on, under or over the right-of-
way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
      C.   Wireless permit. A wireless permit is required by a registrant to
site a new wireless facility, wireless backhaul line, wireless support
structure, small wireless facility, or to collocate a small wireless facility
in a public right of way managed by the City.
   Subd. 2   Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-
of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless:
      A.    Such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-
way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and
      B.    A new permit or permit extension is granted.
   Subd. 3   Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 Subpart
3 and notwithstanding Subd. D of this subsection, the City shall establish and
impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established by
Ordinance adopted by the Council.
   Subd. 4   Permit Display. Permits issued under this section shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the City.
360.09   Permit Applications.
   Application for a permit is made to the City. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
   Subd. 1   Registration with the City pursuant to this section;
   Subd. 2   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.
   Subd. 3   Payment of money due the City for:
      A.    Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
      B.    Prior obstructions or excavations;
      C.    Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City
because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the City;
      D.    Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
   Subd. 4   Payment of disputed amounts due the City by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing.
   Subd. 5   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the City deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
360.10   Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
   Subd. 1   Permit Issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements
of this section and other applicable Code provisions and state and federal
laws, the City shall issue a permit unless it determines that denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-
way and its current use.
   Subd. 2   Conditions. The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use.
360.11   Permit Fees.
   Subd. 1   Excavation Permit Fee. The City shall establish, by Ordinance
adopted by the Council, an excavation permit fee in an amount sufficient to
recover the following costs:
      A.    The City management costs;
      B.    Degradation costs, if applicable.
   Subd. 2   Obstruction Permit Fee. The City shall establish, by Ordinance
adopted by the Council, the obstruction permit fee and shall be in an amount
sufficient to recover the City management costs.
   Subd. 2a    Small Wireless Facility, Support Structure, Collocation Fees.
The City shall establish, by Ordinance adopted by the Council and consistent
with state law, Wireless permit fees in an amount sufficient to recover the
City management costs, or in the absence of a fee set by Ordinance, the fees as
authorized and established by law, and specifically by M.S. 237.163, as amended
from time to time.
   Subd. 3   Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation, obstruction permit or
wireless permit shall be issued without payment of permit fees. The City may
allow the applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of billing.
   Subd. 4   Non Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the
City has revoked for a breach as stated in Subsection
360.21 are not refundable.
   Subd. 5   Application to Franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
360.12   Right-of-Way Patching and Restoration.
   Subd. 1   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under
Subsection
360.15.
   Subd. 2   Patch and Restoration. The permittee shall patch its own work. The
City may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.
      A.    City restoration. If the City restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If, following
such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling,
the permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, all
costs associated with correcting the defective work.
      B.    Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rule 7819.3000.
      C.    Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   Subd. 3   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the City and shall comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100.
   Subd. 4   Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching, or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Permittee, upon
notification from the City, shall correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the City. Said work shall be completed
within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the City, not
including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under Subsection  
360.15.
   Subd. 5   Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-
of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the City, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the City, the
City at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-
of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the City may exercise its rights
under the construction performance bond.
360.13   Joint Applications.
   Subd. 1   Joint Application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   Subd. 2   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the City does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on their applications.
   Subd. 3   With City Projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the City, whether or not it is a joint
application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the
permit fee, but a permit would still be required.
360.14   Supplementary Applications.
   Subd. 1   Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the
area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater
area:
      A.    Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby; and
      B.    Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   Subd. 2   Limitation on Dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the
dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end
date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must
apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new
permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of
the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before
the permit end date.
360.15   Other Obligations.
   Subd. 1   Compliance With Other Laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does
not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses and authority and to pay all fees required by the City or other
applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including M.S. §§ 216D.01
through 216D.09, as amended from time to time, (Gopher One Call Excavation
Notice System). A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all
applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for
all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who
does the work. A permittee seeking the placement of a new wireless support
structure for the siting of a small wireless facility in a right-of-way as
authorized by law, may also be required to obtain a conditional use permit
under this Code if the siting is proposed in a district zoned for single-family
residential use or within a historic district so designated at the time of
application.
   Subd. 2   Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of
the City, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   Subd. 3   Interference with Right-of-Way. A permittee shall not so obstruct
a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with City parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
360.16   Denial of Permit.
   The City may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of state or federal law, this section or other provisions of City
Code, or if the City determines that the denial is necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and
its current use. The City shall notify the telecommunications right-of-way user
in writing within three business days of the decision to deny and the basis for
the denial. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and
resubmit its application. If the applicant resubmits the application within 30
days of receiving written notice of the denial, it shall not be charged an
additional filing or processing fee. The City shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days after the revised application is submitted.
360.17   Installation Requirements.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules
7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as
they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as amended from
time to time.
360.18   Inspection.
   Subd. 1   Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minnesota Rule 7819.1300.
   Subd. 2   Site Inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site available
to the City and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   Subd. 3   Cessation/Corrective Orders.
      A.    At the time of inspection the director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      B.    The City may issue an order to the permittee for any work which
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days
after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the City that
the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within
the required time, the City may revoke the permit pursuant to Subsection
360.21.
360.19    Work Done Without a Permit.
   Subd. 1   Emergency Situations.
      A.   Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event
regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The registrant
may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Within two (2) business days after the occurrence of the emergency the
registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated
therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself
into compliance with this section for the actions it took in response to the
emergency.
      B.   If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's
facilities, the City will attempt to contact the local representative of each
registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event,
the City may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
   Subd. 2   Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates or
places any facility or structure in a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a
permit, and as a penalty pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double
all the other fees required by the City code, deposit with the City the fees
necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the
requirements of this section.
360.20    Supplementary Notification.
   If the project, obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later
or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the
City of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
360.21   Revocation of Permits.
   Subd. 1   Substantial Breach. The City reserves its right, as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      A.   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      B.   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the City or its citizens;
      C.   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      D.   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit
extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons
beyond the permittee's control; or
      E.   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to 360.18.
   Subd. 2   Written Notice of Breach. If the City determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the City
shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the
permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the City, at his or
her discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach.
   Subd. 3   Response to Notice of Breach. Within twenty-four (24) hours of
receiving notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the City with
a plan, acceptable to the City, that will cure the breach. The permittee's
failure to so contact the City, failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or
failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate
revocation of the permit. Further, the permittee's failure to so contact the
City, failure to submit an acceptable plan, or failure to reasonably implement
the approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one
(1) full year.
   Subd. 4   Cause for probation. From time to time, the City may establish a
list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place
the permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to,
working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly
outside of the permit authorization.
   Subd. 5   Automatic Revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits
a breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked
and permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs. Notice of the revocation shall be mailed to the permittee
within three business days of the decision.
   Subd. 6   Reimbursement of City Costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
360.22   Mapping Data.
   Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information required by
the City in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100.
360.23   Location and Relocation of Facilities.
   Subd. 1   Placement, location and relocation of facilities must comply with
the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100,
7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority
otherwise available to cities.
   Subd. 2   The City may assign specific area within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the City expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction or other permits
issued by the City involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. Any registrant
who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the
corridors established by the City shall, no later than at the time of the next
reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities are located, move
the facilities to the assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this
requirement is waived by the City for good cause shown, upon consideration of
such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety,
customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
   Subd. 3   One year after the passage of this section, any facilities found
in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   Subd. 4   Limitation of Space. To protect health, safety and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the City shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the City shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future City plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
360.24   Pre-excavation Facilities Location.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through
216D.09, as amended from time to time, ("One Call Excavation Notice System")
before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has
facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal
and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities
are less than twenty (20) inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall
notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact
location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
360.25   Damage to Other facilities.
   When the City does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the City
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which
it or its facilities damages. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost
of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during
the City's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities.
360.26   Right-of-Way Vacation.
   If the City vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minnesota Rules 7819.3200.
360.27   Indemnification and Liability.
   By registering with the City, or by accepting a permit under this section, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the City in accordance
with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250.
360.28   Abandoned and Unusable Facilities.
   Subd. 1   Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the City must provide
information satisfactory to the City that the registrant's obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this section have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   Subd. 2   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-
of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the City.
360.29    Appeal.
   A right-of-way user that:
   Subd. 1   Has been denied registration;
   Subd. 2   Has been denied a permit;
   Subd. 3   Has had permit revoked; or
   Subd. 4   Believes that the fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial,
revocation or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the City
Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the
denial, revocation or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
360.30   Maintenance of the Right-of-Way.
   Subd. 1   Purpose. The right-of-way is public or private land dedicated for
public use for the purposes of pedestrian and vehicular movement, snow storage,
road reconstruction projects, drainage, and utilities. The area dedicated for
public use generally includes both improved (paved) and unimproved (landscaped)
portions of land. Property owners adjacent to the right-of-way are responsible
for maintaining the unimproved portion of the right-of-way. The City of Arden
Hills has adopted this Section to ensure the integrity of its streets, to
ensure appropriate use of the right-of-way, and to regulate the private use and
maintenance of the unimproved portion of the right-of-way between an adjacent
property and the edge of the pavement of a roadway, also called a "boulevard".
   Subd. 2   Scope.
      A.   The following activities shall be deemed maintenance of the right-
of-way, and shall be allowed without a permit, provided the activities are
conducted within the boulevard, between a person's property and the edge of the
improved portion of the right-of-way, and the maintenance activities do not
impede the City's use of the right-of-way:
         1.   Planting and maintaining perennial and/or annual flowers,
shrubberies, gardens, and rain gardens;
         2.   Installing and maintaining private driveways, sidewalks, curb and
gutter, or parking lots, which are allowed with an approved permit from the
City;
         3.   Installing and maintaining mail boxes in conformance with Federal
Post Office Regulations;
         4.   Installing and maintaining irrigation systems or below-ground pet
containment systems;
         5.   Engaging in snow removal activities; or
         6.   Undertaking activities on behalf of federal, state, county, or
city agencies.
      B.   The following activities shall not be deemed maintenance of the
right-of-way, and shall be prohibited within the boulevard, between a person's
property and the edge of the improved portion of the right-of-way:
         1.   Placement of above-ground fences;
         2.   Placement of retaining walls without a permit;
         3.   Placement of large boulders within fifteen (15) feet of the edge
of the pavement; or
         4.   Placement of other major landscaping improvements or
obstructions, as determined by the City, within fifteen (15) feet of the edge
of the pavement.
   Subd. 3   Responsibility of Private Owners. It shall be the responsibility
of the adjacent property owner to:
      A.   Maintain the boulevard between their property and the improved
portion of the right-of-way. Improvements made within the right-of-way by a
property owner are done so at the property owner's own risk, and may be removed
by the City at the owner's expense. The City is not responsible for damage to
landscaping or other right-of-way improvements resulting from any activity
related to the City's use of the right-of-way.
      B.   Allow only those plant materials that do not have characteristics
detrimental to the public welfare, such as susceptibility to disease and wind
damage, or a tendency to interfere with utilities, public easements, or rights-
of-way.
      C.   Trim, prune, maintain, and/or remove as necessary, any tree in the
boulevard between their property and the improved portion of the right-of-way.
Trees shall be pruned to sufficient height to allow free passage of pedestrians
and vehicular traffic: nine (9) feet over sidewalks and sixteen (16) feet over
streets. Trees not properly maintained, or found to be structurally unsound,
may be deemed a public nuisance by the City Forester, and abated in accordance
with
Section 602 of the City Code.
      D.   Remove any tree in the boulevard between their property and the
improved portion of the right-of-way found to be diseased or dying by the City
Forester, in accordance with
Section 710 of the City Code. The adjacent property owner is responsible for
the cost of removing trees located in the right-of-way.
      E.   Maintain driveway approaches in a safe condition that does not cause
a maintenance problem, and in a manner that does not interfere with or obstruct
the drainage carried by the adjoining street or the use of the adjoining street
for travel, as determined by the City. If a driveway approach is not maintained
in this manner, the City may require the property owner to alter the driveway
approach in order to meet the requirements of this Section. If the property
owner fails to alter the driveway as directed by the City, it will constitute a
public nuisance under Chapter
602.01 and may be abated under Chapter
602.05 or
602.06.
360.31    Rights of the City.
   The City maintains the right to plant, prune, maintain, remove, or perform
any other arboricultural practices as deemed necessary by the City on all
public property and in the right-of-way.
360.32    Placement of Trees in the Right-of-Way
   Subd. 1   Purpose. The planting of trees in areas of the City dedicated for
public streets, which are sometimes referred to in this Section as boulevard
trees, is a matter of public interest. It is the purpose of this Section to
provide a procedure for planting boulevard trees under certain circumstances
and subject to certain regulations as provided by this Section.
   Subd. 2   Permitted Varieties. Only tree species listed on the “Arden Hills
Preferred Street Tree Species List” shall be permitted under the provisions of
this Section Under no circumstances shall any tree species listed as
“prohibited” on that list be planted in the City. . The “Arden Hills Preferred
Street Tree Species List” is a living document maintained and updated by the
acting City Forester and the most current official version shall apply. Amended
10-13-25
   Subd. 3   Space. At the time of planting, trees which will exceed forty (40)
feet at the height of maturity shall be spaced at least twenty-five (25) feet
apart.
   Subd. 4   Prohibited Locations. Trees shall not be planted in the following
manner:
      A.   Within fifteen (15) feet of the improved portion of the right-of-
way;
      B.   Within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant, utility pole or other
fixture;
      C.   Under or within ten (10) level feet of any overhead wire or over or
within ten (10) lateral feet of an underground utility;
      D.   In such a way that it will now or in the future materially impede
the clear vision area.
Section 370 - Fireworks
370.01   Definitions.
   For purposes of this regulation, the following terms shall mean:
      ∙   Fireworks. Any substance or combination of substances or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes blank
cartridges, toy cannons and toy canes in which explosives are used, any type of
balloon which requires fire underneath to propel it, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, or other fireworks of like
construction, and any fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable
compound, or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance and
commonly used as fireworks.
      ∙   Consumer fireworks. Any substance or combination of substances or
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank
cartridges, toy cannons, and toy canes in which explosives are used, the type
of balloons which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers other than those
specified in paragraph (b), or other fireworks of like construction, and any
fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable compound, or any tablets or
other device containing any explosive substance and commonly used as fireworks.
         ∙   The term "fireworks" shall not include toy pistols, toy guns, in
which paper caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are
used and toy pistol caps which contain less than 20/100 grains of explosive
mixture.
         ∙   The term also does not include wire or wood sparklers of not more
than 100 grams of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are
nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per
tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes and glow worms,
smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which include paper streamers, party
poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each consisting of not more
than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive mixture. The use of consumer
fireworks is not permitted on public property. This paragraph does not
authorize the purchase of consumer fireworks by persons younger than 18 years
of age.
370.02   Permit or License Required.
   Subd. 1   Fireworks. No person shall use or display any fireworks, except as
provided herein. Supervised public displays of fireworks by City, fair
associations, amusement parks and other organizations other than the City and
fair associations must obtain a permit for such public displays. Such permits
shall allow the use and display of fireworks for that display only. No permit
so granted shall be transferable.
      A.   Application. The application shall state the name and address of the
person who will supervise the display, the name and address of the person who
will conduct the display, the location of the display, and the date and time of
the display. The application shall be filed 30 days prior to the event.
      B.   Investigation. The Fire Chief shall investigate each application to
determine whether the operator of the display is competent and whether the
display will be of such a character or will be so located, discharged, or fired
as to be hazardous to any person or property.
      C.   Conditions. Every display shall be conducted so as not to endanger
any person or property. Every display shall be conducted in accordance with all
applicable provisions of this code, state law, and regulations including
regulations of the State Fire Marshall.
   Subd. 2    Consumer fireworks. No person shall, directly or indirectly, keep
for retail sale, sell at retail or otherwise dispose of consumer fireworks
unless licensed by the City of Arden Hills. License application shall be
submitted to the City of Arden Hills together with the license fees as
established by Ordinance adopted by the Council. A license shall be issued for
the specific premises identified in the application.
   A. Application. The applicant shall provide:
         1.   The net or gross quantity of explosive material to be kept on the
premises for retail sale or other disposition.
         2.   The interior floor plan of the building showing the place(s) of
storage and/or display.
         3.   The location, type and capacity of sprinkler(s) and fire
extinguishers.
         4.   A certificate of Insurance indicating the applicant has liability
coverage. The Certificate must demonstrate the insurer has been notified of the
type and quantity of consumer fireworks kept on the premises.
      B.   Term. A license shall expire on December 31st of each year.
      C.   License Restriction. A license shall be issued subject to the
following restrictions:
         1.   No transient sales of consumer fireworks are permitted.
         2.   No outdoor sales, storage or retail display of consumer fireworks
is permitted.
         3.   Use of fireworks and consumer fireworks is prohibited on property
where sale and/or storage is permitted.
         4.   Smoking is prohibited within buildings where sale and/or storage
of consumer fireworks is permitted.
         5.   A list of consumer fireworks kept on the premises shall be
available for inspection at all times.
         6.   Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all consumer fireworks
kept on the premises shall be available for inspection at all times.
         7.   A minimum of two (2) water-type extinguishers, with minimum 2 ½
gallon capacity shall be kept within 15 feet of the storage and display area
(s).
      D.   Storage. The licensee shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the State of Minnesota Building and Fire Codes. If there is a conflict between
the regulations of the State and the regulations of the City, the more
restrictive regulation shall control.
         1.   In buildings without an approved automatic sprinkler system, a
maximum quantity of fifty (50) pounds net pyrotechnic composition or two
hundred (200) pounds gross weight, if the pyrotechnic composition is not known,
may be kept on the premises.
         2.   In buildings with an approved automatic sprinkler system, a
maximum quantity of one hundred (100) pounds net pyrotechnic composition of
four hundred (400) pounds gross weight, if the pyrotechnic composition is not
known, may be kept on the premises.
   E.    Inspections. The premises shall be inspected at least twice annually
by the Fire Chief to verify compliance with the terms and conditions of the
license
Section 380 - Local Lodging Tax
[Replaced by Ord. 2021-010, passed 10-25-2021]
380.01   Definitions:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have meanings
given to them by this section:
   City. The City of Arden Hills
   Director. The Finance Director of the City or designee.
   Lodger. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   Lodging. The furnishing for consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel,
rooming house, campgrounds, air B&B, tourist court, or resort, except where
such lodging shall be for a continuous period of thirty (30) days or more to
the same lodger.
   Operator. A person who provides lodging to others, or any officer, agent or
employee of such person.
   Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate or any other
combination of individuals. Whenever the term "person" is used in any provision
of this Chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a
corporation, association, or partnership, shall mean the officers or partners
thereof as the case may be.
   Rent. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether
paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services
rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge
itself.
380.02   Imposition of Tax:
   There is hereby imposed a tax of three (3%) percent on the rent charged by
an Operator for providing lodging to any person. The tax shall be stated and
charged separately and shall be collected by the Operator from the Lodger. The
tax collected by the Operator shall be a debt owed by the Operator to the City
and shall be extinguished only by payment to the City. In no case shall the tax
imposed by this section upon an Operator exceed the amount of tax which the
Operator is authorized and required by this Chapter to collect from a Lodger.
380.03   Collections:
   Each Operator shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter at the time Rent
is paid. The tax collections shall be held in trust by the Operator for the
City. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the Rent charged for
the Lodging.
380.04   Exemptions:
   An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it
is beyond the power of the City to tax. No exemption shall be granted except
upon a claim therefore made at the time the Rent is collected and such a claim
shall be made in writing under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the
City. All such claims shall be forwarded to the City when the returns and
collections are submitted as required by this Chapter.
380.05   Advertising No Tax:
   It shall be unlawful for any Operator to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any party
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the Operator, or that it will not be
added to the Rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
Operator must collect. In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax
less than one cent ($0.01) shall be considered an additional cent ($0.01).
380.06   Payments and Returns:
   The taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be paid by the Operator to the City
not later than twenty-five (25) days after the end of the month in which the
taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the Operator shall submit a
return upon such forms and containing such information as the City may require.
The return shall contain the following minimum information:
   1)   The total amount of Rent collected for Lodging during the period
covered by the return.
   2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
   3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of an agent duly
authorized in writing.
   4)   The period covered by the return.
   5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging tax.
   6)   A copy of the "Minnesota State Sales and Use Tax Return" submitted by
the Operator for the period covered by the return.
   The Operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this Chapter previously paid
as a result of any transaction the consideration for which became uncollectible
during such reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of such
consideration which became uncollectible.
380.07   Examination of Return, Adjustments, Notices and Demands:
   The Director may rely upon the "Minnesota State Sales and Use Tax Return"
filed by the Operator with the State of Minnesota in determining the accuracy
of a return filed under this Chapter. However, the Director shall be authorized
to make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the
person making the return, if the Director reasonably determines that such steps
are necessary for determining the correctness of the return. The tax computed
on the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is
found to be greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to the City
within ten (10) days after receipt of a notice thereof, given either personally
or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid
is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the
person who paid the tax to the City within ten (10) days after determination of
such refund.
380.08   Refunds:
   Any person may apply to the Director for a refund of taxes paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided
that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within one (1)
year after such tax was paid, or within one (1) year from the filing of the
return, whichever period is the longer. The Director shall examine the claim
and make and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in
whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to such
person at the address stated upon the return. If such claim is allowed in whole
or in part, the Director shall credit the amount of the allowance against any
taxes due under this Chapter from the claimant and the balance of said
allowance, if any, shall be paid by the Director to the claimant.
380.09   Failure to File a Return:
   A.   If any Operator required by this Chapter to file a return shall fail to
do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an
incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the Operator shall, upon written notice
and demand, file such return or corrected return within five (5) days of
receipt of such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on
the basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or corrected
return, the Director shall make a return or corrected return, for such person
from such knowledge and information as the Director can obtain, and assess a
tax on the basis thereof, which tax, less any payments theretofore made on
account of the tax for the taxable period covered by such return shall be paid
within five (5) days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such
payment. Any such return or assessment made by the Director shall be prima
facie correct and valid, and such person shall have the burden of establishing
its incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding in respect thereto.
   B.   If any portion of a tax imposed by this Chapter, including penalties
thereon, is not paid within thirty (30) days after it is required to be paid,
the City may institute such legal action as may be necessary to recover the
amount due plus interest, penalties, the costs and disbursements of any action.
   C.   Upon a showing of good cause, the Director may grant an operator one
30-day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of
taxes as required by this Chapter provided that interest during such period of
extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of ten (10%) percent per
annum.
380.10   Penalties:
   If any tax imposed by this Chapter is not paid within the time herein
specified for the payment, or an extension thereof, there shall be added
thereto a specific penalty equal to ten (10%) percent of the amount remaining
unpaid. The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided
by this section, shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10%) percent per annum
from the time such tax should have been paid until it is paid. Any interest and
penalty shall be added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.
380.11   Administration of Tax:
   The Director shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of
taxes imposed by this Chapter. The Director shall cause to be prepared blank
forms for the returns and other documents required by this Chapter and shall
distribute the same throughout the City and furnish them on application, but
failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any
obligation required of him/her under this Chapter.
380.12   Examination of Records:
   The Director and those persons acting on behalf of the Director, authorized
in writing by the Director, may examine the books, papers and records of any
Operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this Chapter. Every such Operator
is directed and required to give to the Director, or such other authorized
agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
380.13   Violations:
   Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this
Chapter; or who shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment; or
who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed
by this Chapter, after written demand for such payment; or who shall refuse to
permit the City to examine the books, records and papers under his/her control,
or who shall willfully make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
380.14   Use of Proceeds and Annual Report:
   Ninety-five (95%) percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of
taxes pursuant to this Chapter shall be used in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes § 469.190, as the same may be amended from time to time, to fund a
local convention, tourism, or visitors bureau for the purpose of marketing and
promoting the City as a tourist or convention center. Any local bureau
receiving proceeds shall, for its most recent calendar year, provide an annual
year-end report of its operations and its financial condition to the City
Council in writing and by oral presentation at a City Council meeting.
380.15   Appeals:
   A.    Any Operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by
the Director under this Chapter may file a petition for review of such notice,
order or determination detailing the Operator's reasons for contesting the
notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the
petitioner, the petitioner's address and the location of the Lodging subject to
the order, notice or determination.
   B.    The petition for review shall be filed with the City within ten (10)
days after the notice; order or determination for which review is sought has
been mailed or served upon the person requesting review.
   C.    Upon receipt of the petition, the City Administrator, or the
Administrator’s designee, shall set a date for a hearing and give the
petitioner at least five (5) days’ prior written notice of the date, time and
place of the hearing.
   D.    At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn.
The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner's choosing at
petitioner's own expense.
   E.    The hearing shall be conducted by the City Administrator, or the
Administrator’s designee, provided only that the person conducting the hearing
shall not have participated in the drafting of the order, notice or
determination for which review is sought.
   F.    The person conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact
and conclusion based upon the applicable sections of this Chapter and evidence
presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse or modify the
notice, order or determination made by the Director.
   G.    Any decision rendered by the City Administrator or clerk, or the
Administrator’s designee, pursuant to this section may be appealed to the City
Council. A petitioner seeking to appeal the decision must file a written notice
of appeal with the City within ten (10) days after the decision has been mailed
to the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed on the council agenda as
soon as it is practical. The City Council shall then review the findings of
fact and conclusions to determine whether they are correct. Upon a
determination by the City Council that the findings and conclusions are
incorrect, the City Council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the
City Administrator, or the Administrator’s designee, upon the same standards as
set forth in subsection F of this section.
Section 390 – Tree Service
[Added by Ord. 2016-009, passed 11-14-2016]
390.01   License Required.
Any person engaging in a business that maintains, trims, removes, or treats
trees or shrubs within the City must obtain a license from the City.
390.02   Applications.
   (A)   Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the
City.
   (B)   The annual fee for a license shall be in the amount established by the
City Council.
   (C)   All licenses issued shall expire on December 31 following the date of
issue.
390.03   Liability Insurance.
No license or renewal shall be granted, nor be effective, until the applicant
files with the City proof of a public liability insurance policy covering all
operations of such applicant under this chapter for the sum of at least two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) against liability for bodily injuries to one
person from the accident, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for the injury of
two (2) or more persons, and for at least two million dollars ($2,000,000.00)
against liability for damage or destruction to property. The policy shall
provide that it may not be canceled by the insurer except after ten (10) days
written notice to the City. If the insurance is canceled and the licensee fails
to replace same with another policy conforming to the provisions of this
section, the license shall automatically be suspended until the required
insurance is replaced.
390.04   Workers’ Compensation Insurance.
No license or renewal shall be granted, nor be effective, until the applicant
files with the City acceptable evidence of compliance with the statutory
workers’ compensation insurance coverage requirements by providing the name of
the insurance company, the policy number, and date of coverage.
390.05   Chemical Treatment Requirements.
Applicants who propose to use pesticides or other chemicals in any activity
related to treatment or disease control of trees shall file with the City proof
that the applicant or an employee of the applicant administering such treatment
has been certified or licensed by the state department of agriculture as a
commercial applicator. All boulevard trees that will be chemically treated must
be treated by means of spraying or trunk or soil injection (no soil drenching).
390.06   Safety Regulations Requirements.
All contractors licensed under the provisions of this chapter must abide by all
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) regulations while operating within the City limits.
390.07   Identification.
At the time a license is issued, the applicant shall be furnished with a
license or vehicle decal for each vehicle that will be used on any job site
within the City. The license or vehicle decal must be displayed at all times
while operating as a business within the City limits.  
390.08   Violations; Penalty.
A license may be suspended, revoked, or denied for renewal for any violation of
this Code or conditions of any permit. Any violation of this Code or provisions
of any permit shall be a misdemeanor.
390.09   Other Permits Required.
Tree contractors licensed by the City must also obtain other permits required
by the City if their business activities include solicitation of customers
(Section 340 of this Chapter), obstruction of City streets (Section 360 of this
Chapter), or other regulated activities.
Section 395 – Mobile Food Units amended 4/22/24
(added 12/11/17)
395.01 Purpose.
   This ordinance is intended to permit the reasonable use of mobile food units
while preventing any adverse consequences to residents, businesses and public
property.
395.02 Definitions.
   Mobile food unit – (1) A self-contained food service operation, located in a
readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle that is readily movable
without disassembling and that is used to store, prepare, display, or serve
food intended for individual portion service; or (2) A mobile food unit as
defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 157.15, subdivision 9.
395.03 License Required.
(Revised 4/22/2024)
   Any Mobile food operator unit must obtain all applicable licenses prior to
operating in the City, including but not limited to a license from Ramsey
County or the Minnesota Department of Agriculture, as applicable. All
applicable licenses must be displayed at all times in the mobile food unit.
395.04 Conditions of Mobile Food Unit Operation in the city.
(Revised 4/22/2024)
A mobile food unit may only be operated as follows:
   Subd. 1   Locations.
      A.   A mobile food unit may be operated in a private commercial or
industrial parking lot and on private residential property.
      B.   Mobile food units may not be located within three hundred (300’)
feet from the perimeter of any pre-approved festival, sporting event, or civic
event unless the licensed mobile food unit is a registered participant or
vendor of such festival or event.
      C.   Mobile food units may not be operated within two hundred (200’) feet
from the public entrance to any restaurant and/or any portion of a restaurant’s
outdoor dining area during that restaurant’s hours of operation, unless the
licensee obtains permission from restaurant owner/manager.
      D.   A mobile food unit operator or licensee must have prior written
approval from the City to operate in a City park, on City property or within
City rights of way. Additional park or other permits from the City or Ramsey
County, as applicable, may be required for such operations.
   Subd. 2   Performance standards. A mobile food unit operator or licensee is
subject to the following performance standards:
      A.   A mobile food unit operator or licensee shall operate the mobile
food unit in strict compliance with the applicable laws, rules, and regulations
of the United States, State of Minnesota, Ramsey County, and the City of Arden
Hills.
      B.   A mobile food unit operator or licensee must dispose of the unit’s
gray water daily. Gray water may not be drained into City storm water drains or
disposed of in public trash cans.
      C.   A mobile food unit operator or licensee shall provide and maintain
at least one clearly designated waste container for customer use, and located
within five feet (5’) of the unit. Operator or licensee is responsible for
daily removal of trash, litter, recycling and refuse.
      D.   Unless the vehicle is equipped with an internal power supply, a
mobile food unit must operate on an independent power supply that is screened
from public view, public streets, and adjacent residential districts. Any power
supply must be operated in compliance with City’s noise regulations.
      E.   Mobile food units shall not be operated before 7:00 a.m. or after
10:00 p.m. and shall not be operated in such a manner that creates any
unnecessary noise disturbances or disrupts, obstructs or interferes with
customer or public vehicular or pedestrian traffic or safety in any way.
      F.   Proof of a valid license(s) from any applicable licensing authority,
as required in Section
395.03 of this Code, must be posted on the mobile food unit.
      G.   A mobile food unit must be operated in compliance with the National
Fire Protection Association’s Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire
Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations.
   Subd. 3   Practices Prohibited. It is unlawful for any mobile food unit
operator or licensee to do any of the following:
      A.   Call attention to the mobile food unit by crying out, blowing a
horn, ringing a bell, playing loud music or by any loud or unusual noise, or by
use of any amplifying device.
      B.   Leave the mobile food unit at an authorized location outside of
hours allowed for operation or at any unauthorized location.
      C.   Operate or travel in or on public sidewalks, trails or rights-of-
way.
      D.   Obstruct the ingress to or egress from public or private property or
buildings.
      E.   Conduct business in any manner that creates a threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of a specific individual or the general public.
      F.   Fail to obey a lawful order of a law enforcement officer, the City
Building Official or City Inspector/Code Enforcement official, or agent of the
applicable licensing authority.
Section 396 – CANNABIS AND LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLES
(added 12/9/24)
396.1. – Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of Minnesota_Statute
Chapter_342, which authorizes cities to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of residents by regulating cannabis and lower-potency hemp edible
businesses within its jurisdiction.
396.2. – Definitions.
Unless otherwise noted in this section, words, terms, and phrases found in the
definitions of Minnesota_Statutes_Section_342.01, or as amended, apply, unless
otherwise noted or except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning. In addition, the following definitions apply:
CANNABIS EVENT. A temporary event organized by a Cannabis Event Organizer at
which cannabis products or lower-potency hemp edible products are sold by
vendors. Such Cannabis Event may be comprised solely of cannabis and lower-
potency hemp edible vendors or may be part of a larger event at which cannabis
and lower-potency hemp edible vendors wish to participate.
OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT or OCM. The Minnesota Office of Cannabis
Management.
STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued by the Minnesota Office of Cannabis
Management to a cannabis and lower-potency hemp edible business.
396.3. – Registration Required.
Before operating a business licensed by OCM the business must register with the
City, except for businesses with an OCM issued license for lower-potency hemp
edible retailer, which is exempt from City registration requirements under this
Section 396, applications shall be submitted on the forms provided by the City
Clerk, and all applicants shall comply with the process below. All applications
shall be considered and approved or denied by the City Council. See Minnesota
Statute_342.22.
396.4. – Cap on Registrations.
The City will not issue more than one (1) cannabis retail registration per
12,500 residents, as determined by the most recent state demographer’s
estimate. This cap on registrations does not apply to a medical cannabis
combination business with a retail endorsement or a lower-potency hemp edible
retailer. See Minnesota_Statute_342.13,_Local_Control.
396.5. – Application Process and Fees (Minnesota_Statute_342.11).
   1.   All applicants must:
      (a)   Complete the registration form provided by the City;
      (b)   Pay the non-refundable registration fee for each type of retail
license for which the business is applying; and
      (c)   Provide a copy of all State Licenses issued by OCM.
   2.   No registration shall be issued under this chapter until the
appropriate fees are paid in full. The fee for a registration under this
chapter shall be set by ordinance.
   3.   All fees are nonrefundable and shall not be pro-rated.
   4.   At the time of the initial registration, the initial registration fee
and the renewal fee shall be due and payable.
   5.   For the first renewal of the registration, no additional registration
fee shall be required. Beginning with the second renewal, and each subsequent
renewal thereafter, the renewal registration fee shall be paid at the time of
renewal.
396.6. – Approval.
The City Council must take action on each new and renewal registration
application within a reasonable time following receipt of the recommendation
from City staff regarding the application. At the City Council meeting at which
the application is considered, the registration will be approved by the City
Council if the applicant:
   (a)   Is in compliance with this chapter and all zoning requirements;
   (b)   Has paid the registration fee;
   (c)   Is current on all property taxes and assessments;
   (d)   Has a State License Issued by OCM for the retail business being
negotiated; and
   (e)   Is current on payment for all other City fees and charges.
396.7. – Exceptions – Cannabis Event Organizer (Minnesota Statutes 342.39 and
342.40).
No registration shall be required for an Event Organizer licensed by OCM who
intends to conduct a Cannabis Event within the City; however, each Cannabis
Event must be approved by the City Council through a Cannabis Event permit. The
Event Organizer shall submit an application as provided by the City Clerk. The
cannabis event permit application shall include:
   (a)   A copy of the Event Organizer’s license by OCM or a copy of the
license application submitted to OCM;
   (b)   Payment of the permit fee;
   (c)   A copy of a Certificate of Insurance from an insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota;
   (d)   The location, including address, Property Identification Numbers and
ownership information of the property upon which the Cannabis Event is proposed
to take place and whether the activity is proposed indoors or outdoors,
including a diagram of the physical layout of the event which includes
consumption areas, and retail sales areas.
   (e)   The dates and number of days requested for the Cannabis Event;
   (f)   If the Cannabis Event is part of a larger event, signed consent from
the organization sponsoring the larger event;
   (g)   A security plan that has been approved by Chief Law Enforcement
Agency, including the name of the contracted licensed security personnel that
complies with Minn. Stat. Section 342.40 Subd. 3;
   (h)   If on-site consumption is proposed, a detailed plan for complying with
Minn. Stat. Section 342.40 Subd. 8 regarding such activity. The City Council
may approve or deny on-site consumption of cannabis as part of the permit in
its sole discretion, based on the circumstances of the specific cannabis event
requested;
   (i)   The printed names and signatures of the Event Organizer and the
property owner.
No Cannabis Event will be permitted on public property or in a public park. The
Council may add reasonable conditions to the permit, may reduce the number of
days for the event, prohibit outdoor activity and/or restrict or prohibit on-
site consumption, in order to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
396.8. – Renewal Process.
   (a)   Registration renewals are issued in the same manner and subject to the
same conditions as a new registration application. A cannabis retail business
shall apply to renew its registration on a form established by the City.
   (b)   Before renewing a registration, the City may enter and inspect the
cannabis business to ensure that the cannabis business is in compliance with
this chapter, the zoning ordinance, and state laws.
396.9. – Registration Term.
The registration term begins on January 1 and ends on December 31.
396.10. – Premises Covered by Registration.
Unless otherwise authorized by this Code, the registration for the business is
only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved
registration application.
396.11. – No transfer or Assignment of Registration or Location.
A registered business shall not transfer or assign a registration to another
person or entity or move to a different location without completing a new
application and paying the appropriate fees.
396.12. – Prohibited Acts.
The owner or operator of a registered business is responsible for the conduct
of their place of business and the conditions of order in it. The act of an
employee of the premises is deemed the act of the owner or operator as well,
and the owner or operator is responsible for all penalties provided by this
chapter equally with the employee.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, purchase, obtain or
otherwise provide any cannabis or lower-potency hemp edible product to any
person under the age of twenty-one (21), including cannabinoids derived from
hemp.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
to possess any cannabis or lower-potency hemp edible product. This chapter
shall not apply to persons under the age of twenty-one (21) lawfully involved
in a compliance check, including cannabinoids derived from hemp.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
to use or consume any cannabis or lower-potency hemp edible product unless it
is legally authorized medical cannabis.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
to attempt to disguise the person’s true age by the use of a false form of
identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one in
which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with, to represent an
age older than the actual age of the person, in order to purchase any cannabis
or lower-potency hemp edible product.
   (e)   No cannabis or lower-potency hemp edible product may be sold to an
obviously intoxicated person or a person under the influence of a controlled
substance.
   (f)   No one under the age of twenty-one (21) shall sell cannabis or lower-
potency hemp edibles.
   (g)   Cannabis and lower-potency hemp edibles cannot be sold in vending
machines, through a drive-through window or as part of a home occupation.
   (h)   On-site consumption is prohibited at lower-potency hemp edible retail
and cannabis retail businesses, except for lower-potency hemp products that are
consumed as a beverage at an on-sale liquor establishment.
   (i)   It shall be unlawful to sell, purchase, obtain, or otherwise provide
products with Delta-10 THC unless it is derived from industrial hemp and
contains not more than 0.3 percent THC.
   (j)   No retail cannabis or lower-potency hemp edible product shall be
visible from the exterior of the building.
396.13. – Compliance Checks and Inspections.
   (a)   Inspections. All registered business premises must be open to
inspection by the local law enforcement or other authorized City official
during regular business hours.
   (b)   Compliance Checks. From time to time, but at least once per year, the
City will conduct compliance checks on registered retail businesses by engaging
persons between the ages of sixteen (16) and twenty-one (21) years, to enter
the premises to attempt to purchase cannabis products. Persons used for
compliance checks are not guilty of the unlawful purchase or attempted
purchase, nor the unlawful possession of cannabis products when the items are
obtained or attempted to be obtained as a part of the compliance check. No
person used in compliance checks may attempt to use a false identification
misrepresenting the person’s age, and all persons lawfully engaged in a
compliance check may answer all questions about the person’s age and shall
produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked.
Nothing in this section prohibits compliance checks authorized by State or
Federal laws for educational, research or training purposes, or required for
the enforcement of a particular State or Federal law.
396.14. – Violations.
   (a)   Civil Penalties. If the City determines that a registered business
made a sale to a customer or patient without a valid retail registration, the
City may impose a civil penalty for each violation as follows:
      First violation       $1,000
      Second violation   $2,000
      Third violation   $2,000
      Fourth violation   $2,000 and revocation of City registration
(b)   Suspension. If the City determines that a business with a registration is
not operating in compliance with the City Code or zoning ordinance, or that the
operation of the business poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of
the public, the City, through the Chief Law Enforcement officer, may
immediately suspend the registration for up to thirty (30) days. The City will
notify the business and the OCM in writing of the suspension, stating the
grounds for the suspension. The OCM will investigate and may extend the period
of suspension, revoke the registration, or order the reinstatement of the
registration, or take any other action described in Minnesota Statutes Section
342.19 or 342.21
Chapter 4 - Animals and Pets
Section 400 - General Provisions
(revised 9/27/21)
400.01   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall be used in the application and
interpretation of the provisions of this chapter:
      ∙   Animal. Any non-human mammal, reptile, amphibian, or bird.
      ∙   Animal Control Officer. An individual or employee of a business
retained by the City for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter;
or a member of the City's law enforcement agency.
      ∙   Animal, Domestic. Animals kept within the home as pets, such as fish,
dogs, cats, household bird, and similar animals.
      ∙   Animal, Non-Domestic. Animals which are kept outside the home for
purposes of food or pleasure such as cattle, hogs, horses, bees, sheep, goats,
chickens, birds, such as falcons and pigeons, and similar animals.
      ∙   Animal, Wild. Any animal which is of a species not usually
domesticated and of a species which, due to size, wild nature or other
characteristics, is dangerous to humans and would ordinarily be confined in a
zoo or found in the wild. The term includes but is not limited to:
         ∙   Animals and birds, the keeping of which is licensed by the state
or federal government, such as wolves, raptors, and pheasants.
         ∙   Eagles, ocelots, jaguars, cougars, weasels, wild ferrets, badgers,
monkeys, chimpanzee, deer, and bison.
         ∙   Crossbreeds of wild animals and domesticated animals such as the
cross between dogs and coyotes and dogs and wolves.
         ∙   Any large cat of the family Felidae, such as lions, tigers,
jaguars, leopards, cougars and ocelots, except commonly accepted domesticated
house cats.
         ∙   Any member of the family Canidae, such as wolves, coyotes,
dingoes, and jackals, except domesticated dogs.
         ∙   Any poisonous snake such as a rattlesnake, coral snake, water
moccasin, puff adder, or cobra.
         ∙   Any snake or reptile which by its size, vicious nature or other
characteristic is dangerous to human beings.
         ∙   Any skunk, raccoon, or fox whether captured in the wild,
domestically raised, descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or
not vaccinated against rabies.
         ∙   Any bear, ape, gorilla, monkey, or badger.
         ∙   Any other animal or reptile which is commonly considered wild.
      ∙   At Large. An unattended animal on public property; or an unattended
animal on private property without the consent of the property owner.
      ∙   Cat. Any domesticated feline animal, male or female, whole or
neutered.
      ∙   Dangerous Dog. Any dog that has committed any of the acts set forth
below:
         ∙   Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human
being on public or private property;
         ∙   Killed a domestic animal without provocation; or
         ∙   A potentially dangerous dog which aggressively bites, attacks, or
endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      ∙   Coop. An accessory structure for the keeping or housing of chickens
permitted by the ordinance.
      ∙   Dog. Any canine animal, male or female, whole or neutered.
      ∙   Enclosure. Any structure, except a dwelling, designed to securely
enclose and prevent an animal from escaping therefrom.
      ∙   Proper Enclosure. Proper Enclosure means securely confined indoors or
in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the
animal from escaping and providing protection from the elements for the animal.
A Proper Enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house,
garage or other structure that would allow the animal to exit of its volition,
or any house or structure in which windows are open or in which door or window
screens are the only obstacles that prevent the dog from exiting.
      ∙   Exercise yard. Is a larger fenced area adjacent to chicken coop and
pen that provides space for exercise and foraging for the birds when
supervised.
      ∙   Hen. Is a female chicken.
      ∙   Owner. Any person, firm, or corporation, organization or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in or having custody or
control of an animal.
      ∙   Pen. A fully enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the
chickens can roam unsupervised.
      ∙   Potentially Dangerous Dog. Any dog that has committed any of the acts
set forth below:
         ∙   When unprovoked, bites a human or domestic animal;
         ∙   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets,
sidewalks or any other public property in an apparent attitude of attack; or
         ∙   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
      ∙   Restrained. On a leash of not more than six (6) feet in length or on
a leash which can be retracted to a length of six (6) feet or less, and in the
custody of a person of sufficient age to adequately control the animal; in a
vehicle; or confined to the owner's property by enclosure or fencing.
      ∙   Rooster. Is a male chicken.
      ∙   Substantial Bodily Harm. Bodily injury which involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or which causes a temporary but substantial loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or which causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
Section 410 - Licenses
410.01   License Required.
(revised 9/27/21)
   The following animal licenses shall be required within the City of Arden
Hills.
   Subd. 1   Dog/Cat Licenses. All dogs and cats within the City of Arden
Hills, except as hereinafter provided, shall be licensed.
      A.   Application. Within thirty (30) days after acquiring possession of a
dog or cat which has not been licensed by the City of Arden Hills, the owner of
the dog or cat shall make application for a dog or cat license. The application
shall be on forms provided by the City of Arden Hills.
      B.   Vaccination. It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to keep
or maintain any dog or cat older than six (6) months of age unless it shall
have been vaccinated with an anti-rabies vaccine certified to be effective by a
licensed veterinarian. No license renewal shall be issued except upon
compliance with this section.
      C.   License Fee. The license fee for each dog or cat must be submitted
with the application. The fee will be established by City Council Resolution.
      D.   Duration of License. A license shall be issued for a period of time
not to exceed the expiration date of the rabies vaccination. No dog or cat
license shall be renewed without proof of vaccination.
      E.   Issuance of License. Upon completion of the application form,
receipt of the license fee and receipt of the proof of vaccination, the City
Administrator shall cause a dog or cat license to be issued to the applicant
for a particular dog or cat.
      F.   Receipt and Tags. The City of Arden Hills shall issue a license fee
receipt to the applicant along with a metallic dog or cat license tag. The
applicant shall permanently affix the tag by a metal fastening device to the
collar of the licensed animal in a manner that allows the tag to be easily
observed. If a tag is lost, a duplicate may be issued by the City of Arden
Hills upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the initial license fee
and upon payment of an additional fee for each duplicate tag.
      G.   Change of Address. An applicant who has obtained a dog or cat
license shall notify the City of the applicant's address changes within the
corporate limits of the City within ten (10) days of any address change.
      H.   Counterfeit Tags. No person shall counterfeit or attempt to
counterfeit dog or cat license tags.
      I.   Transfer of Tags. No person shall transfer a dog or cat tag from one
dog or cat to another.
      J.   Exceptions. The following dogs and cats are not required to be
licensed:
         1.   Dogs and cats less than six (6) months of age.
         2.   Dogs and cats whose owners are temporary visitors within the City
for thirty (30) days or less.
         3.   Dogs and cats which are brought into the City for appearance in
an animal show.
         4.   Dogs being used by law enforcement officers
   Subd. 2   Wild Animal Licenses.
      A.   General Prohibition. All wild animals except the following are
prohibited within the City of Arden Hills:
         1.   Wild animals brought into the City for entertainment, exhibition
or show purposes by persons keeping wild animals for a public zoo.
         2.   Wild animals which are part of a permanent display sponsored by a
bona fide research institution, a veterinary hospital, public zoo or other
institution.
         3.   Nonpoisonous snakes, birds kept indoors, hamsters, mice, rabbits,
gerbils, white rats, guinea pigs, chinchillas, or lizards and similar small
animals capable of being kept in cages continuously.
         4.   Monkeys trained as personal helpers and kept by handicapped
persons.
         5.   Raptors owned by licensed Falconers holding valid state and
federal Falconry permits so long as the conditions of such permits are being
satisfied.
         6.   Wild animals and birds that are part of the natural habitat and
environment.
      B.   License Application. Applications for a Wild Animal License shall be
submitted on forms provided by the City along with a Certificate of Insurance
which indicates that applicant has $200,000 of liability coverage on the Wild
Animal and which includes an endorsement indicating that the liability coverage
will not be cancelled without twenty (20) days written notice to the City of
Arden Hills.
      C.   Investigation. The Animal Control Officer shall review the
application, conduct such investigation as the Animal Control Officer deems
necessary, and shall prepare a written recommendation regarding the issuance of
a Wild Animal License. The City Administrator shall within ten (10) days mail a
notice to all property owners within 350 feet of the site on which the Wild
Animal will be kept. The notice shall indicate that the City has received an
application for a Wild Animal License and shall request comments from such
property owners.
      D.   Review. The City Council shall review the application, the Animal
Control Officer's recommendations, and the comments from property owners. The
City Council may issue a Wild Animal License if it determines that the
application is in compliance with the City's regulations. The City Council may
attach any reasonable conditions to the issuance of a license as it determines
to be necessary in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of Arden
Hills residents.
      E.   Existing Wild Animals. Anyone keeping a Wild Animal in Arden Hills
at the time of the adoption of this regulation shall have ninety (90) days in
which to comply with the provisions of this regulation or otherwise remove the
Wild Animal from the City. Extensions beyond ninety (90) days may be granted by
the City Council for good cause but in no case shall such extension permanently
exempt a person from the requirements of this regulation.
      F.   Wild Animal Restrictions.
         1.   Confinement. No person owning or harboring or having the care or
custody of a wild animal shall suffer or permit such animal to go unconfined on
the premises of such person. A wild animal is "unconfined" as the term is used
in this section if such animal is not securely confined indoors or confined in
a secure enclosure suitably sized for the wild animal is confined therein. An
"enclosure" is secure within the meaning of this section if it is constructed
of heave gauge mesh steel, or other suitable material; consists of a top and
sides, with the bottom of such sides fastened along their perimeter to a slab
floor of concrete or other suitable material; where no slab floor is provided,
the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one foot; all access
points of the enclosure must be locked when the animal is confined therein. The
Animal control officer may seize a wild animal that has been declared dangerous
that is unconfined.
         2.   Muzzling. No person owning or harboring, or having the care of a
wild animal shall suffer or permit such animal to go beyond the premises of
such person unless such animal is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain
not exceeding three (3) feet in length, and having a tensile strength
sufficient to restrain the animal. Wild animals which are actively
participating in recognized local, regional or national trials, training or
other such sponsored competition, need not to be muzzled while being
transported to or from during such competitions.
         3.   Summary Destruction. Any person harboring or owning a wild animal
that is found to be in violation of the City's Animal Control Regulations may
be summarily destroyed.
   Subd. 3   Chickens License. All chickens within the City of Arden Hills,
except as hereinafter provided, shall be licensed.
   A.   Application. Within thirty (30) days after acquiring possession of a
chicken which has not been licensed by the City of Arden Hills, the owner of
the chicken(s) shall make application for a chickens license. The application
shall be on forms provided by the City of Arden Hills. If the Applicant is a
renter, the Property Owner signature shall be required on the license
application form.
   B.   Neighbor Notification. The Applicant shall be responsible for providing
written notification to the neighbors immediately adjacent to the property of
their intent to keep chickens. As part of the application review, the
prospective license holder shall certify that they have provided the required
written notification of their intent to keep chickens.
   C.   License Fee. The license fee must be submitted with the application.
The fee will be established by City Council Resolution.
   D.   Duration of License. A two year license shall be issued.
   E.   Issuance of License. Upon completion of the application form and
receipt of the license fee, the City Administrator shall cause a chicken
license to be issued to the applicant subject to:
      (1)   No more than six (6) hens shall be housed or kept on any one (1)
residential lot with the issuance of a City license.
      (2)   Dead chickens must be disposed of according to the Minnesota Board
of Animal Health rules which require chicken carcasses to be disposed of as
soon as possible after death, usually within forty-eight (48) to seventy-two
(72) hours. Legal forms of chicken carcass disposal include burial, off-site
incineration and/or rendering.
      (3)   Prior to issuance of a license, the prospective license holder
certifies as part of the application review that they have read “Keeping of
Chickens Informational Handout.”
   F.   The following are prohibited within the City of Arden Hills for
chickens:
      (1)   Roosters are prohibited.
      (2)   No breeding of chickens is allowed.
      (3)   Slaughtering of chickens on the property is prohibited.
(Updated 9/22/25)
Section 420 - Regulations
420.01   Regulations.
   Subd. 1   Confinement of Animals. Except as herein provided, the owner of an
animal within the City of Arden Hills shall cause such animal to be confined to
the individual's property by adequate fencing, leash, enclosure, or an approved
pet containment system.
   Subd. 2   Animals in Heat. The owner of a female dog or cat in heat shall
confine such animal to the owner's property or any veterinary hospital/clinic,
in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with other
animals, except for intentional breeding purposes.
   Subd. 3   Animals in Public Places. Except in designated off leash areas,
the owner of an animal within the City of Arden Hills shall cause such animal
to be restrained at all times while in a public place including but not limited
to school properties, trails, parks, open space areas, and streets.
   Subd. 4   Nuisance. The owner of an animal within the City of Arden Hills
shall prevent the animal from becoming a nuisance by barking, baying, crying,
or howling in any manner for at least five (5) continuous minutes or
intermittently for unreasonable lengths of time.
   Subd. 5   Cleaning Up Litter:
      A.   The owner of an animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any
feces of the animal and disposing of such feces in a sanitary manner.
      B.   The owner of an animal shall not permit such animal to be on public
property or the private property of another without having in the owner's
immediate possession, a device for the removal of feces and a proper receptacle
located on the property of such animal owner.
      C.   The owner of an animal shall remove feces left by such animal on
public property or the private property of another to a proper receptacle
located on property of the animal owner.
   Subd. 6   Number of Dogs/Cats. No person shall keep more than three (3) dogs
or three (3) cats on residentially zoned property. The total number of combined
licensed animals per residentially zoned property shall not exceed four (4). Up
to four (4) domestic animals are permitted in any dwelling unit, but without a
residential dog kennel license not more than two (2) may be dogs. Up to three
(3) dogs are allowed with a residential dog kennel license. Dog enclosures may
be located only in a rear yard in all zoning districts. (revised 2/25/19)
   Subd. 7   Warning Sign. A person who uses a dog for security purposes within
the City of Arden Hills shall post a warning notice at the entrance of the
premises.
   Subd. 8   Maintenance. The owner of an animal within the City of Arden Hills
shall provide said animal with sufficient, wholesome food and water; proper
shelter and protection from weather; veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering; and with humane care and treatment.
   Subd. 9   Pet Containment System. Dog owners who wish to use a pet
containment system to confine the dog shall register the pet containment with
the City Administrator. The registration form shall include the name of the dog
owner; the property address; the identification of the dog or dogs which will
be confined by the pet containment system; a description of the particular pet
containment system; and other information as required by the City
Administrator. The owner of the animal shall place an appropriate sign on the
property indicating the existence of a pet containment system. The sign shall
not be placed within the publicly dedicated right of way. Failure to register a
pet containment system is a violation of this Section. The first time a dog
escapes from a pet containment system, the City Administrator shall send a
written warning to the dog owner. Thereafter, if a dog escapes from a pet
containment system, the dog owner shall construct an enclosure to confine the
dog.
   Subd. 10   Abuse. No person shall own or harbor any animal for the purpose
of fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait or use any animal for the purpose
of causing or encouraging said animal to unprovoked attacks upon human beings
or domestic animals.
420.02   Dangerous Dogs.
   The provisions of Minnesota Statutes Sections 347.50 through and including
347.56 are hereby adopted as the potentially dangerous and dangerous dog
regulations for the City of Arden Hills. Every provision contained in the
foregoing Minnesota Statutes is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter
by reference as if fully set forth herein. Where a conflict exists between the
provisions of the City Code and the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Sections
347.50 through and including 347.56, the latter provisions shall apply.
   Subd. 1   Process. A City Animal Control Officer of other law enforcement
official shall be responsible for determining whether a dog is a potentially
dangerous dog or dangerous dog.
   Subd. 2   Notice. Upon a determination by the Animal Control Officer or
other law enforcement officials that a dog is a potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog, the City shall provide the owner with notice of the
determination by personally serving the owner or a person of suitable age at
the residence of such owner. The notice shall describe the dog deemed to be a
potentially dangerous or dangerous dog; shall identify the officer making the
determination; and shall specify the facts relied upon by the officer in making
the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog determination. If the officer
determines that the dog is a potentially dangerous or a dangerous dog, the
notice shall also inform the owner of the owner's rights to appeal the
determination.
   Subd. 3   Appeal. An owner may appeal a determination that a dog is a
potentially dangerous or dangerous dog by filing a written notice for a hearing
to the City Administrator within ten (10) days of the owner's receipt of the
notice. If an owner files a timely appeal, a hearing shall be held within
thirty (30) days after the City's receipt of the appeal. The City Administrator
shall assign a hearing examiner to hear the appeal. The hearing examiner may be
a City employee, provided the employee has not been involved in determining if
the dog was potentially dangerous or dangerous. During the hearing the
Minnesota rules of evidence do not need to be strictly followed and the records
of the Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer shall be considered
without further foundation. After considering all of the evidence submitted,
the hearing examiner shall make written findings of fact and shall determine
whether the dog is a potentially dangerous or a dangerous dog. The findings and
conclusions shall be made within ten (10) working days after the hearing and
shall be thereafter personally served upon the owner or a person of suitable
age at the residence of such owner. The decision of the hearing examiner shall
be the final decision of the City. If a timely appeal is not filed, the owner
of a dangerous dog must comply with the requirements set forth in this section
and Minnesota Statutes Sections 347.50 through and including 347.56.
   Subd. 4   Dangerous Dog Restrictions.
      A.   Registration Required. No person may own a dangerous dog in the City
of Arden Hills unless the dog is registered as provided in this section. The
Animal Control Officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner
of the dangerous dog if the owner presents the following information:
         1.   Proper Enclosure. A Proper Enclosure exists for the dangerous dog
and there is a posting on the premises with a clearly visible warning sign,
including a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous dog on
the property.
         2.   Bond/Insurance. A surety bond issued by a surety company
authorizing to conduct business in the State of Minnesota in a form acceptable
to the Animal Control Officer in the sum of at least $300,000.00, payable to
any person injured by the dangerous dog, or a policy of liability insurance
issued by an insurance company authorized to conduct business in the State of
Minnesota in the amount of at least $300,000.00, insuring the owner for any
personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. (revised 5/28/13)
         3.   Annual Fee. The owner has paid an annual fee as determined by
City Council Ordinance, in addition to any regular dog licensing fees, to
obtain a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog under this section.
         4.   Microchip. The owner has had a microchip identification implanted
in the dangerous dog.
      B.   Annual Renewal. The owner of a dangerous dog must renew the
registration of the dog annually until the dog is deceased. If the dog is
removed from the City of Arden Hills, it must be registered as a dangerous dog
in its new jurisdiction.
      C.   Warning Symbol. If a certificate of registration is issued to the
owner of a dangerous dog, the owner must post a warning symbol to inform
children that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The design of the
warning symbol must have been approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public
Safety.
      D.   Tag. The dangerous dog must have a standardized, easily identifiable
tag identifying the dog as dangerous and containing the Uniform Dangerous Dog
symbol, affixed to the dog's collar at all times.
      E.   Sterilization. The Animal Control Officer may require a dangerous
dog to be sterilized at the owner's expense.
      F.   Death/Transfer from City. The owner of any dangerous dog must notify
the Animal Control Officer in writing of the death of the dog; its transfer to
a residence outside of the City of Arden Hills or its transfer within the City
of Arden Hills within thirty (30) days of the death of transfer.
      G.   Notice to Landlord. The owner of a dangerous dog who rents property
from another where the dog will reside must disclose to the property owner,
prior to entering into the lease agreement and at the time of any lease renewal
that the person owns a dangerous dog that will reside at the property.
      H.   Sale. The owner of a dangerous dog must notify the purchaser that
the Animal Control Officer has identified the dog as a dangerous dog. The
seller must also notify the Animal Control Officer in writing of the sale and
provide the Animal Control Officer with the new owner's name, address and
telephone number.
      I.   Photograph. The owner or custodian of any dangerous dog shall make
the dog available to be photographed for identification by the Animal Control
Officer at a time and place specified by the Animal Control Officer.
      J.   Muzzling. If the dog is outside the Proper Enclosure, the dog must
be muzzled and restrained by substantial chain or leash and be under the
physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle must be made in a manner
that will prevent the dog from biting any person or animal but that will not
cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
      K.   Custody Pending Determination. The Animal Control Officer may retain
custody of any dog declared dangerous until the dog is duly and properly
registered as required herein.
420.03   Enforcement.
   The provisions of Sections 400.01 through 400.13 shall be enforced by the
Animal Control Officer or the City's law enforcement contractor. No person
shall, in any manner, interfere with or hinder an Animal Control Officer or the
City's law enforcement contractor in the discharge of their duties.
420.04   Exemptions. The following provisions of this Chapter shall not apply
in the following circumstances:
   Subd. 1   Unless specified herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall not
apply to animals used or confined at hospitals, clinics, or businesses operated
by licensed veterinarians.
   Subd. 2   Regulations relating to vaccination requirements shall not apply
to any animal belonging to a nonresident of the City and kept within the City
for no longer than thirty (30) days, provided all such animals shall, at all
times while in the City, be restrained by the owner on the property which the
owner is occupying within the City of Arden Hills.
   Subd. 3   Regulations relating to dangerous animals and potentially
dangerous animals shall not apply to dogs under the control of a law
enforcement officer.
420.05    Seizure and Removal of Animals.
   Subject to the provisions of this section, animals found in violation of
this chapter may be seized by the Animal Control Officer, impounded in a
designated animal shelter, and confined therein in a humane manner for a period
of not less than five (5) business days or until claimed by the animal's owner,
whichever occurs first.
   Subd. 1   Animal Control Officers shall not enter the private dwelling of an
individual for purposes of seizing animals or otherwise enforcing the
provisions of this Chapter without first obtaining a search warrant. However,
an Animal Control Officer is empowered to enter upon a property adjacent to a
private dwelling for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter.
   Subd. 2   Before seizing an animal on private property, the Animal Control
Officer shall make a reasonable attempt, taking into consideration the time of
day and nature of the violation, to notify the owner that the animal is being
seized because it was observed by the Animal Control Officer to be in violation
of the provisions of this Chapter.
   Subd. 3   When an animal is seized from the private property of its owner
and the Animal Control Officer has been unable to notify the owner of the
reason for seizing animal, the Animal Control Officer shall leave a written
notice affixed to the dwelling unit, in a conspicuous manner, which includes
the following information:
      A.   A description of the animal seized.
      B.   Purpose for seizure of the animal.
      C.   The time, place and circumstances under which the animal was seized.
      D.   The location, address, telephone number, and contact person where
the animal will be impounded.
      E.   A statement indicating that the person claiming the animal will be
required to pay for the fees and costs associated with impoundment of the
animal.
      F.   A statement indicating that failure to claim the animal within five
business days will result in the disposition of the animal.
   Subd. 4   Immediately upon impounding animals, reasonable efforts shall be
made to notify the owner and inform the owner of the animal's confinement and
the procedures for release of the animal to the owner.
   Subd. 5   An animal which is not redeemed within five (5) business days
after impoundment may be disposed of in any manner provided by law. Any animal
which is not claimed by the owner or sold, shall be euthanized and disposed of
in a sanitary manner by the Animal Control Officer.
   Subd. 6   The title of all animals seized and held at the animal shelter may
be transferred to the Humane Society after the legal detention period has
expired and the animals have not been claimed by their owners.
   Subd. 7   Animals taken into custody pursuant to the provisions of Minn.
Stat. 343.22 or 343.29 shall be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of Minn.
Stat. 343.235.
420.06   Impoundment Fees.
   Any animal impounded hereunder may be reclaimed by the owner of such animal
within five (5) business days after such impoundment. Before the owner shall be
permitted to recover possession of the animal, the owner shall pay the Animal
Control Officer all required fees and costs of impoundment.
420.07   Rabies Control.
   Subd. 1   The Minnesota Health Laws and Regulations are hereby adopted in
cases of rabid animals which have bitten any person or animals suspected of
being rabid.
   Subd. 2   It shall be the duty of every physician to report to the City the
names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals together
with other information helpful in rabies control.
   Subd. 3   It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to
the City his diagnosis of any animal observed by him as a rabies suspect.
   Subd. 4   Whenever the prevalence of rabies or hydrophobia renders such
action necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the Mayor
shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or in possession of a
dog to confine it securely to the premises unless it is muzzled so that it
cannot bite. No person shall violate this proclamation.
420.08   Biting Animals To Be Quarantined.
   Whenever an animal has bitten a person, or whenever a known or suspected
rabid animal is picked up by the Animal Control Officer or law enforcement
officer, such animal shall be confined for a minimum of ten (10) days as
follows:
   Subd. 1   Upon proof of a current rabies vaccination, the owner of the
animal may, with the consent of the Animal Control Officer, quarantine the
animal at the owner's residence provided that such animal shall not be
permitted to come in contact with other animals or persons and, provided
further that the animal shall be muzzled and on a leash not to exceed four (4)
feet, and in control of a competent person when taken from the place of
confinement for sanitation purposes.
   Subd. 2   If no proof of a current rabies vaccination is provided, or if the
Animal Control Officer does not consent to confinement of the animal to the
owner's residence, the animal shall be quarantined at the animal shelter or a
licensed veterinary clinic at the expense of the owner.
   Subd. 3   A quarantined animal shall not be removed from the place of
confinement without the written permission of the Animal Control Officer.
   Subd. 4   A quarantined animal shall be confined in an enclosure constructed
of materials suitable to prevent the animal from escaping. All openings to the
enclosure shall be locked at all times and the animal shall not be removed from
the enclosure unless the animal is muzzled on a leash not exceeding four (4)
feet in length and in control of a competent person.
420.09   Summary Destruction.
   Whenever an Animal Control Officer has reasonable cause to believe that a
particular animal represents a clear and immediate danger to the residents of
the City of Arden Hills, the Animal Control Officer, after making reasonable
attempts to impound such animal, may summarily destroy the animal.
420.10   Intentional Feeding of Wild Animals
   Subd. 1   Feeding Prohibited. No person shall feed wild animals or small
mammals within the City. Intentional feeding shall mean the provision of any
grain, fruit, vegetables, nuts, salt licks, or any other food that attracts
wild animals. Living food sources such as trees and other live vegetation shall
not be considered food for wild animals.
   Subd. 2   Feeding Wild Birds. Bird feed may be placed in bird feeding
devices and structures solely for the purpose of attracting and feeding wild
birds. Bird feeding devices and structures should be placed at a sufficient
height or designed to prevent access by wild animals.
   Subd. 3   Exception. This shall not apply to the employees or agents of the
City, County, State, and the Federal government or veterinarians who in the
course of their official duties have wild animals in their custody or under
their management.
Chapter 5 - Alcoholic Beverages
Section 500 - General Provisions
(revised: 10/26/09)
500.1   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
      ∙   3.2% Malt Liquor. Malt liquor containing not less than 1/2 of 1%
alcohol by volume, nor more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
      ∙   Alcoholic Beverage. Any beverage containing more than ½ of 1% alcohol
by volume.
      ∙   Brewer. A person who manufactures malt liquor for sale and/or
distribution. (added 10/29/12)
      ∙   Brewpub. A restaurant that also has a facility that manufactures and
distributes intoxicating malt liquor or wine in total quantity not to exceed
250,000 barrels a year on the premises. (added 3/11/13)
      ∙   Brewer Taproom. A facility on the premises of and accessory to a
licensed brewery intended for the on-sale consumption and limited off-sale of
beer produced on site by the brewer as authorized by Minnesota statutes section
340A.301, subdivision 6b. (added 10/29/12)
      ∙   Club. An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the
State of Minnesota for civil, fraternal, social or business purposes, for
intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, and which has been in
existence in the City for fifteen (15) years; or a congressionally chartered
veterans' organization which has been in existence in the City for ten (10)
years; and are organizations that:
         ∙   Have more than 30 members;
         ∙   Have owned or rented a building, or space in a building, for more
than one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its
members;
         ∙   Are directed by a board of directors, executive committee or other
similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose;
         ∙   Do not distribute profits to officers, agents, employees or
members or their guests, from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a
reasonable salary or wage fixed and voted each year by the governing body; and
         ∙   Sell alcoholic beverages only to members and to their guests.
      ∙   Distilled Spirits. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all
dilutions and mixtures thereof, for non industrial use.
      ∙   Event Center. An establishment which is rented by individuals or
groups to host scheduled private events including but not limited to weddings,
cultural celebrations, corporate functions, and banquets. Such use may or may
not include 1) kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food; 2)
the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption only during
scheduled events and not open to the general public; and 3) outdoor gardens,
patios or outdoor gathering areas. (added 9/23/24)
      ∙   Exclusive Liquor Store. An establishment used exclusively for the
sale of alcoholic beverages; tobacco products; ice; beverages, either liquid or
powder, specifically designated for mixing with intoxicating liquor; soft
drinks; liqueur-filled candies; food products that contain more than ½ of 1%
alcohol by volume; cork extraction devices, books and videos on the use of
alcoholic beverages; magazines and other publications published primarily for
the information and education on alcoholic beverages; and home brewing
equipment.
      ∙   Hotel. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly
furnished to transients and which has:
         ∙   dining room serving the general public at tables and having
facilities for seating at least thirty (30) guests at one time; and
         ∙   guest rooms for at least ten (10) guests.
      ∙   Intoxicating Liquor. Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous,
vinous, and malt beverages containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight.
      ∙   Licensed Premises. The compact and contiguous space described in the
approved license application.
      ∙   Microbrewery. A facility that manufactures and distributes
intoxicating malt liquor or wine in total quantity not to exceed 250,000
barrels a year. A microbrewery may have space dedicated as a taproom to
distribute on-sale and off-sale alcohol in compliance with MN State Statute
340A.301, subd. 6b. (added 3/11/13)
      ∙   Microdistillery. A facility that manufactures and distributes
premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons
in a calendar year. (added 3/11/13)
      ∙   Off-Sale. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the licensed premises only.
      ∙   On-Sale. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
licensed premises only.
      ∙   Package. A corked or sealed container of alcoholic beverages as
provided by the manufacturer or distiller.
      ∙   Person. An individual, a body politic or corporate, a partnership,
and other unincorporated associations.
      ∙   Restaurant. An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control
of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises and served at tables to the general public, and having a minimum
seating capacity for thirty (30) guests.
      ∙   Sale. To directly, or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device,
sell, barter, keep for sale, charge for possession, or otherwise dispose of
alcoholic beverages as part of a commercial transaction.
      ∙   Wine. The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of
grapes, including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from
condensed must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, red
grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry and
sake, in each instance containing not less than ½ of 1%, nor more than 24%
alcohol by volume for non-industrial use. Wine does not include distilled
sprits.
500.2   License Required.
   No person may sell alcoholic beverages without having obtained the
appropriate alcoholic beverage license.
500.3   Types of Licenses.
   The following types of alcoholic beverage licenses may be issued in the City
of Arden Hills:
      ∙   Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License. An Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor
License shall only be issued to exclusive liquor stores.
      ∙   On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License. On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor
Licenses shall only be issued to hotels, restaurants, clubs, or exclusive
liquor stores.
         o   A restaurant operating within an Event Center may apply for an On-
Sale Intoxicating Liquor License that will be issued to the restaurant, with
liquor service within the Event Center space allowed only during regular
operating business hours of the restaurant as the licensee. (added 9/23/24)
         o   An Event Center may utilize a State licensed caterer license for
liquor service during an event in lieu of obtaining an On-Sale Intoxicating
Liquor License through an on-site restaurant. (added 9/23/24)
      ∙   Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License. A Temporary On-Sale
Intoxicating Liquor License shall be issued only to a micro distillery, small
brewer, club or a charitable, religious, or other non profit organization that
has been in existence for three (3) years; or a political committee registered
under M.S. 10A.14; or a state university or college; in connection with a
social event sponsored by the licensee within the City. The Temporary On-Sale
Intoxicating Liquor License may not authorize the sale for more than four (4)
consecutive days and may not authorize sales on premises other than the
premises that the licensee owns or occupies within the City. (Revised 12/12/
2022)
      ∙   On-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor License. On-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor Licenses
shall only be issued to restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and
establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor for
consumption only on the premises.
      ∙   Off-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor License. Off-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor Licenses
shall permit the sale of 3.2% malt liquor in the original package for
consumption only off of the premises.
      ∙   Temporary On-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor Licenses. A Temporary On-Sale 3.2%
Malt Liquor License shall only be issued to a micro distillery, small brewer,
or charitable, religious and non-profit organizations and shall permit the
consumption of 3.2% malt liquor only on the licensed premises. (Revised 12/12/
2022)
      ∙   On-Sale Wine. On-sale wine licenses shall only be issued to a
restaurant. A wine license permits the sale of wine up to 14% alcohol by volume
for consumption with the sale of food. In no event shall an on-sale license be
issued to a fast food restaurant as defined in the City Code.
      ∙   Sunday On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License. Sunday On-Sale
Intoxicating Liquor Licenses shall be only issued to a restaurant, club,
bowling center, or hotel; which holds an On-sale Intoxicating Liquor License.
An establishment serving intoxicating liquor on Sundays must obtain a Sunday
Liquor License.
      ∙   Brewer Taproom License (added 10/29/12). A brewer who has a license
from the Commissioner of Public Safety to brew up to 250,000 barrels of malt
liquor or wine per year may be issued a license by the City for on-sale of malt
liquor or wine subject to the following conditions: (revised 3/11/13)
         ∙   The malt liquor or wine sold on sale for consumption must be
produced by the brewer on the licensed premises. (revised 3/11/13)
         ∙   No other beverages containing alcohol may be sold or consumed on
the licensed premises.
         ∙   A brewer may only have one taproom license.
         ∙   Hours of operation for on-sale of malt liquor or wine at a brewer
taproom. No sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the licensed
premises may be made before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through
Sunday. (revised 3/11/13)
         ∙   A restaurant is not allowed at a brewery with a taproom license.
The brewer would, however, be allowed to sell simple pre-packaged snacks
(chips, peanuts, popcorn, etc.) for consumption on-site.
      ∙   Brewer Off-Sale Malt Liquor License (added 10/29/12). A brewer who
has a license from the Commissioner of Public Safety to brew up to 3,500
barrels of malt liquor or wine per year may with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety be issued a license by the City for off-sale of
malt liquor or wine subject to the following conditions: (revised 3/11/13)
         ∙   The malt liquor or wine sold off-sale must be produced and
packaged on the licensed premises. (revised 3/11/13)
         ∙   Off-sale of malt liquor or wine shall be limited to the legal
hours for off-sale pursuant to section
500.3, Subdivision 9(d). (revised 3/11/13)
         ∙   The malt liquor or wine sold off-sale must be removed from the
licensed premises before the applicable off-sale closing time pursuant to
section
500.3, Subdivision 9(d). (revised 3/11/13)
         ∙   The malt liquor or wine sold off-sale shall be packaged in 64-
ounce containers commonly known as "growlers" or 750 milliliter containers
commonly known as "bombers" and shall have the following requirements for
packaging: (revised 3/11/13)
            1)   The containers shall bear a twist type closure, cork, stopper
or plug.
            2)   At the time of sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip
or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extend over the top
of the twist type closure, cork, stopper or plug forming a seal that must be
broken upon opening of the container or bottle.
            3)   The adhesive band, strip or sleeve shall bear the name and
address of the brewer/licensee selling the malt liquor or wine. (revised 3/11/
13)
            4)   The containers or bottles shall be identified as malt liquor
or wine, contain the name of the malt liquor or wine, bear the name and address
of the brewer/licensee selling the malt liquor or wine, and the contents in the
container packaged as required herein shall be considered intoxicating liquor
unless the alcoholic content is labeled as otherwise in accordance with the
provisions of Minnesota Rules, part 7515.1100. (revised 3/11/13)
         ∙   The retail sales for a brewer/licensee under this subsection may
not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more
than 50 percent of the brewer/licensee's production or 500 barrels, whichever
is less.
         ∙   A brewer operating a brewer taproom may hold or have an interest
in other retail on-sale licenses, but may not have an ownership interest in
whole or in part, or be an officer, director, agent or employee of, any other
manufacturer, brewer, importer, or wholesaler or be an affiliate thereof,
whether the affiliation is corporate or by management, direction or control.
Notwithstanding this prohibition, a brewer licensed under this provision may be
an affiliate or subsidiary company of a brewer licensed in Minnesota or
elsewhere if that brewer's only manufacture of malt liquor or wine is: (revised
3/11/13)
            1)   As a brewer taproom as defined herein and limited to the
regulations of a brewer taproom by this chapter;
            2)   Manufactured in another state for consumption exclusively in a
restaurant located in the place of manufacture or brewing; or
            3)   Manufactured in another state for consumption primarily in a
restaurant located in or immediately adjacent to the place of manufacture, if
the brewer was licensed subject to the regulations herein on January 1, 1995.
500.4   Persons Ineligible for License.
   No license shall be issued or transferred to, held by, or renewed for any
person:
   Subd. 1   Who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age.
   Subd. 2   Who is, or has a direct interest in, a manufacturer or wholesaler
of intoxicating liquors.
   Subd. 3   Who has direct or indirect interest in any other establishment in
the City of Arden Hills to which an alcoholic beverage license of the same type
has been issued by the City.
   Subd. 4   To whom, in the judgment of the City Council, based upon
information received as part of the application and investigation process, such
issuance, transfer or renewal would not be in the best interest of the public.
   Subd. 5   Who possess a federal wholesale liquor dealer's special tax stamp
or a federal gambling stamp.
   Subd. 6   Who has, within five (5) years prior to the alcoholic beverage
license application been convicted of a felony, or of violating any law of the
State of Minnesota relating to the manufacture, sale, distribution or
possession for sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages and cannot
demonstrate competent evidence under M.S. § 364.03, as amended from time to
time, of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of
an alcoholic beverage license.
500.5   Places Ineligible.
   An alcoholic beverage license shall not be issued, transferred, or renewed
for the conduct of business in any premises:
   Subd. 1   On which real estate taxes, special assessments, or other
financial claims of the City of Arden Hills are delinquent.
   Subd. 2   Which is located within five hundred (500) feet of any school or
any church unless the premises are currently licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
   Subd. 3   That is owned by a person to whom no alcoholic beverage license
could be issued under the provisions of the laws of the State of Minnesota.
   Subd. 4   That is not in compliance with the building code, the fire code,
and/or the development regulations of the City of Arden Hills.
   Subd. 5   Which has been issued an adult establishment license.
500.6   Applications.
   Applications for an alcoholic beverage license shall be verified and
submitted on forms prescribed by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety
or, if such forms are not available for a particular type of license, on forms
provided by the City Administrator. The applications shall include the
following:
   Subd. 1   A legal description for the property on which alcoholic beverages
will be sold or consumed.
   Subd. 2   A scale drawing of the premises in which the alcoholic beverages
will be sold or consumed, including exterior portions thereof, which will be
used for such purpose.
   Subd. 3   The alcoholic beverage license fee and investigation fee.
   Subd. 4   Other information as required in the application form.
500.7   Investigation.
   Initial alcoholic beverage license applications, renewal applications, and
transfer application shall be referred to the City's law enforcement agency for
background and financial investigations of the applicant and/or owner in such
detail as the law enforcement agency deems appropriate for the type of license
being requested.
500.8   Alcoholic Beverage License Fees.
   The Arden Hills City Council shall adopt an ordinance which establishes
alcoholic beverage license fees and license investigation fees subject to the
limitations contained in Minnesota Statutes 340A.408.
500.9   Refund of Fee.
   Subd. 1    Except as provided in this subsection, no part of the fee paid
for an alcoholic beverage license shall be refunded. Refund applications shall
be made within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the following events:
      A.   Destruction or damage to the licensed premise by fire or other
catastrophe to such an extent that the licensee ceases to carry on the licensed
business; and
      B.   Discontinuance of the business of the licensee by reason of death or
illness of the licensee.
   Subd. 2    The Council may, at its discretion, refund a pro rata portion of
the license fee.
500.10   Liability Insurance.
   No retail alcoholic beverage license may be issued, maintained, or renewed
unless the applicant demonstrates proof of financial responsibility. The City
shall submit to the Commissioner of Public Safety the applicant's proof of
financial responsibility.
   Subd. 1 Minimum Coverages. The minimum requirement for proof of financial
responsibility may be given by filing:
      A.   A certificate that states there is an effect for the license period
an insurance policy issued by an insurer required to be license under Minn.
Stat. 60A.07 Subd. 4, or by an insurer recognized as an eligible surplus lines
carrier pursuant to Minn. Stat. 60A.206, or pool providing at least $50,000 of
coverage because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence,
$100,000 because of bodily injury to two (2) or more persons in any one
occurrence, $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others
in any one occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person
in any one occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of support for two (2) or
more persons in any one occurrence or;
      B.   A Bond from a surety company with minimum coverages as provided in
Section
500.10, Subd. 1(a).
   Subd. 2   Cancellation Provisions. The liability insurance policy required
by this section must provide that it cannot be cancelled for:
      A.   Any cause, except non-payment of premium, by either the insured or
the insurer, unless the cancelling party has first given thirty (30) days
notice in writing to the City of its intent to cancel the policy; and
      B.   Non-payment of premium unless the cancelling party has first given
ten (10) days notice in writing to the City of its intent to cancel the policy.
   Subd. 3   Exemptions. The insurance requirements provided herein do not
apply to licensees who by affidavit established:
      A.   They are an On-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor Licensee with sales of less
than $25,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year;
      B.   They are Off-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor Licensees with sales of less than
$50,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year; or
      C.   They are holders of On-Sale Wine Licenses with sales of less than
$25,000 of wine for the preceding year.
500.11   Granting of Licenses.
   The City Council may make, or cause to be made, an investigation, as it
deems appropriate, of the claims set forth in the application. The Council may
hold a public hearing relative to the issuance of any license under the
provisions of this section. The granting of on-sale and off-sale liquor
licenses shall be discretionary with the Council. No off-sale liquor license
shall become effective until it, together with the proof of insurance furnished
by the applicant, has been approved by the commissioner of public safety.
500.12
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall expire on the
last day of December of each year. Each license shall be issued for a period of
one year, but if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the application
is made a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata
fee. In computing the fee, any expired fraction of a month shall be counted as
one month.
500.13   Renewals.
   Applications for renewal of an existing license issued under the provisions
of this chapter shall be filed with the City Administrator on or before
November 1 of the year preceding the year which is the subject of the license.
500.14   Transfer.
   No license may be transferred to another person or to another place without
the approval of the City Council. Verified application for transfer shall be
made in writing to the City Administrator and shall be accompanied by certified
check or money order payable to the City, in the amount established by
Ordinance adopted by the Council. The Council shall make or cause to be made an
investigation as it deems appropriate regarding the transferee or the proposed
location. This provision shall also apply in the event of application by a
corporate licensee for transfer of stock in the corporation, provided that no
transfer fee shall be charged if the transfer is the first within the period of
the license or the stock sought to be transferred does not constitute fifty
(50%) percent or more of the outstanding common stock of the corporation. It is
hereby made the duty of the officers of any corporation holding such a license
to notify the Council of any proposed sale or transfer of any stock that result
in another person holding ten or more percent interest in the corporation. The
transfer of any such stock without the knowledge and consent of the Council
shall be deemed sufficient cause for revocation by the Council of any license
granted to the corporation under authority of this subsection. The corporate
officers shall also notify the Council whenever any change is made in the
officers of any such corporation, and failure to notify Council shall be
sufficient cause for revocation of any liquor license granted to the
corporation.
500.15   Display.
   The license issued under the provisions of this section shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises at all times.
500.16   Hours and Days of Sale.
   Subd. 1    On Sale Intoxicating Liquor. No sale of intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the licensed premises may be made:
      A.   Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday; or
      B.   After 2:00 a.m. on Sunday unless the licensee has also been issued a
Sunday on sale liquor license.
   Subd. 2    Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor. Permissible hours of sale
will be stated on the permit.
   Subd. 3    On-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor. No sale of 3.2% malt liquor may be made
between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday or after 2:00 a.m.
on Sunday.
   Subd. 4    Temporary On-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor. Permissible hours of sale
will be specified on the permit.
   Subd. 5    On-Sale Wine. No sale of wine may be made between 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday or after 2:00 a.m. on Sunday.
   Subd. 6    Sunday On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor. Sales are permitted between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday in conjunction with
the sale of food.
   Subd. 7    Off Sale Intoxicating Liquor. The hours of operation and days of
sale shall be those set by Minnesota Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from
time to time, except that the City Council may, by resolution, ordinance or
specific restriction on issued licenses, provide for more restrictive hours
than state law allows.
(Amended Ord. 2017-003, passed 5-22-2017)
500.17   Suspension and Revocation.
   Upon the finding that a license holder has failed to comply with applicable
statutes, rules, or city regulations relating to alcoholic beverages, the City
may revoke the license, suspend the license for up to sixty (60) days, impose a
civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation as hereinafter provided, or
impose a combination of these sanctions. No suspension or revocation shall take
effect until the licensee has been given an opportunity for a hearing under the
provisions of Minn. Stat. 14.57 to 14.69 of the Administrative Procedure Act.
500.18   Administrative Fines.
   The purpose of this section is to establish an escalating scale of penalties
for the sale of alcoholic beverages to an underage person; for the sale of
alcoholic beverages to an obviously intoxicated person; for permitting after
hour sales, display, or consumption of an alcoholic beverage; or illegal
gambling on premises committed by the license holder or its employees.
   Subd. 1    For on-sale and off-sale license holders who participate in
optional manager and server training, subject to the approval of the City, and
prove the person who sold or served alcohol had received server training within
the previous year:
      A.   For a first violation, the penalty shall be an administrative fine
as set by the City's fee schedule and one (1) additional compliance check.
      B.   For a second violation, in forty-eight (48) months, the penalty
shall be an administrative fine as set by the City's fee schedule and one (1)
additional compliance check.
      C.   For a third violation in forty-eight (48) months, the penalty shall
be an administrative fine as set by the City's fee schedule, a one (1) day
suspension and one (1) additional compliance check.
      D.   For a fourth violation in forty-eight (48) months, the penalty shall
be an administrative fine as set by the City's fee schedule and the license may
be revoked.
   Subd. 2 For on-sale and off-sale license holders who do not participate in
optional manager and server training, subject to the approval of the City:
      A.   For a first violation, the penalty shall be an administrative fine
as set by the City's fee schedule and one (1) additional compliance check.
      B.   For a second violation, in forty-eight (48) months, the penalty
shall be an administrative fine as set by the City's fee schedule and one (1)
additional compliance check.
      C.   For a third violation in forty-eight (48) months, the penalty shall
be an administrative fine as set by the City's fee schedule, a three (3) day
suspension and one (1) additional compliance check.
      D.   For a fourth violation in forty-eight (48) months, the penalty shall
be an administrative fine as set by the City's fee schedule and the license may
be revoked.
Chapter 6 - Nuisances and Offenses
Section 602 - General Provisions
(section 600 repealed and section 602 added 2/18/09)
602.01   Public Nuisance Defined.
   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally
does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is
a misdemeanor:
   Subd. 1.   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures, or endangers the safety, health, comfort, or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public; or
   Subd. 2.   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any
public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public, or
   Subd. 3.   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this
ordinance to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically
provided.
602.02   Public Nuisances Affecting Health.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   Subd. 1.   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter, except vegetable matter in an approved and maintained compost bin by a
residential property owner;
   Subd. 2.   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   Subd. 3.   Accumulations of manure, refuse, or other debris;
   Subd. 4.   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-
tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit
foul and disagreeable odors;
   Subd. 5.   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances;
   Subd. 6.   All noxious weeds and other growths of vegetation upon public or
private property in excess of eight (8) inches. The requirements of this
section do not apply to areas established with meadow vegetation. Meadow
vegetation is defined as grasses and flowering broad-leaf plants that are
native to, or adapted to, the State of Minnesota, and that are commonly found
in meadow and prairie plant communities, except noxious weeds. In meadow areas,
the prior vegetation has been eliminated and meadow vegetation planted through
transplanting or seed by human or mechanical means; the area is cut at least
once per year to a height of no more than ten inches if noxious weeds or other
prohibited vegetation cover more than 25 percent of the area; and a sign is
posted on the property in a location likely to be seen by the public advising
that a meadow or prairie is being established. The sign shall be no smaller
than ten inches square and no longer than one square foot and no higher than
three feet tall. It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any
lot or land to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed all such weeds,
grass or other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be
necessary to comply with the provisions of this subsection; provided that
cutting and removing the weeds, grass and vegetation at least once in every
three (3) weeks, between May 15 and September 15, shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this subsection.
   Subd. 7.   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease;
   Subd. 8.   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not
operating under local license;
   Subd. 9.   Accumulation of manure, tree branches, cut trees, grass
clippings, bottles, rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials,
metals including aluminum or tin cans, or lumber;
   Subd. 10.   Any condition which provides a harborage for rats, mice, snakes
and other vermin;
   Subd. 11.   All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations,
including animal noises;
   Subd. 12.   Any diseased animals running at large or the carcasses of
animals or foul not disposed of within a reasonable time after death;
   Subd. 13.   Open burning in violation of state law, or dense smoke, nauseous
fumes, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities; and
   Subd. 14.   Any building, structure or other place or location where any
activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted,
performed or maintained.
602.03   Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   Subd. 1.   All trees, hedges, signs, or other obstructions which materially
obstruct the clear vision area between a height of two and one half feet (2-1/
2) and ten (10) feet. The clear vision area includes an area within a triangle
that is measured along the edge of the driving surface of the road starting at
the intersection of two roads (public or private) and extending thirty (30)
feet in each direction from the intersection and then a line connecting these
two end points;
   Subd. 2.   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of
a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   Subd. 3.   All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;
   Subd. 4.   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds except under such conditions as
are permitted by city code or other applicable law;
   Subd. 5.   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   Subd. 6.   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or
any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   Subd. 7.   All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over
streets and sidewalks, or so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
constructed and maintained as provided by city code;
   Subd. 8.   The allowing of rain water, ice, or snow to fall from any
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any
sidewalk;
   Subd. 9.   Any barbed wire fence less than six (6) feet above the ground and
within three (3) feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   Subd. 10.   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so
situated or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   Subd. 11.   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public properties;
   Subd. 12.   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery,
household appliances, automobile bodies, or other material, in a manner
conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the rank growth
of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire,
health, or safety hazards from such accumulation;
   Subd. 13.   Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered or
in such other condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person
coming on the premises where it is located;
   Subd. 14.   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter, or ditch with trash of other materials;
   Subd. 15.   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over such
substance;
   Subd. 16.   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or
on adjacent private property;
   Subd. 17.   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury
to the person or property of anyone;
   Subd. 18.   All snow or ice not removed from public sidewalks within twenty-
four hours after the snow or ice has been deposited, unless that portion of the
public sidewalk has been exempted from this requirement by city council
resolution;
   Subd. 19.   The piling, storing or keeping of old machinery, equipment,
building materials, wrecked or junked vehicles or other junk or debris except
as may otherwise be permitted by the city code;
   Subd. 20.   Making repairs to motor vehicles, including tires, on a public
street or alley, except that emergency repairs may be allowed if they do not
unduly interfere with traffic; and
   Subd. 21.   Except as provided in Section
710.12 and its subdivisions relating to shade trees; dead, diseased or fallen
trees or tree branches not removed within a reasonable period of time. (amended
11/28/11)
   Subd. 22.   Any tree which poses an imminent danger to life or property.
(adopted 11/28/11)
602.04   Duties of City Officers.
   The city building official or designee and/or city law enforcement agency
officers shall enforce the provisions of this chapter as defined in Sections
602.02 and
602.03. Such officers shall have the power to inspect private premises and take
all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of such
public nuisances.
602.05   General Abatement Procedure.
   Whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines that a public
nuisance, as defined in Section
602.02 and Section
602.03, is being maintained or exists on property within the city, the
following code enforcement procedure shall apply:
   Subd. 1   Notice of Violation. Written notice of violation shall be served
by the officer charged with enforcement on the owner of record or occupant of
the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the
premises are not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of
record or occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation
shall be served by posting it on the premises. The notice shall describe the
facts which are in violation of the City's public nuisance regulation; the
specific City regulation which have been violated; the type of action necessary
to abate the violation; and deadline for compliance.
   Subd. 2   Notice of Council Hearing. If a property owner fails to comply
with the notice of violation requirements, the officer charged with enforcement
shall serve the owner of record and occupant of premises either in person or by
certified or registered mail with a notice of a council hearing. If the
premises is not occupied, and the owner of record is unknown, or other owner of
record or occupant refuses to accept notice of council hearing, the notice of
council hearing shall be served by posting it on the premises. Notice of
council hearing shall specify the time, date and place of the hearing and
indicate that the property owner can appear at that time. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the City Council shall determine whether to issue an abatement
order.
   Subd. 3   Notice of City Council Order. Except for those cases determined by
the City to require emergency abatement, the written notice of a any city
council order to abate shall be served upon the owner of record, or the owner's
agent, if an agent is in charge of the building or property, and upon the
occupying tenant, if there is one, and upon all lien holders of holder of
record in the manner provided for service of a summons in a civil action. If
the owner cannot be found, the order shall be served upon the owner by posting
it at the main entrance to the building, or if there is no building, in a
conspicuous place on the property and by four (4) weeks publication in the
official newspaper of the City. A copy of the order with proof of service shall
be filed with the court administrator of the district court. At the time of
filing of the city council's order, the City shall file for record with the
county recorder or registrar of titles a notice of the pendency of the
proceeding, describing with reasonable certainty the lands effected and the
nature of the order. In all other respects, the City's service and order shall
comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. 463.17.
602.06   Emergency Abatement Procedure/Summary Enforcement.
   In the case of an emergency, where a delay in abatement of a nuisance will
occur because of the time necessary during normal review procedures as defined
in section
602.05 will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public
health, safety or welfare, the city council may order summary enforcement and
abate the nuisance. To proceed with summary enforcement, the officer charged
with enforcement shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance
will unreasonably endanger public health, safety, or welfare. The enforcement
officer shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the
nature of the nuisance and of the city's intention to seek summary enforcement
and the time and place of the council meeting to consider the question of
summary enforcement. The City Council shall determine whether or not the
condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance,
whether public health, safety, or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by
delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in subdivision
602.05, and may order that such nuisance be immediately terminated or abated.
If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the city council may
order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
602.07   Accelerated Abatement Procedure.
   In order to more efficiently abate the recurring general nuisances which are
defined in this section, the City Council's abatement order may indicate that
it will remain in effect for a two (2) year period and will authorize the
City's code enforcement officers to take corrective actions during such period
in regard to the removal of tall grass, nuisance weeds and other vegetative
growth; the removal of snow and/or ice within public rights-of-way; the removal
of accumulations of debris and garbage; the trimming and care of trees and the
removal of unsound trees from public rights-of-way; the removal of insect
infested or diseased trees on private property; and the enforcement of housing
code violations. The accelerated abatement procedure shall include the
following:
   Subd. 1   Notice of Violation. Whenever the officer charged with enforcement
determines that a nuisance prescribed under Section
602.07 is being maintained or exists on premises in the City, written notice by
certified mail or registered mail shall be provided to the property owner or
occupant. If the premises are not occupied and the property owner is not known,
the notice may be served by posting it on the premises. The notice shall
include the following information:
   A description of the nuisance to be abated.
      A.   The nuisance shall be abated within seven (7) working days;
      B.   If the nuisance is not abated within seven (7) working days, the
City Council will hold a hearing, and the date of the hearing shall be
included;
      C.   The owner has the right to appear at the hearing;
      D.   The City will have the nuisance abated if corrective action is not
taken, and the order to abate may continue for up to two years; and
      E.   125 percent of the cost of the abatement, including administrative
costs will be charged to the property owner and certified against the property
for collection with taxes if the bill is not paid.
   Subd. 2   Abatement by City. If the owner or occupant fails to comply with
the Council's Order to Abate a reoccurring nuisance within seven (7) days of
the date of the Council's Order, the City shall provide for the abatement of
the nuisance and may continue to abate at intervals it deems appropriate for up
to two years. The officer charged with enforcement shall keep records of the
cost of the abatement including administrative costs and shall provide this
information to the City Administrative for billing and assessment against the
property pursuant to section
602.08.
   Subd. 3   Reoccurring Nuisance. If the nuisance reoccurs within two years of
the Council's Order to Abate, the officer charged with enforcement shall send a
notice requiring compliance within seven (7) working days. If the owner or
occupant fails to comply with the notice, the City shall provide for the
abatement of the nuisance. An additional public hearing shall not be required
within two years of the Council's original Order to Abate. The officer charged
with enforcement shall keep records of the cost of the abatement including
administrative costs and shall provide this information to the City
Administrative for billing and assessment against the property pursuant to
section
602.08.
602.08   Recovery of Cost.
   Subd. 1   Personal Liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has
been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of
the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the city administrator or other official
designated by the council shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the
owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office
of the city clerk.
   Subd. 2   Assessment. If the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on
private property, the accumulation of snow, ice, or rubbish on public
sidewalks; removal or elimination of public health or safety hazard (excluding
structures under MN Statute 463.15 and 463.26); the growth of weeds on private
property or outside the traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-
infected trees, the city administrator shall, on or before September 1 next
following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with
all other such charges as well as other charges for current services to be
assessed under Minn. Stat. 429.101 against each separate lot or parcel to which
the charges are attributable. The council may then spread the charges against
such property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification
to the county auditor and collection along with current taxes the following
year or in annual installments, not exceeding 10, as the council may determine
in each case.
Section 610 - Abandoned Property
610.01   Disposition of Abandoned Property.
   Subd. 1   Procedure. Except for abandoned and junked vehicles, all property
lawfully coming into possession of the City shall be disposed of as provided in
this section. Abandoned and junked vehicles shall be disposed of according to
the procedures of this section.
   Subd. 2   Storage. The department of the city acquiring possession of the
property shall arrange for its storage. If City facilities are unavailable or
inadequate, the department may arrange for storage at a privately-owned
facility.
   Subd. 3   Claim by Owner. The owner may claim the property by exhibiting
satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the City any storage or maintenance
costs incurred by it. A receipt for the property shall be obtained upon release
to the owner.
   Subd. 4   Sale. If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the
City for 60 days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public
auction conducted by the law enforcement agency after two weeks' published
notice setting forth the time and place of the sale and the property to be
sold.
   Subd. 5   Disposition of Proceeds. The proceeds of the sale shall be placed
in the general fund of the City. If the former owner makes application and
furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within six months of the sale, the
former owner shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of the property less the
costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of published notice and
other costs of the sale.
   State law reference - Sale of unclaimed property, see M.S. § 471.195
610.02   Findings and Purpose.
   Abandoned motor vehicles constitute a hazard to the health and welfare of
the people of the City in that such vehicles can harbor noxious diseases,
furnish shelter and breeding places for vermin, and present physical dangers to
the safety and well-being of children and other citizens. Abandoned motor
vehicles and other scrap metals also constitute a blight on the landscape of
the City and therefore a detriment to the environment. The abandonment and
retirement of motor vehicles and other scrap metals constitutes a waste of a
valuable source of useful metal. It is therefore in the public interest that
the present accumulation of abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metals be
eliminated, that future abandonment of motor vehicles and other scrap metals be
prevented, that the expansion of existing scrap recycling facilities be
developed and that other acceptable and economically useful methods for the
disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other forms of scrap metal be
developed. (M.S. § 168B.01)
610.03   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ∙   Abandoned Vehicle. The words "Abandoned Vehicle" shall mean:
         ∙   A motor vehicle, defined in M.S. § 169.01 and as amended from time
to time, that:
            1)   Has remained illegally:
               a.   For a period of more than 48 hours on any property owned or
controlled by a unit of government, or more than four hours on that property
when it is properly posted; or
               b.   On private property for a period of time, without the
consent of the person in control of the property; and
            2)   Lacks vital components or is in an inoperable condition such
that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual
functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building.
         ∙   A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. § 168.10 and
amended from time to time, is not considered an abandoned vehicle.
         ∙   Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile graveyards
that are defined, maintained, and licensed in accordance with M.S. § 161.242,
as amended from time to time, or that are licensed and maintained in accordance
with local laws and zoning regulations, are not considered abandoned vehicles.
         ∙   A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under
police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not considered
abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police hold, writ or
court order is in effect.
      ∙   Department. The word "Department" shall mean the Minnesota Department
of Public Safety.
      ∙   Impound. The word "Impound" shall mean to take and hold a vehicle in
legal custody. There are two types of impounds: public and nonpublic.
      ∙   Impound Lot Operator; Operator. The words "Impound Lot Operator" or
"Operator" shall mean a person who engages in impounding or storing, usually
temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. "Operator" includes an
operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot, regardless of whether tow truck
service is provided.
      ∙   Junk Vehicle. The words "Junk Vehicle" shall mean a vehicle that:
         ∙   Is three years old or older;
         ∙   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including such things as
broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train or transmission;
         ∙   Is apparently inoperable;
         ∙   Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and/or
         ∙   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate
value of the scrap in it.
      ∙   Motor Vehicle; Vehicle. The words "Motor Vehicle" or "Vehicle" shall
have the meaning given "Motor Vehicle" in M.S. § 169.01, as amended from time
to time.
      ∙   Motor Vehicle Waste. The words "Motor Vehicle Waste" shall mean solid
waste and liquid wastes derived in the operation of or in the recycling of a
motor vehicle, including such things as tires and used motor oil, but excluding
scrap metal.
      ∙   MPCA; Agency. The words "MPCA" or "Agency" shall mean the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.
      ∙   Nonpublic Impound Lot. The words "Nonpublic Impound Lot" shall mean
an impound lot that is not a public impound lot.
      ∙   Public Impound Lot. The words "Public Impound Lot" shall mean an
impound lot owned by or contracting with a unit of government under Subsection
610.11.
      ∙   Unauthorized Vehicle. The words "Unauthorized Vehicle" shall mean a
vehicle subject to removal and impoundment pursuant to 610.05 or M.S. §
169.041, as amended from time to time, but is not a junk vehicle or an
abandoned vehicle.
      ∙   Unit of Government. The words "Unit of Government" shall include a
state department or agency, a special purpose district and a county, statutory
or home rule charter city, or town.
      ∙   Vital Component Parts. The words "Vital Component Parts" shall mean
those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning
of the vehicle, including such things as the motor, drive train and wheels.
(M.S. § 168B.011)
610.04   Violation to Abandon Motor Vehicle.
   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private property,
without the consent of the person in control of such property, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (M.S. § 168B.03)
610.05   Authority to Impound Vehicles.
   Subd. 1   Abandoned or Junk Vehicles. Units of government and peace officers
may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle.
   Subd. 2   Unauthorized Vehicles. Units of government and peace officers may
take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under M.S. § 169.041, as
amended from time to time. A vehicle may also be impounded after it has been
left unattended in one of the following public or private locations for the
indicated period of time:
      A.   In a public location not governed by M.S. § 169.041, as amended from
time to time:
         1.   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace officer, four hours;
         2.   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic hazard to the
traveling public, as determined by a peace officer, immediately; or
         3.   That is a parking facility or other public property owned or
controlled by a unit of government, properly posted, four hours.
      B.   On private property:
         1.   That is single-family or duplex residential property,
immediately;
         2.   That is private, nonresidential property, properly posted,
immediately;
         3.   That is private, nonresidential property, not posted, 24 hours;
or
         4.   That is any residential property, properly posted, immediately.
(M.S. § 168B.04)
610.06   Sale; Waiting Periods.
   Subd. 1   Sale after 15 Days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal
or sale under Subsection
610.10, 15 days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be:
      A.   A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subsection; or
      B.   An abandoned vehicle.
   Subd. 2   Sale after 45 Days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal
or sale under Subsection
610.10, 45 days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be
an unauthorized vehicle.
610.07   Notice of Taking and Sale.
   Subd. 1   Contents; Notice Given Within Five Days. When an impounded vehicle
is taken into custody, the unit of government or impound lot operator taking it
into custody shall give notice of the taking within five days. The notice
shall:
      A.   Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year, make, model
and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if such information can be
reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is being held;
      B.   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the
vehicle under Subsection
610.08; and
      C.   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the appropriate time allowed
under Subsection
610.06 shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title and interest in the
vehicle and contents and a consent to the transfer of title to and disposal or
sale of the vehicle and contents pursuant to 610.10.
   Subd. 2   Notice by Mail or Publication. The notice shall be sent by mail to
the registered owner, if any, of an impounded vehicle and to all readily
identifiable lienholders of record. The Department makes this information
available to impound lot operators for notification purposes. If it is
impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of
the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in
a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was
towed from or abandoned. Published notices may be grouped together for
convenience and economy.
   Subd. 3   Unauthorized Vehicles; Notice. If an unauthorized vehicle remains
unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice was sent under Subd. 2 above,
a second notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and to all readily
identifiable lienholders of record.
(M.S. § 168B.06)
610.08   Right to Reclaim.
   Subd. 1   Payment of Charges. The owner or any lienholder of an impounded
vehicle shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the unit of government
or impound lot operator taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and
storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or 45
days, as applicable under Subsection
610.06, after the date of the notice required by Subsection
610.07.
   Subd. 2   Lienholders. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair
any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state, or the right of a
lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, "Garagekeeper" is an
operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle
storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles.
(M.S. § 168B.07)
610.09   Operator's Deficiency Claim; Consent to Sale.
   Subd. 1   Deficiency Claim. The nonpublic impound lot operator has a
deficiency claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the reasonable
costs of services provided in the towing, storage and inspection of the vehicle
minus the proceeds of the sale or auction. The claim for storage costs may not
exceed the costs of:
      A.   25 days storage for a vehicle described in Subsection
610.06, Subd. 1; and
      B.   55 days storage for a vehicle described in Subsection
610.06, Subd. 2.
   Subd. 2    Implied Consent to Sale. A registered owner who fails to claim
the impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under
Subsection
610.06 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and consents to the
disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer of title.
(M.S. § 168B.087)
610.10   Disposition by Impound Lot.
   Subd. 1   Auction or Sale.
      A.   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents taken into
custody by a unit of government or any impound lot is not reclaimed under
Subsection
610.08, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible pursuant
to 610.07 and 610.08.
      B.   The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the
registrar of motor vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the
vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle
and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
   Subd. 2   Unsold Vehicles. Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by units of
government or public impound lots pursuant to Subd. 1 above shall be disposed
of in accordance with Subsection
610.11.
   Subd. 3   Sale Proceeds; Public Entities. From the proceeds of a sale under
this section by a unit of government or public impound lot of an abandoned or
unauthorized motor vehicle, the unit of government shall reimburse itself for
the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative,
notice and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this
chapter. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner
of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited
in the treasury of the unit of government.
   Subd. 4   Sale Proceeds; Nonpublic Impound Lots. The operator of a nonpublic
impound lot may retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted under the
authority of Subd. 1 above. The operator may retain all proceeds from sale of
any personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that were not claimed by
the owner or the owner's agent before the sale, except that any suspected
contraband or other items that likely would be subject to forfeiture in a
criminal trial must be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(M.S. § 168B.08)
610.11   Disposal Authority.
   A unit of government may contract with others or may utilize its own
equipment and personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and
abandoned scrap metal and, if no bids are received, may utilize its own
equipment and personnel for the collection, storage and transportation of these
vehicles and abandoned scrap metal. A unit of government may utilize its own
equipment and personnel for the collection and storage of not more than five
abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without advertising for or receiving bids in
any 120-day period. (M.S. § 168B.09(1))
610.12   Contracts; Reimbursement by MPCA.
   Subd. 1   MPCA Review and Approval. If a unit of government enters into a
contract with a person licensed by the MPCA pursuant to this section or a
contract pursuant to Subsection
610.11, the MPCA may review the contract to determine whether it conforms to
the MPCA's plan for solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA
rules. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the MPCA. Where a
contract has been approved, the MPCA may reimburse the unit of government for
the costs incurred under the contract that have not been reimbursed under
Subsection
610.10. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
610.11, the MPCA shall not approve any contract that has been entered into
without prior notice to and request for bids from all persons duly licensed by
the MPCA pursuant to Subd. 2 below; does not provide for a full performance
bond; or does not provide for total collection and transportation of abandoned
motor vehicles, except that the MPCA may approve a contract covering solely
collection or transportation of abandoned motor vehicles where the MPCA
determines total collection and transportation to be impracticable and where
all other requirements herein have been met and the unit of government, after
proper notice and request for bids, has not received any bid for total
collection and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles.
   Subd. 2   Solid Waste Disposers. The MPCA may issue a license to any person
desiring to be a party to a disposal contract who meets the requirements for
solid waste disposers established by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. § 116.07.
   Subd. 3   Units of Government That Perform Work. If a unit of government
utilizes its own equipment and personnel pursuant to its authority under
Subsection
610.11, and the use of the equipment and personnel conforms to the MPCA's plan
for solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA rules, that
government may be reimbursed by the MPCA for reasonable costs incurred which
are not reimbursed under Subsection
610.11.
   Subd. 4   Units of Government Required to Contract Work. The MPCA may demand
that a unit of government contract for the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles
and other scrap metal pursuant to the MPCA's plan for solid waste disposal.
Where the unit of government fails to so contract within 180 days of the
demand, the MPCA, through the Department of Administration and on behalf of
such unit of government, may contract with any person duly licensed by the MPCA
for such disposal.
(M.S. § 168B.10 (1) - (4))
Section 620 - Offenses
620.01   Adoption of State Law.
   The various criminal offenses and misdemeanors enacted by the State of
Minnesota, to the extent that the same may be adopted and enforced by the City,
are hereby adopted by reference by the City and made a part of this code as if
set out here in full.
620.02   Curfew.
   Subd. 1   Imposed. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of
sixteen (16) years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or otherwise be in or
upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public and other unsupervised places and buildings or places of entertainment
and amusement in the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the
following day. It shall be unlawful for any minor who is sixteen (16) or
seventeen (17) years of age to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or otherwise
be in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds
or other public places and buildings, places of entertainment and amusement or
vacant lots, and other unsupervised places in the City, between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following morning.
   Subd. 2   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a
minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of the minor, or to a minor who is upon an emergency
errand, upon other legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian
or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the
presence of the minor in the place or places is connected with and required by
some legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the presence of the
minor in the place or places is connected with and required by some legitimate
business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is permitted by
law to be engaged or direct travel to or from such business. The provisions of
this subsection shall also not apply to minors engaged in interstate travel;
attending or directly traveling to or from official school, religious or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a school, church,
religious group, the City, a civic organization or another similar entity;
exercising First Amendment rights; located on the sidewalk abutting his or her
parent or guardian's residence, or abutting the residence of a next door
neighbor if the neighbor has not complained to the City's designated law
enforcement provider about the minor's presence; or who has been married or
otherwise legally emancipated.
   Subd. 3   Duties of Parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian
or other adult having charge of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to
permit the minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or otherwise be in or
upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, places and public buildings, places of entertainment and
amusement, vacant lots and other unsupervised places in the City during the
hours prohibited by this subsection except as provided for in Subd. 2 above.
   Subd. 4   Minors in Amusement Places. No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment shall permit any minor
under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain in such place during the hours
prohibited by this subsection; provided however, that the provisions of this
subsection shall not apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
620.03   Weapons.
   Subd. 1   Deadly Weapons Defined. The term "Deadly Weapons," as used in this
section shall include, but not be limited to the following:
      A.   Any pistol or firearm;
      B.   Bows and arrows when the arrows are pointed or tipped;
      C.   All instruments used to expel at high velocity any pellets of any
kind, including, but not limited to, BB guns and air rifles;
      D.   Sling shots;
      E.   Cross knuckles or knuckles of lead, brass or other metal; and
      F.   Switchblade knives, being knives with retractable blades.
   Subd. 2   Prohibited Generally. Except as herein specifically authorized,
the discharging or use of deadly weapons within the City is hereby prohibited.
   Subd. 3   Aiming Prohibited. The aiming of any deadly weapon, whether loaded
or not, at or towards any human being, is hereby prohibited.
   Subd. 4   Furnishing to Minors. The selling, giving, loaning or furnishing
in any way of any deadly weapon to a minor without the written consent of his
or her parents or guardian is hereby prohibited.
   Subd. 5   Use by Minor. No minor under the age of fourteen (14) years shall
handle or have in his or her possession or under his or her control any deadly
weapon, except while accompanied by or under the immediate charge of his or her
parent or guardian.
   Subd. 6   Carrying Concealed. The possession by any persons other than a
public officer of any deadly weapon concealed on his or her person is hereby
prohibited.
   Subd. 7   Discharge Restricted. The firing of a gun or use of other deadly
weapon in the lawful defense of the person, property or family of the user of
the weapon is excepted from the prohibitions set forth in this chapter and
similarly, the firing of a gun or use of other deadly weapons in the necessary
enforcement of the law, whether by a law enforcement officer or a private
individual, is also excepted from the prohibitions contained in this
subsection. Bows and arrows may be used in a county archery range.
   Subd. 8   Permits. The City Council may promulgate regulations for the
suitable protection of persons and property and, subject to the regulations,
the Council may issue special permits to duly organized clubs and their members
for shooting or the use of air rifles or bow and arrows on lands owned or
leased by the clubs. The permits shall be issued by the city administrator upon
direction of the Council, shall be in writing, and shall be valid only when in
the possession of the person to whom issued.
620.04   Garbage and Trash.
(repealed 12/20/07)
620.05   Alarm Systems.
   Subd. 1   Scope. This subsection provides regulation for the use of fire,
burglary and safety alarms, establishes users' fees and establishes a system of
administration.
   Subd. 2   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to protect the public
safety services of the City from misuse of public safety alarms and to provide
for the maximum possible service to public safety alarm users.
   Subd. 3   Definitions.
      A.   Alarm System. An alarm installation designed to be used for the
prevention or detection of burglary, robbery or fire and located in a building,
structure or facility.
      B.   Alarm User. The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or
facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.
      C.   False Alarm. An alarm signal eliciting a response by personnel of
the public safety department when a situation requiring a response does not, in
fact, exist, and which is caused by the activation of the alarm system through
mechanical failure, pet movement, alarm malfunction, improper installation or
the inadvertence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her
employees or agents. "False alarms" shall not include alarms caused by extreme
climatic conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, lightning strikes,
utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature or any other conditions
which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer or
owner.
      D.   Public Safety Department. The designated law enforcement agency.
   Subd. 4   Reports of False Alarms; Notice to Alarm User. The public safety
department shall file a written report of each false alarm with the city
administrator. Upon receipt of the first false alarm report at an address, the
city administrator shall, by certified mail, notify the alarm user of the
provisions of this chapter.
   Subd. 5   User Fees; Notice.
      A.   An alarm user owning an alarm system which precipitates or reports
more than two (2) false alarms to the City in a single calendar year shall be
charged a user fee per false alarm in excess of two (2) false alarms in a
calendar year, and a user fee per false alarm in excess of ten (10) false
alarms in a calendar year. (revised 3/11/13)
      B.   Upon receipt of a third and all subsequent false alarm reports as to
an alarm system, the city administrator shall notify the alarm user and
property owner (if different than the alarm user) by certified mail that the
threshold number of false alarms has occurred and that the applicable user fee
specified has become due and owing. The user fees shall be established from
time to time by Council resolution. (revised 2/13/17)
   Subd. 6   Appeals Process. Any alarm user who is required by the City to pay
a user fee as the result of a false alarm may make a written appeal of the
false alarm charge to the City Council within ten (10) days of the City's
mailing of the notice of false alarm which shall have authority to make a final
determination as to whether the appellant is to be charged with a false alarm.
   Subd. 7   Payment of Fees.
      A.   Payment of user fees shall be made to the city treasurer within
thirty (30) days of the date of notice by the City to the alarm user. Failure
to pay the fee within the thirty day period shall cause the alarm user to be
considered delinquent and subject to a penalty of a full eight (8%) percent of
fee due.
      B.   All delinquent charges for user fees shall be certified by the city
administrator to the county for collection with taxes due against the property
on which the alarm system is installed.
      C.   This certification process shall take place on a yearly basis on
October 10 of each year or by such earlier date as is necessary to have the
delinquent charges collectible with taxes due and payable against the property
in the next calendar year.
   Subd. 8   Administrative Rules. The City Council may promulgate such rules
as may be necessary for the implementation and administration of this
subsection.
   Subd. 9   Confidentiality.
      A.   All information submitted in compliance with this subsection shall
be held in confidence and shall be deemed a confidential record exempt from
discovery to the extent permitted by law.
      B.   Subject to requirements of confidentiality, the city administrator
may develop and maintain statistics for the purpose of on-going alarm systems
evaluation.
   Subd. 10   Enforcement and Penalties.
      A.   Failure or omission to comply with any part of this section shall be
deemed a misdemeanor and may be so prosecuted.
      B.   Upon conviction, a violation of this subsection shall be punishable
by a fine, imprisonment or both as provided by state law for a misdemeanor.
620.06   Food and Food Handlers*
   Subd. 1   Compliance. No person shall operate any restaurant, café, public
dining room or eating house unless it is at all times clean and sanitary, and
all requirements of this subsection and other applicable provisions of this
code and state law have been fulfilled.
   Subd. 2   Authority of Health Officer. If upon investigation of any
restaurant, café, dining room or eating house, the city's designated health
officer finds violations of this chapter or other applicable provision of this
code, he or she shall notify the owner, proprietor or manager in writing
stating the condition to be corrected and stating a reasonable time, not less
than forty eight (48) hours, in which the correction shall be made. Failure to
comply with the notice shall constitute a violation of this subsection.
   Subd. 3   Physical Examination of Food Handlers. It shall be unlawful for
any person to engage in the handling and/or sale of food or food products or
allow any person to be so engaged if his or her condition is such that disease
may be transmitted by him or her to others either directly or indirectly. Upon
receipt of a complaint or whenever deemed necessary by the health officer, a
special physical examination may be required of any person so engaged.
Section 630 - Construction Activities
630.01   Prohibited Activities.
   No person shall engage in or permit construction activities involving the
use of any kind of electric, diesel or gas powered machine or other power
equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekday or
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
630.10   Prohibited Activities.
   Except as allowed by permit of the City Council, no person shall engage in
or permit construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric,
diesel or gas powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. Upon application for a waiver and
notification to all properties within 500 feet from the property line at least
ten days prior to the City Council meeting, the City Council may grant a permit
waiving the requirements of this Section for maintenance activities and may
impose reasonable conditions to it.
630.11   Emergency Construction Activities.
   Emergency construction activities which are necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare, are exempt from the requirements of Section
630.10, provided that parties shall notify the City Public Works Director as
soon as reasonably possible regarding the existence of the emergency condition
and the projected time necessary to abate the emergency.
Section 640 - Property Complaint Data
640.01   Registering Complaints; Confidentiality.
   The identities of individuals who register complaints with state agencies of
political subdivisions concerning violations of state laws or local ordinances
concerning the use of real property are classified as confidential data,
pursuant to M.S. § 13.44 (1), as amended from time to time.
Section 650 - Clandestine Drug Lab Sites
(adopted 4/25/05)
650.10   Purpose and Intent;
   The purpose of Chapter
650 is to protect public health, safety and welfare, and reduce public exposure
to health risks where law enforcement authorities have determined that
hazardous chemicals from a suspected clandestine lab site or associated
dumpsite may exist. The City Council finds that such sites may contain
hazardous chemicals, substances, or residues that place people, particularly
children or women of child-bearing age, at risk of exposure through inhabiting
or visiting the site or being exposed to contaminated personal property.
   Chemicals used in the production of illicit drugs can condense, penetrate
and contaminate surfaces, furnishings, and equipment of surrounding structures.
These conditions present health and safety risks to occupants and visitors of
structures through fire, explosion, skin and respiratory exposure to chemicals.
650.11   Interpretation and Application.
   The provisions of this Chapter
650 shall be interpreted and applied as the minimum requirements necessary to
protect public health, safety and welfare. Where conditions imposed by any
provision of this Chapter
650 are either more or less restrictive than comparable provisions imposed by
any other law, ordinance, statute, or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements
shall prevail.
650.12   Definitions
      ∙   Chemical Dump Site. Any place or location where chemicals and/or
other hazardous waste material used in a clandestine drug lab have been
deposited.
      ∙   Chemical investigation site. A Clandestine drug lab site that is
under notice and order for cleanup and/or remediation as a public health
nuisance, and this Chapter
650.
      ∙   Clandestine drug lab operation. The unlawful manufacture, or attempt
to manufacture, a controlled substance(s).
      ∙   Clandestine drug lab site. Any place or area where law enforcement
has determined that conditions associated with the operation of an unlawful
clandestine drug lab exist. A clandestine drug lab site may include dwellings,
accessory buildings, or structures, a chemical dumpsite, vehicle boat, trailer
or any other land.
      ∙   Cleanup. The proper removal and/or containment of substances
hazardous to humans and/or the environment at a chemical investigation site.
      ∙   Controlled substance. A drug, substance or immediate precursor
described under Schedules I through V of Minnesota Statute 152.02, and as
amended in the future. The term shall not include distilled spirits, wine, malt
beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
      ∙   Health Authority. Ramsey County Department of Public Health
      ∙   Household hazardous wastes. Waste generated from a clandestine drug
lab operation. Such wastes shall be treated, stored, transported, or disposed
of in a manner consistent with Minnesota Department of Public Health, Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency and Ramsey County Health Department rules and
regulations.
      ∙   Law Enforcement Agency. An agency or a person designated by the City
Council.
      ∙   Manufacture. In places other than a pharmacy, shall mean and include
the production, cultivation, quality control, or standardization, by
mechanical, physical, chemical or pharmaceutical means, packing, repacking,
tableting, encapsulating, labeling, relabeling, or filling, of a controlled
substance.
      ∙   Occupant. Any person who occupies real property, whether with or
without any right, title, or interest in the property, and any person in
possession or charge or such property in the event the owner resides or is
located elsewhere.
      ∙   Owner. Any person, firm or corporation who owns, in whole or in part,
the land, buildings or structures associated with a clandestine drug lab site.
Unless information is provided to prove otherwise, the owner of real property
is deemed to be the property taxpayer of record in the Ramsey County records,
and the owner of a vehicle, boat or trailer as deemed to be the person listed
as the owner of the most recent title to said vehicle boat or trailer.
      ∙   Public health nuisance. All dwellings, accessory structures and
buildings or adjacent property associated with a clandestine drug lab site
deemed unsafe due to potential health hazards.
      ∙   Remediation. Methods such as assessment, evaluation, testing,
venting, detergent scrubbing, enclosure, encapsulation, demolition, and/or
removal of contaminate materials from a chemical investigation site.
650.13   Public Health Nuisance.
   A clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site is hereby determined to be
a public nuisance subject to the regulations of this Chapter
650 in addition to any and all applicable federal, state, or local laws and
ordinances. No person may occupy, enter or allow occupancy or entrance to
property declared a public health nuisance under this Chapter
650 until such declaration is vacated or modified to allow occupancy.
650.14   Notice to Other Agencies ("Agency Notice").
   Law enforcement authorities, if other than the City's Law Enforcement
Agency, upon identification of a clandestine drug lab site or a chemical dump
site shall promptly notify the City's Law Enforcement Agency. The City's Law
Enforcement Agency shall notify the Building Official, appropriate health
authority and other appropriate agencies of the property location, property
owner if known, and conditions found.
650.15   Notice to Owner and Occupant ("Owner/Occupant Notice").
   Upon notification by law enforcement authorities, the Building Official will
promptly notify the following parties by U.S. Mail:
   A)   The owner of the property, if known.
   B)   Occupants of the property.
   C)   Any neighbors determined to be at risk to the extent that they can be
located.
   D)   Other appropriate state and local authorities including, but not
limited, to the Minnesota Department of Health, the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, which are known to have applicable public and environmental protection
responsibilities.
   The Owner/Occupant Notice must, at a minimum, include the location of the
chemical dump site or the clandestine drug lab site; the name of the property
owner, if known; the type and nature of the contamination; and the extent of
the contamination. The Building Official must also cause a copy of the Owner/
Occupant Notice to be posted at each appropriate access point to such site.
Removal of the posted Owner/Occupant Notice by anyone other than the Building
Official, City's Law Enforcement Agency, or their designees, is prohibited.
650.16   Issuance of Abatement Order ("Abatement Order").
   The Building Official shall notify and order the property owner and occupant
to have the public health nuisance abated as provided in and this Chapter. The
Abatement Order shall include a description of the site and all portions
thereof that are determined to be contaminated and shall include statements
indicating:
   A)   That all or portions of the site are determined to be contaminated and
at risk to occupants or visitors are immediately vacated.
   B)   That the owner commence and complete all testing and clean up
procedures and other required remedial actions on the site by dates specified
in the order or such other dates agreed to by the City.
   C)   That the site may not be re-occupied or used in any manner until it has
been completely cleaned in accordance with the guidelines established by the
MDH.
   D)   That if the owner does not commence testing and complete the clean up
procedures by the dates established in the order, the City, its officials,
employees, or agents, will arrange appropriate on-site assessment and cleanup
services at the owner's expense.
   E)   That the owner is responsible for all costs associated with the on-site
assessment and clean up of the site including all costs incurred by the City
and other public agencies, and that if the owner does not promptly pay those
cost they will be assessed against the property and collected in the manner of
a special tax.
650.17   Service of Abatement Order.
   The Abatement Order shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof
is delivered in one of the following methods:
   A)   Delivered personally
   B)   Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last know
address.
   C)   A copy posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling or area
affected by such order.
650.18   Property Owner and Occupant Responsibility to Act.
   Property owner(s) and occupant(s) provided with an Owner/Occupant Notice,
which may include the posted warning notice informing them about the chemical
investigation site public health nuisance, shall promptly act to vacate within
twenty-four (24) hours all occupants from those parts of a structure that are a
chemical investigation site public health nuisance, including dwellings,
buildings, motor vehicles, trailers, boats or other vehicles and appliances.
   Subd. 1    In the event the property owner(s) and occupant(s) who received
the Owner/Occupant Notice fail to vacate parts of a structure that are a
chemical investigation site public health nuisance, the Building Official shall
order all persons to vacate the premises. Failure to leave is a misdemeanor.
Where a person fails to vacate the premises as ordered by the Building
Official, the City's Law Enforcement Agency may be summoned to assist in
vacating the premises and issuing such citations or in making such arrests as
may be necessary to comply with this subsection.
   Subd. 2   Except as hereinafter provided, within ten (10) business days of
receiving the Abatement Order, the property owner(s) and/or occupant(s) shall
act to accomplish the following:
      A.   Notify the Building Official that the affected parts of the
structure has been and will remain vacated and secured until the health
authority acts to remove the chemical investigation site public health nuisance
declaration;
      B.   Contract with one or more acceptable environmental hazard testing
and cleaning firms (acceptable firms are those that have provided the Minnesota
Department of Health and/or Building Official assurance of appropriate
equipment, procedures and personnel) to accomplish the following:
         1.   Conduct a detailed on-site assessment;
         2.   Determine the extent of contamination;
         3.   Carry out and /or direct remediation operations;
         4.   Perform and/or direct follow-up sampling and testing; and
         5.   Determine that the risks are sufficiently reduced, according to
Minnesota Department of Health guidelines, to allow the structure to be
reoccupied;
      C.   Provide the Building Official with the identity of the environmental
hazard testing and cleaning firm with whom the owner has contracted, for
remediation of the structure as described above; and
      D.   Provide the Building Official with the contractor's plan and
schedule for remediation leading to removal of the chemical investigation site
public health nuisance declaration.
   Subd. 3   The property owner(s) or occupant(s) may seek authorization for an
extension of time to allow the owner to consider options for arranging cleanup
or removal of the affected parts of the structure. The owner(s) or occupant(s)
must show good cause for any such extension. Any extension shall be dependent
on the owner(s) assurance that the affected parts of the structure will not be
occupied pending appropriate cleanup or demolition.
   Subd. 4   The owner(s), occupant(s) or their contractor shall provide
documentation of the cleanup and remediation, including but not limited to
follow-up environmental testing as deemed necessary, to the Building Official.
Review and determination of acceptable cleanup must be made by the Building
Official prior to re-occupancy of the property.
650.19   Owner's Responsibility for Cost.
   The owner of the site is responsible for the costs of vacating the site and
surrounding areas, testing, clean-up and public expenses. Public expenses
include all costs that have or may be incurred by the City and other public
agencies including but not limited to, costs for:
   A)   Emergency Response
   B)   Posting and physical security of site
   C)   Notification of affected parties
   D)   Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment
process
   E)   Laboratory fees
   F)   Clean-up fees
   G)   Administrative fees
650.20   Recovery of Public Costs.
   The City is authorized under Minnesota Statutes 463 to proceed within ten
(10) business days after mailing of notification, to initiate the assessment
and cleanup when the property owner (a) is not located, (b) is located but
fails to respond appropriately, or (c) notifies the City that the owner refuses
to or cannot pay the costs or arrange timely assessment and cleanup that is
acceptable to the Building Official.
   Subd. 1   The City may abate the nuisance by removing any hazardous
structure, building, or otherwise, in compliance with Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 463 or by any other means provided under law.
   Subd. 2   If the City abates the public health nuisance, it may recover all
costs associated with such abatement.
   Subd. 3   In addition to any other legal remedy, the City may recover costs
by civil action against the person or persons who own the property or by
assessing such costs as a special tax against the property in the manner that
taxes and special assessments are certified and collected pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes §429.101
650.21   Authority to Modify or Remove Declaration of Public Health Nuisance.
   The Building Official is authorized to modify the Declaration of chemical
investigation site public health nuisance. Such modifications or removal shall
be only after the Building Official has determined levels of contamination are
sufficiently reduced through remediation to warrant modification or removal of
the declaration. The Building Official may rely on information from competent
sources, including those supplied by the property owner(s) and/or others such
as state and local health, safety, and pollution control authorities to reach
such decisions.
Section 660 - Garbage, Refuse, and Recycling
(adopted 12/20/07)
660.01    Purpose.
   Subd. 1   The City Council finds, determines, and declares that it is
necessary and conducive for the protection and enhancement of the public
health, safety and welfare of the people to provide regulations for the
dumping, collection, and disposal of garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, and
other mixed municipal solid waste within the City. In order to protect and
enhance the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the City, this
subsection seeks to prohibit and prevent the indiscriminate and uncontrolled
use of property for dumping purposes in violation of zoning regulations, health
regulations, and recognized public health standards; prevent and prohibit open
dumping on land in the City; promote environmentally responsible behavior in
regards to recyclable materials; and require that disposal, collection, and
dumping of garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, and other mixed municipal
solid waste materials be authorized only pursuant to permits granted under this
subsection.
660.02   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
      ∙   Collection. The aggregation of garbage, refuse, recyclable materials,
and other mixed municipal solid waste from the place at which it is generated
and includes all activities up to the time when materials are delivered to a
designated facility.
      ∙   Commercial, Institutional, and Industrial. Any location in the City
that is not residential and contains a retail business, restaurant,
manufacturing enterprise, government, school, church, nursing home, daycare
facility or any other similar establishments.
      ∙   Garbage. Putrescible animal, vegetable, or other matter that attends
the preparation, consumption, display, dealing in or storage of meat, fish,
fowl, birds, fruit or vegetables, including the cans, containers or wrappers
wasted along with such materials.
      ∙   Manufactured Home or Mobile Home. The definition given it under M.S.
Chapter 327 as amended from time to time.
      ∙   Manufactured Home Community. Any site, lot, field or tract of land
upon which two or more occupied manufactured or mobile homes are located.
      ∙   Mixed Municipal Solid Waste. The definition given it under M.S. Ch.
115A.03, as amended from time to time.
      ∙   Multi-family dwelling. A building or complex which provides more than
four residential dwelling units as part of a large building or complex which as
part of the rental fee or association dues provides collection service for the
entire group of households.
      ∙   Refuse. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste (except body
waste) including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, abandoned automobiles, automobile parts, tires, demolition and
construction debris, and market and industrial solid waste.
      ∙   Refuse Collector. Any person, firm, corporation or business licensed
to collect refuse and other mixed municipal solid waste from residential or
non-residential premises, or both.
      ∙   Recyclable Materials. Any material that is separated from refuse or
other mixed municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling.
      ∙   Recycling. The process of collecting and preparing recyclable
materials and reusing the materials in their original form or using them in
manufacturing processes that do not cause the destruction of recyclable
materials in a manner that precludes further use.
      ∙   Recycling Contractor. A company or corporation that is in the
business of collecting and/or transporting, recyclable materials to be
processed for use or resale value.
      ∙   Recycling Facility. A facility at which materials are prepared for
reuse in their original form or for use in manufacturing processes that do not
cause the destruction of the materials in a manner that precludes further use.
      ∙   Single-family Dwelling. Any building containing one to four dwelling
units (single-family, duplex, triplex, and fourplex), and any building with
units contiguous to each other (townhouses) sharing no more than two common
walls and not having a centralized garbage, refuse, mixed municipal solid waste
and/or recycling pickup location.
660.03    Depositing Restricted.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any
garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, or other mixed municipal solid waste
upon any vacant lot or other tract of land, whether platted or unplatted, or
upon any ground appurtenant to any building in the City except in the manner
provided by this subsection.
660.04    Collection and Licensing.
   Subd. 1.   No person, company, or corporation shall act as a garbage
collector or recycling contractor without first obtaining the appropriate
licenses required by the County and the City. Anyone desiring a license to
collect garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, or other mixed municipal solid
waste material in the City shall submit a completed license application form
and all required information prior to providing services within the City and
shall otherwise comply with and be subject to Arden Hills Code
Section 300 and its subdivisions.
   Subd. 2.   No person, except a collector duly licensed by the City, shall
collect or in any manner interfere with garbage, refuse, recyclable material,
or other mixed municipal solid waste material placed in containers for
collection or interfere in any manner with containers for garbage, refuse,
recyclable materials, or other mixed municipal solid waste.
   Subd. 3.   All garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, and other mixed
municipal solid waste shall be transported on the streets or alleys in the City
only in vehicles with leak proof bodies of easily cleanable construction and
metal sides and a closable cover. Vehicles shall be so operated that contents
do not spill or drip upon streets or alleys or otherwise create a nuisance. The
equipment operator shall be responsible for promptly cleaning up any drips or
spills. The equipment shall be kept clean and shall not be allowed to stand in
any street or public place longer than necessary to collect materials.
   Subd. 4.   No person, company, or corporation shall collect or remove
garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, or other mixed municipal solid waste in
any residential district or from any property sharing a property line with a
residential district in which the collection can cause a negative impact to the
adjacent residential district (i.e., noise, odors), except between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
   Subd. 5.   A licensee's failure to comply with the provisions of the City of
Arden Hills code, State laws or any of the conditions attached to the license
shall be grounds for license revocation, without refund of licensee fee.
660.05   Containers and Placement of Containers. (amended 12/3/08)
   Subd. 1.   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, all garbage,
refuse, recyclable material, and other mixed municipal solid waste shall be
kept in rust resistant nonabsorbent and easily washable containers. Garbage and
refuse containers shall also be watertight, equipped with a bail or handles,
and covered with close fitting lids. Insofar as practicable, all materials
shall be drained of liquids and wrapped in paper or otherwise sealed in a bag
or other container. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number to hold
all garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, and other mixed municipal solid
waste accumulating between collections. All containers on private property,
located in the R-1, R-2, or R-3 Districts, shall be kept in the following
manner:
      A.   Containers shall be stored within an enclosed building, or in the
side or rear yard adjacent to a structure. Containers shall not be stored in
the front yard forward of the principal structure. For properties adjacent to
more than one public street, the side of the property with driveway access to
the public street shall be deemed the front yard.
      B.   Containers shall not be stored closer to the principal building of
an adjoining lot than to the principal building on the lot where they are
stored.
      C.   All containers shall be washed and treated with a disinfectant as
often as necessary to prevent a nuisance.
      D.   Containers shall be kept in a tidy and orderly manner, with lids
closed, and all refuse stored within.
   Subd. 2.   All garbage, refuse, and recycling containers located on public
property shall be located as determined by the Public Works Director to promote
efficient public use and maintenance of public property.
   Subd. 3.   When extra recycling materials do not fit in the containers
provided, certain items may be placed outside of the containers. Cardboard
boxes should be flattened and bundled, not exceeding three (3) feet in length
and fifty (50) pounds in weight and placed next to the recycling container. Old
newspapers or mixed paper should be bagged and set next to the recycling
container.
   Subd. 4.   Tree cuttings shall be bundled, not exceeding three (3) feet in
length and fifty (50) pounds in weight, and placed next to the yard waste
container.
   Subd. 5.   Garbage collectors may charge an extra fee and distribute
guidelines for excess materials that cannot be placed inside of the refuse
container.
   Subd. 6.   Refuse from demolition or construction sites must be stored in
roll-off containers or other refuse containers. These containers shall be kept
clean, orderly, and in good condition so as to prevent a nuisance.
   Subd. 7.   Commercial, business, industrial, or other such establishments
having refuse and/or recyclable material volume in excess of two cubic yards
per week and all multi-family dwellings shall provide bulk or box type refuse
storage containers or approved equivalent. These containers shall be so located
as to be accessible to collection equipment and so as not to require an
intermediate transfer. These containers shall be kept clean, orderly, and in
good condition so as to prevent a nuisance.
   Subd. 8. Refuse and recycling containers from single-family dwellings shall
be placed at the end of the driveway after 6:00 p.m. the night before, or
anytime on the day of collection. Waste containers shall not be placed in the
street. Containers shall be removed after pickup on the scheduled collection
day. (amended 10/26/20)
660.06   Garbage, Refuse, and Mixed Municipal Solid Waste Collection.
   Subd. 1.   All occupied properties shall arrange for the collection of
garbage, refuse, or other mixed waste thereof with a licensed refuse collector
and shall pay the collector an amount not to exceed the collector's scheduled
rates, as approved by the Council. All properties are required to contract for
garbage collection services unless proof of other legal disposing of waste can
be demonstrated to the City upon request.
   Subd. 2.   Collection of garbage and other refuse from single-family
dwellings shall be made at least once each week by a duly licensed collector
and every fourteen days from all other properties unless the City Administrator
agent approves a waiver. Those properties south of Interstate 694 (Zone 1)
shall receive collection services on Tuesdays and those properties north of
Interstate 694 (Zone 2) shall receive collection services on Wednesdays. If a
holiday occurs on the collection day, collection shall occur on the week day
that immediately follows.
660.07   Recyclable Materials Collection.
   Subd. 1.   Curbside Residential Recycling Service. The City shall contract
with a recycling contractor to serve as the exclusive curbside collector of
recyclable materials for single family, duplex, triplex, and fourplex
residential dwellings.
   Subd. 2.   Multi-Family and Manufactured Home Community Residential
Recycling Service. Every multi-family building and manufactured home community
shall contract with a recycling contractor who will remove recyclable materials
by a duly licensed collector at least twice monthly with City Council approval.
Owners of multi-family buildings and manufactured home communities may
subscribe to the City's curbside collection program according to negotiated
pricing with City Council approval and acceptance by the City's curbside
recycling contractor.
   Subd. 3.   Commercial, Institutional, and Industrial Recycling Service.
Commercial, institutional, and industrial locations in the City are encouraged
to contract with a recycling contractor that removes recyclable materials
provided the recycling contractor is licensed by the City.
   Subd. 4.   Recyclable Materials to Be Collected. The following list of
recyclable materials must be collected by the recycling contractor for curbside
residential recycling collection and by any hauler licensed by the City to
collect recyclable materials from multi-family or manufactured home
communities. Minimum recycling service provided must include the collection of
the following materials:
      A.   Paper - including, but not limited to, newspaper, corrugated
cardboard, mixed mail, boxboard, telephone books, and/or magazines.
      B.   Glass - including, but not limited to, clear, brown, and green glass
bottles and jars.
      C.   Metal - including, but not limited to, steel and aluminum food and
beverage cans.
      D.   Plastics - including, but not limited to, plastic containers with
necks marked with a #1 or #2.
   Subd. 5.   Recyclable Materials Set Out for Collection Separately from
Refuse Shall Not Be Disposed As Refuse. All recyclable materials collected
shall be delivered to a recycling facility or end market. Recycling contractor
(s) shall provide proof of delivery of recyclable materials to recycling
facilities and/or end markets upon request of the City.
   Subd. 6.   Report to the City. All licensed recycling contractors who
collect from single-family residential, multi-family residential, or
manufactured home communities shall keep accurate records of all material
collected and submit a report to the City on a monthly basis detailing the
total tonnage by type of recyclable materials collected, by residential
dwelling type, in a format and at the level of detail requested by the City.
Failure to provide the required reports shall be cause for suspension of the
collection license. (adopted 12/20/07)
Chapter 7 - Recreation Areas
Section 700 - Lakes
700.01   Purpose, Intent and Application.
   As authorized by M.S. § 86B.201 (2), as now in effect and as hereafter
amended time from time, this section is enacted for the purpose and with the
intent to control and regulate the use of the waters of Lake Johanna (62 78),
T. 30, R. 23, S. 33 34, Ramsey County, Minnesota, a body of water located
entirely within the boundaries of the City, to promote its fullest use and
enjoyment by the public in general and the citizens of the City in particular;
to ensure safety for persons and property in connection with the use of the
waters; to harmonize and integrate the varying uses of the waters; to fulfill a
demand for the regulation of the waters as indicated by citizens of the City
who responded to questionnaires circulated by the City as to the need for such
regulations; and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of this City.
700.02   Laws and Regulations Adopted.
   The Minnesota Waters and Watercraft Safety Laws, M.S. Ch. 86B, as now
existing and hereafter amended from time to time, and the Boat and Water Safety
Rules and Regulations promulgated by the State of Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources, as the same now exist and are hereafter amended, are hereby
adopted, incorporated herein by reference, and made a part hereof as if set
forth in their entirety. At least three (3) copies of the Waters and Watercraft
Safety Laws and Boat and Water Safety Rules and Regulations, so adopted, shall
be marked as official copies and filed in the office of the city administrator.
700.03   Violations.
   Any person violating the Minnesota Waters and Watercraft Safety Laws and the
Boat and Water Safety Rules and Regulations promulgated by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources, adopted and incorporated herein by reference,
shall be subject to the penalties and punishment provided in this section.
700.04   Enforcement.
   The appropriate officials as designated by the City Council may be
authorized and directed to make such arrangements with the county, including
entering into a joint powers agreement therewith, if necessary, to ensure the
placement of buoys demarcating the restricted speed zones, the notification of
the public of the existence of this section and the enforcement of the
provisions of this section by the county sheriff's office. Notwithstanding
anything herein to the contrary, officers of the City's designated law
enforcement provider shall be authorized and entitled to enforce the provisions
of this section in conjunction with and in addition to officers and deputies of
the county sheriff's office, whether or not the officers of the City's
designated law enforcement provider are deputized by the county sheriff's
office.
700.05   Surface Zoning Map.
   The boundaries of the various speed zones of the waters of Lake Johanna
shall be designated on the map of the lake on file in the office of the city
administrator, which map is adopted and incorporated herein by reference and
made a part of this code as if set out here in full, and shall hereinafter be
referred to as the "Surface Water Zoning Map of Lake Johanna."
700.06   Speed Zones.
   Subd. 1   Establishment and Designation. There is hereby continued a
restricted speed zone between the shoreline of Lake Johanna and a line
approximately two hundred fifty (250) feet from the shoreline. In addition to
this restricted speed zone, there is hereby continued an additional restricted
speed zone encompassing the shallow area approximately near the center of Lake
Johanna, as delineated on the surface water zoning map.
   Subd. 2   Maximum Speed in Restricted Speed Zone. Within the restricted
speed zones established hereby, no watercraft shall at any time be operated at
a speed in excess of five (5) miles per hour.
   Subd. 3   Open Zone. There is hereby continued an open speed zone on Lake
Johanna encompassing all that portion of the surface thereof between and not
included in the restricted speed zones created and established by this section.
   Subd. 4   Restrictions and Speed Limits in Open Zone During Certain Hours.
Within the open speed zone, between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and
7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on each and every day of the week, no motorboat shall
be operated at a speed in excess of five (5) miles per hour. At all other times
during each and every day of the week, no boats shall be operated in the open
zone at a speed in excess of 40 miles per hour.
   Subd. 5   Direction of Travel in Open Zone During Certain Times. Within the
open zone, during the hours in which operating speeds of up to forty (40) miles
per hour are permitted, all motorboats shall travel and be operated in a
counterclockwise direction around Lake Johanna.
   Subd. 6. Notice and Enforcement. Notification and enforcement of the speed
restrictions established shall include placement of any necessary signs at
public watercraft accesses and buoys as provided in Section
700.04 and state law, however, nothing herein shall preclude additional efforts
of public notification nor preclude enforcement by other licensed peace
officers.
   Subd. 7. Violation Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
section of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
thereof, shall be subject to a misdemeanor penalty as then defined by Minnesota
law. Additionally, the City may exercise any civil remedy available under
Minnesota law for the enforcement of this code including civil action,
mandamus, injunctive relief, declaratory action, or the levying of assessments.
(revised 4/24/17)
700.07   Nonsanctioned Racing Prohibited.
   Racing, that is the participation of two (2) or more operators of motorboats
operating their motorboats in a competition of speed, shall be prohibited on
the waters of Lake Johanna unless the same takes place as part of a scheduled
or public race, regatta, tournament or other competition or exhibition duly
sanctioned by the county sheriff pursuant to Minnesota Statutes.
700.08   Josephine Lake; Regulations.
   Portions of Lake Josephine are located within the City of Arden Hills and
within the City of Roseville. The City Councils for the cities of Arden Hills
and Roseville, by adoption of a joint powers agreement, have determined that it
is in the public's interest and in the interests of those people who reside on
property adjacent to Lake Josephine to consistently regulate the surface use of
Lake Josephine. The following regulations shall apply to the surface use of
Lake Josephine:
   Subd. 1.    The definitions contained in M.S. § 86B.005, as amended from
time to time, are hereby incorporated as a part of this regulation.
   Subd. 2.    Motorboat speed on Lake Josephine shall not exceed 40 m.p.h.,
which speed shall be in effect 24 hours per day.
   Subd. 3.    No person shall operate a motorboat or be towed on water skis or
on a similar device at a greater than slow no wake speed within 150 feet of the
shoreline of Lake Josephine. Launching or landing a skier by the most direct
route to open water shall be exempt from this regulation.
   Subd. 4.    Motorboats shall only travel in a counter clockwise direction
except when operating at a slow no wake speed.
   Subd. 5.    Persons operating a motorboat, and those being towed on water
skis or a similar device shall, at all times, maintain an adequate distance
(considering speed and conditions) from other watercraft, swimmers, swim rafts,
and docks, so as to avoid an accident. When a swimmer is present, motorboats or
persons being towed on water skis or a similar device, shall not pass between a
swim raft and the nearest shoreline.
   Subd. 6.    The following parties are exempt from compliance with the above
regulations:
      A.   Authorized resource management, emergency and enforcement personnel
when acting in the performance of their duties; and
      B.   Parties participating in special events as authorized by the City
Council and the Ramsey County sheriff's department pursuant to an approved
permit.
   Subd. 7.    Primary enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility
of the Ramsey County sheriff's department. This, however, shall not preclude
enforcement by other licensed peace officers.
Section 710 - Trees and Vegetation
(sections 7.10-01-710.10 & 710.12, subd 6(A)(7) and 710.12, subd 9(C) repealed
11/28/11)
710.12.1   Protection of Shade Trees* (adopted 8/29/05)
   Subd. 1   Declaration of Policy. The City Council has determined that the
health of oak, elm, and ash trees, hereinafter sometimes collectively referred
to as "shade trees," within the municipal limits are threatened by fatal tree
diseases commonly known as "Oak Wilt Disease", "Dutch Elm Disease", and
"Emerald Ash Borer" respectively, here-inafter sometimes collectively referred
to as "shade tree diseases." It has further determined that the loss of shade
trees growing upon public and private property would substantially depreciate
the value of property within the City and impair the safety, good order,
general welfare and convenience of the public. Accordingly, it is hereby
declared to be the intention of the Council to control and prevent the spread
of shade tree diseases and other epidemic diseases, by enacting this subsection
for that purpose.
   Subd. 2   Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine, imprisonment or both, not to exceed the maximums provided
by state law for a misdemeanor. Each day following the date on which the person
was to have removed any diseased shade tree or wood as specified in written
notice given pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, the person has
allowed the tree to remain on his or her property, or has allowed the parts or
brush there from to remain on his or her property, shall constitute a separate
violation.
   Subd. 3   Forester. The position of city forester is hereby continued and
the powers and duties of the officer are hereby conferred upon the person as
designated from time to time by the Mayor with the concurrence of the Council.
It shall be the duty of the forester to coordinate, under the direction and
control of the Council, all activities of the City relating to the control and
prevention of shade tree diseases. He or she shall recommend to the Council the
details of a program for the control and prevention of the diseases and perform
the duties incident to such a program as adopted by the Council. Inspections
may be performed by a designated tree inspector(s).
   Subd. 4   Interference Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
prevent, delay or interfere with the forester or his or her tree inspector(s)
or designee while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this
subsection.
   Subd. 5.   Epidemic Disease Program. It is the intention of the City Council
to conduct a program of pest control pursuant to the authority granted by
Minnesota statues section 18G.13, as amended, directed at the control and
elimination of Dutch elm disease, oak wilt disease, and elimination of other
tree diseases and is undertaken at the recommendation of the Minnesota
Commissioner of Agriculture.
   Subd. 6.   Shade Tree Nuisances Declared. (amended 11/28/11)
      A.   The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances whenever
and wherever they may be found within the City:
         1.   Any elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the
Dutch elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or which harbors
any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Marsham) or Hylurgopinus
Rufipes (Eichhoff);
         2.   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including stems, branches,
stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed
and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide; and
         3.   Any northern red oak (Quercus rubra, Quercus ellipsoidalis, and
Q. palustris), or part thereof, infected to any degree with the oakwilt
disease, Ceratocystis fagacearum.
         4.   Any living or standing white oak (Quercus alba), bur oak (Quercus
macrocarpa), and swamp white oak (Quercus bicolor), that poses a threat of
transmission of the oak wilt disease to other trees.
         5.   Red oak species deemed by the City forester or designated tree
inspector to be a potentially diseased spore producing tree (PSPT) must be
removed before March 15th of the year following complete tree wilt. Any removed
red oak tree should be disposed of at an approved wood utilization site or
properly treated, i.e. main stems cut into firewood length sections, split if
appropriate, stacked and covered in clear plastic with the edges sealed at the
ground line to prevent vector entry or escape.
         6.   Other shade trees with epidemic diseases or epidemic insect
infestations.
   Subd. 7   Shade Tree Nuisances Prohibited. (amended 11/28/11) It is unlawful
for any person to permit the spread of a public nuisance as defined in this
chapter across his or her property lines in any specified control areas as
established by the city. Such nuisances shall be abated in a manner prescribed
in this chapter.
   Subd. 8    Inspection by Certified Tree Inspector.
      A.   The forester shall engage one or more persons, each of whom shall
have been issued a certificate from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture
pursuant to M.S. § 89.63, as amended from time to time, certifying that he or
she is a qualified or certified tree inspector, for the purposes of inspecting
any public or private properties, upon prior notification, to detect shade
trees harboring shade tree diseases, which inspector(s) shall act as the duly
authorized agent(s) of the forester. Nothing herein shall preclude the forester
from being certified by the State Department of Agriculture as a qualified tree
inspector and acting as such on behalf of the City.
      B.   The tree inspector(s) shall inspect all premises and places, both
public and private, within the City as often as is practicable to detect and
mark the location of all shade trees infected with shade tree diseases and
report the results of the inspections to the forester immediately after each
inspection has been conducted. The forester, or the tree inspector(s), may send
appropriate specimens or samples to the State Department of Agriculture for
analysis, or take such other steps for diagnosis as may be recommended by the
Department. In addition to the foregoing inspections, it shall be the duty of
the tree inspector(s) to investigate all reported incidents of infestation by
Dutch elm fungus, elm bark beetles, emerald ash borer or any other
manifestations of shade tree diseases.
      C.   A property owner or contractor who becomes aware of any tree
infestation within the City shall notify the City Forester within seven (7)
days.
      D.   The City forester and tree inspector(s) shall have the right to
enter upon all private premises within the City at any reasonable time for the
purpose of carrying out the duties assigned to them under this subsection,
including inspection, treatment, cutting, burning or removing of diseased shade
trees.
   Subd. 9   Notices to Property Owners.
      A.   After each inspection and investigation, whenever the forester or
the tree inspector(s) has found with a reasonable certainty that a shade tree
or any wood that harbors shade tree disease to such an extent that the same
constitutes a threat of infestation of shade trees in proximity thereto, the
tree inspector(s) shall mark the diseased shade trees or wood or both, as the
case may be, in a visible manner and notify each owner of real estate within
the City whereon the diseased shade trees or wood, or both as the case may be,
are located, which notice shall contain the inspection information with respect
to the diseased shade trees upon the property and shall further advise that, in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection, the owner is required to
remove the trees or wood, or both, as the case may be, within (20) (amended 11/
28/11) days for elm and ash trees and (30) days for oak trees and other trees
species from the date of the letter being sent to the property owner. The
notices shall be sent by certified mail with return receipt requested to the
last known address of the owner. In the event that the certified mail is not
delivered, mailing by ordinary mail to the address shall be deemed sufficient
notice.
      B.   The notices to be sent under the provisions of this subdivision
shall be sent to the occupant of premises upon which the diseased shade trees
or wood, or both as the case may be, are located, if those premises are
occupied, and also to the owner of the premises, if the owner has an address
different from the subject premises and the address is disclosed by the records
of the county department of property taxation. Reasonable inquiry by the
forester or the tree inspector(s) shall be sufficient to meet this requirement,
and telephone inquiry of the office of the county department of property
taxation shall be deemed reasonable inquiry for the purpose of ascertaining the
addresses. If the subject premises are unoccupied, then mailing to the address
of the owner as shown by the records of the county department of property
taxation shall be deemed sufficient.
      C.   No person shall allow, permit the spread of, or fail to abate a
public nuisance as defined in this code. Such nuisances shall be abated in the
manner prescribed in this code.
   Subd. 10    Removal of Diseased Shade Trees.
      A.   An owner of real estate in the City who is notified of the existence
on his or her property of shade trees or wood therefrom, or both as the case
may be, harboring shade tree disease shall within the time specified in the
written notice cut down or have cut down each of the diseased trees, remove or
have removed all parts, branches and brush there from, and transport or have
transported all the parts, branches and brush from the diseased trees and any
diseased wood from the premises to an authorized disposal or chipping site.
With respect to the transportation of wood from diseased elms or ash trees, it
shall be unlawful for any person to transport within the City any bark bearing
elm or ash wood.
      B.   The City Forester shall enforce the treatment of nuisance by
requiring the performance of one or more of the following disease control
methods listed in subsection C in order to destroy and prevent the spread of
epidemic diseased of shade trees, including, but not limited to, Dutch elm
disease, emerald ash borer, or oak wilt disease. Such abatement may be
designated by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture or the University of
Minnesota.
      C.   The following abatement procedures are recommended by the City of
Arden Hills:
         1.   Root graft barrier installation at least 60 inches in the soil to
isolate the diseased trees;
         2.   Removal of trees;
         3.   Stump grinding;
         4.    Burning, chipping, debarking or properly covering and sealing
the potentially hazardous wood and/or stumps.
      D.   To prevent root graft transmission of tree related diseases, a
barrier must be created between diseased and healthy trees, either by cutting
the root system with a 54-inch blade or longer by using a vibratory cable plow,
or by digging a trench to a minimum depth of 60 inches in the soil surrounding
the diseased trees. Such abatement procedures will be carried out in accordance
with current technical and expert opinions and plans as designated by the State
Commissioner of Agriculture.
      E.   In addition the owner may poison or have poisoned the stumps of
trees diseased with oak wilt and shall debark or have debarked to the ground
line the stumps of trees diseased with Dutch elm disease or emerald ash borer
in such manner as may be approved by the forester.
   Subd. 11   Abatement by City. In the event the owner fails or refuses to
abate the nuisances as so required, then the forester shall upon orders from
the Council, abate the nuisance by cutting down diseased shade trees and
removing all parts, branches and brush thereof, together with any diseased wood
of any diseased shade trees located on the premises, from the premises to an
authorized disposal or chipping site. The cost of the City's abating the
nuisance shall be billed to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which
the nuisances existed.
   Subd. 12   Assessment for Nuisance Abatement. If the owner or occupant fails
to pay the bill, as provided for in Subd. 9, within thirty (30) days of the
date thereof, the Council may then assess the amount due, plus interest,
against the property as a special assessment under M.S. Ch. 429.101 (amended
11/28/11), as amended from time to time, installments of which assessment shall
in no event be payable over a period exceeding five (5) years from the date the
same have been levied. On or before October 1 of each year, the city
administrator shall list the total unpaid charges for each such abatement
against each separate lot or parcel to which the same is attributable.
Thereafter, the charges may then be spread by the Council as a special
assessment against the property benefited by the abatement, and the assessment
certified to the county as provided by law.
   Subd. 13   Request for Laboratory Testing. Any owner of real estate in the
City who receives a notice as provided in Subd. 7 to the effect that shade
trees or wood, or both as the case may be, on his or her property harbor shade
tree disease and must be removed within the time specified in the notice, may
request the forester to obtain a laboratory test of one or more of the trees.
The request must be made no later than the date on which the trees or diseased
wood are to be removed from the premises, as specified in the written notice
from the City to the owner as provided herein, by written notice from the owner
to the forester sent by certified mail with return receipt requested. Upon
receipt of the request, the forester shall promptly engage the services of the
State Department of Agriculture or a qualified laboratory to make analyses of
appropriate specimens or samples of the allegedly diseased shade trees. If the
analyses confirm the original diagnosis that the shade trees are infected or
the wood thereof diseased, or both whichever the case may be, the requesting
owner shall pay all expenses and charges incurred for the analyses by the City.
If the test discloses that the trees or wood are not so diseased, the City
shall bear all the costs and the forester shall remove the trees or wood from
the list of diseased trees. If the test confirms the original diagnosis that
the trees or wood or both as the case may be, are diseased, notice thereof
shall be sent the owner by the forester, and the owner shall remove the
diseased trees or wood or both as the case may be, within one week after
receipt of the notice.
   Subd. 14   Spraying or Treatment of Shade Trees.
      A.   Whenever the forester determines that any shade tree or shade tree
wood within the City is infected with shade tree disease, he or she may spray
or treat all nearby high value shade trees by such chemical or mechanical means
as will be effective to prevent as fully as possible the spread of shade tree
disease thereto. The forester may also cause the diseased shade trees or wood
to be sprayed or treated by chemical or mechanical means so as likewise to
control the possible spread of shade tree disease to neighboring, high value
shade trees. Such procedure shall be carried out in accordance with current
technical and expert opinions and plans of the State Department of Agriculture
and under the supervision of the Department whenever possible.
      B.   As determined necessary by the City Forester, the City may utilize
chemical means of treatment. If chemical treatments are deemed necessary, the
cost for this service shall be borne by the City. The costs of the mechanical
means of treatment shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises, the
shade trees upon which have been mechanically treated by the City. The owner or
occupant of the premises shall be billed the costs of the mechanical treatment,
and in the event of nonpayment of the bill within thirty (30) days of the date
thereof, the Council may then assess the amount due, plus interest, in the
manner provided in Subd. 10.
      C.   The forester shall notify, in the manner provided in Subd. 9, each
owner or occupant of real estate within the City of the date after which shade
trees on his or her property shall be mechanically treated, which date shall
not be less than five (5) days from the date of mailing the notice.
   Subd 15.   Transportation of Epidemic Diseased Wood. It is unlawful for any
person to transport within the City any diseased wood that is determined to be
hazardous, as described in Subd. 6.
   Subd 16.   Public Tree Care. The City has the right to plant, prune,
maintain, remove or perform any other arboricultural practices as necessary on
all public property including the street right-of-way to ensure public safety
and to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
   Subd 17.   Abuse or Mutilation of Public Trees. Unless specifically
authorized by the City Forester, no person shall intentionally damage, cut,
carve, transplant, remove any tree, attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising
poster, or other contrivance to any tree, allow any gaseous liquid or solid
substance which is harmful to come in contact with any tree, or set fire or
permit any fire to burn when the heat could injure any portion of any tree, or
top a tree by severely cutting back the tree canopy to a stub.
   Subd 18.   Violation of Penalty. Any person, firm or cooperation who
violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, thereof, shall be subject to a misdemeanor penalty as then by
defined by Minnesota law. Additionally, the City may exercise any civil remedy
available under Minnesota law for the enforcement of this code including civil
action, mandamus, injunctive relief, declaratory action, or the levying of
assessments.
Section 720 - Arden Hills Parks System
720.01   Purpose.
   This section is enacted for the purpose of and with the intent to regulate
the use of the Arden Hills Parks System by members of the public in order to
promote the fullest use and enjoyment of the system by the public in general
and the citizens of the City in particular, to ensure safety for persons and
property in connection with the use of the system, to harmonize and integrate
the varying uses of the system, to protect public property and resources for
posterity, and to enhance the general health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City.
720.02   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed:
      ∙   Cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-
derived consumer products. These terms shall have the meaning established in
Minn. Stat. § 342.01.
      ∙   City. The City of Arden Hills, Ramsey County, Minnesota.
      ∙   Council. The City Council.
      ∙   Department. The parks and recreation department of the City.
      ∙   Director. Either the person authorized by the Council to serve as the
parks and recreation director of the City, or if such a person has not been
appointed, to the city administrator.
      ∙   Electronic Delivery Device. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance, whether natural or synthetic,
intended for human consumption through inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the
product. Electronic delivery device includes but is not limited to devices
manufactured, marketed, or sold as electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars,
electronic pipe, vape pens, modes, tank systems, or under any other product
name or descriptor. Electronic delivery device includes any component part of a
product, whether or not marketed or sold separately. Electronic delivery device
excludes drugs, devices, or combination products, as those terms are defined in
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, that are authorized for sale by the
United States Food and Drug Administration.
      ∙   Law Enforcement Officer. Any member of the City's designated law
enforcement provider, or to any person duly deputized or commissioned by the
Board of Ramsey County Commissioners or the State of Minnesota for the purpose
of enforcing the laws, ordinances and regulations of their respective
jurisdictions.
      ∙   Open Space Site. Any public park including the parking area and
driveways appurtenant thereto, any pathway, any trail, any bathing beach or any
other similar public open space area owned, leased, improved, maintained,
operated or otherwise controlled by the City, or by the County of Ramsey, or by
any other public agency.
      ∙   Open Space Waters. Any shoreline included in the system and those
waters lying within three hundred fifty (350) feet and immediately abutting
such shoreline.
      ∙   Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association
of persons.
      ∙   Smoke. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated product containing,
made, or derived from nicotine, tobacco, marijuana, or other plant or
substance, whether natural or synthetic, that is intended for inhalation.
Smoking includes carrying or using an activated electronic delivery device.
      ∙   System. All of the open space sites located within the City.
      ∙   THC. Tetrahydrocannabinols. (revised 9/11/2023)
720.03   Operating Hours and Access.
   The system shall be open to the public during that period of time thirty
(30) minutes before sunrise and thirty (30) minutes after sunset. No person
shall remain, stop, use or be present within the confines of any open space
site during that period of time between thirty (30) minutes after sunset and
thirty (30) minutes before sunrise. Exceptions may be made at the discretion of
the director in the case of emergency or when special use permits have been
authorized, or when signs with other times are posted, or for other reasons the
director may determine necessary or desirable such as for ballfields with
lights or hockey rinks.
720.04   Permits.
   Subd. 1   When Required. Permits shall be required for the exclusive use of
system facilities. Permits shall be obtained from the parks and recreation
director. Only persons at least eighteen (18) years of age shall be eligible
for a permit.
   Subd. 2   Liability of Permittee. The permittee shall be liable for any
loss, damage or injury sustained by the system or by any person whatever, by
reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permits are
issued.
   Subd. 3   Revocation. The director shall have the authority to revoke a
permit upon evidence of good cause.
720.05   Special Activities.
   Subd. 1   Airborne Activities. No person shall make an airborne ascent or
descent in any open space site, except by permit issued by the City.
   Subd. 2   Bicycling.
      A.   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle in any open space site
except on designated bikeways or surfaces normally provided for vehicular
traffic.
      B.   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle in violation of M.S. Ch.
169, as amended from time to time. Persons riding a bicycle shall observe and
obey all traffic and directional signs.
      C.   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle in any designated bikeway
or surface normally provided for vehicular traffic, except in a prudent and
careful manner.
      D.   Wherever provided, bicycles shall be parked in locations set aside
specifically for their storage.
   Subd. 3   Boating.
      A.   No person shall launch or land any boat, canoe, raft or other
watercraft on or from any shoreline which is part of the system except at
locations specifically designated for such purposes.
      B.   No person shall operate any watercraft within an area which has been
designated as a swimming area.
      C.   No person shall drop or throw from any watercraft garbage, litter or
other debris.
      D.   No person shall stand up in, rock or operate any watercraft in a
careless or reckless manner.
   Subd. 4   Camping.
      A.   No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other temporary
lodging or sleeping place in any open space site, except by permit, and then
only in areas specifically designated for such use.
      B.   Permits for temporary lodging shall be issued to adults only, and
the adult granted the permit shall be on the premises at all times during the
duration of the permit.
   Subd. 5   Equestrian. No person shall ride or drive a horse in any open
space site.
   Subd. 6   Fishing. No person shall take any fish, frog, turtle or crayfish
by angling, spearing, archery, netting or trapping from any open space waters
or from any shoreline, pier or dock included in the system unless in accordance
with state law.
   Subd. 7   Motorized Recreation Vehicle. No person shall operate any
motorized vehicle within any open space site, except in such areas or on paved
surfaces specifically designated for such use. No person shall operate a non-
licensed vehicle on any parkway or other roadway within an open space site.
   Subd. 8   Picnicking. No person shall picnic in any open space site except
in those areas designated and equipped for such use.
   Subd. 9   Snowmobiling.
      A.   No person shall operate a snowmobile at a speed in excess of limits
specifically posted for such use or at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles
per hour within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any fisherman, fish house,
pedestrian, skier, skating rink, sliding area, ski tow area or other area where
such operation would conflict with or endanger other persons or property.
      B.   No person shall operate a snowmobile within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of any residence, except at a speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour or
less.
   Subd. 10    Swimming.
      A.   No person shall bathe, wade or swim in any open space waters or at
any public beach except in such areas specifically designated for such use, and
only at such times when a City or otherwise authorized lifeguard is on duty.
      B.   No person shall bathe, wade or swim at any beach except when dressed
in bathing attire which is socially acceptable and conducive to water safety.
      C.   No person using open space waters shall swim outside of the marked
area.
      D.   No person shall bring into or use at any beach any inner tube, life
raft or other inflatable or buoyant object intended to support a person, except
U.S. Coast Guard approved life jackets or vests when properly attached.
      E.   No person shall possess, carry onto or scatter on any beach, any
glass bottle, broken glass, metal can or other debris which could be a safety
hazard.
      F.   No person shall use any designated public beach area for purposes of
picnicking.
      G.   No person shall launch, dock or operate any watercraft in any
designated swimming area.
720.06   General Conduct.
   Subd. 1   Defacement, Destruction of Property and Resources. No person shall
tamper with, injure, deface, destroy, disturb, damage or remove any part of any
system building, structure, sign, lightpole, drinking fountain, hydrant, table,
grill, equipment, statue, flower, tree, shrub, plant, turf, soil conditions, or
mineral resource, nor shall any person plant or cause to be planted any wild,
cultivated or exotic tree, shrub or plant except with the written permission of
the director.
   Subd. 2   Animals.
      A.   No person within custody of any pet or animal shall allow the animal
to disturb, harass or interfere with other open space users or their property.
      B.   All state and local ordinances relating to the licensing and
muzzling of animals and pets shall apply to same brought into any open space
site.
   Cross-reference - Animals and Pets, see
Chapter 4
   Subd. 3   Hunting, Fishing and Molesting Wildlife.
      A.   No person shall kill, hunt, trap, pursue, injure, molest or
unnecessarily disturb or have in possession any species of wildlife including
birds, waterfowl, fish or other animals found within the confines of any open
space site, except that fishing may be permitted in designated areas subject to
laws and regulations as established by the State of Minnesota.
      B.   No person shall remove any animal, living or dead, from a park or
other public open space without written authorization from the City.
      C.   No person shall rob, disturb or molest the nest, eggs or young of
any birds or other animals within the confines of any open space site.
   Subd. 4   Fires.
      A.   No person shall start or maintain a fire in any park or other public
open space site except in grills provided for that purpose in areas
specifically designated for such use. Private grills may be used in designated
areas provided that all ashes and residue therefrom be disposed of in
containers provided for such disposal.
      B.   Any person who starts or maintains a fire in an authorized area
shall not leave a fire unattended or fail to fully extinguish the fire before
leaving.
   Subd. 5   Pollution, Waste and Litter.
      A.   No person shall allow the release of any substance which shall
result in the pollution of open space waters or endanger the health of the
public.
      B.   No person shall deposit, scatter, drop or abandon in any open space
site any paper, bottles, cans, sewage, waste, trash or other debris except in
receptacles provided by the department for such purposes. No person shall
deposit in any receptacle in any open space site any accumulation of waste or
trash generated outside the boundaries of the site.
   Subd. 6   Firearms, Weapons and Fireworks. No person except a law
enforcement officer shall possess or carry a firearm of any description, any
airgun, bow and arrow, knife with a blade greater than three (3) inches,
slingshot, dart or projectile thrower, fireworks or any other dangerous or
illegal weapon in any open space site. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent the recreational use of firearms and bow and arrows on
officially established fields or target ranges, nor to prohibit fireworks
displays authorized by the city.
   Subd. 7   Disturbing the Peace.
      A.   No person or group of persons shall unreasonably disturb the peace
and good order in any open space site by either word or act.
      B.   No person or group of persons shall unreasonably disturb, harass or
interfere with any open space user or the user's property.
   Subd. 8   Audio Devices. No person shall operate or play any sound emitting
equipment in any open space site in such a manner that the sound emanating
therefrom is audible beyond the immediate vicinity of the equipment.
   Subd. 9   Loitering.
      A.   No person over the age of six (6) years shall enter any comfort
station or restroom, washroom or toilet facility set apart or designated for
the opposite sex.
      B.   No person shall lurk or loiter in or around the toilet or other
system structure except to use such facility for the purpose for which it is
intended.
      C.   No person shall lurk or loiter in any parking area adjacent to any
open space site.
   Subd. 10   Alcoholic and Intoxicating Beverages. No person shall transport,
possess, offer for sale, consume or be under the influence of any alcoholic or
intoxicating beverages in any open space site.
   Subd. 11   Tobacco and THC/Cannabis. No person shall offer for sale, smoke,
vape, ingest, use or otherwise consume any product containing tobacco, THC,
cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived
consumer products in any open space site.
(revised 9/11/2023)
   Subd. 12   Games. No person shall engage in any potentially dangerous games
involving thrown or propelled objects, such as, but not limited to footballs,
baseballs, horseshoes, arrows, golf balls, model airplanes, frisbees or any
similar objects, in such manner as to interfere with the safety and comfort of
others. No person shall drive, putt or in any other manner play or practice
golf except in areas specifically designated for such use.
   Subd. 13   Advertising. No person shall distribute, disseminate or cause to
be displayed, any leaflets, pamphlets, circulars, handbills, advertisements or
other written or printed commercial material except with the written permission
of the director.
   Subd. 14   Unlawful Sales. No person shall sell, offer for sale, hawk,
peddle or lease any object, merchandise or service or carry on any manner of
business or commercial enterprise except those concessions authorized or
operated by the City.
   Subd. 15   Construction. The construction of any above or below ground
structure shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
   Subd. 16   Posted Regulations, Directional Signs and Graphics. No person
shall disregard or fail to comply with any posted regulations, directional
signs and graphics, barriers or other control devices located within any open
space site or on any parkway.
720.07   Traffic Rules.
   Subd. 1   Location. No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle within
any open space site except upon roadways, parking areas, parkways or other
areas designated for such use.
   Subd. 2   Parking. No person shall park, stop or leave a vehicle in any open
space site or on any parkway during that period of time thirty (30) minutes
after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise unless otherwise posted.
Exceptions may be made at the discretion of the director in the case of
emergency or when special use permits have been authorized, or for other
reasons the director may determine necessary or desirable.
   Subd. 3   Maintenance. No person shall wash, grease, change oil, service or
repair any vehicle in any open space site. All disabled vehicles shall quickly
be made operational or removed from the open space site.
(Cross reference - Abandoned Property, see
Section 610)
720.08   Penalties for Violation.
   Subd. 1   Misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
subject to a fine or imprisonment not to exceed the maximums provided by state
law.
   Subd. 2   Ejection. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section may be expelled, ejected or ousted at such time from an open space site
at the discretion of a law enforcement officer or department employee.
720.09   Diversion and Disposal of Recreation Areas.
   Subd. 1.   A proposal to divert recreational areas to other uses or to
dispose of recreational areas shall be forwarded to the City's park and
recreation committee for review and recommendations. The park and recreation
committee shall submit its recommendations no later than sixty (60) days from
the date upon which it receives the proposal for review.
   Subd. 2.   Upon receipt of the park and recreation committee's
recommendations, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing preceded by
ten (10) days published notice.
   Subd. 3.   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council may, by four
(4) affirmative votes, authorize the diversion or disposal of recreational
areas if it determines that such action is in the best interest of the City.
The Council shall require that additional recreational areas be acquired to
replace those areas diverted or disposed.
   Subd. 4.   The Council shall obtain from a qualified independent appraiser
an appraisal of the fair market value of the recreational areas to be diverted
or disposed and in the event the City receives less than the appraised fair
market value of such land, the Council shall allocate funds from the capital
improvement budget to equal the deficiency.
   Subd. 5.   The net proceeds or funds received or allocated, and interest
earned thereon, from the diversion or disposal of recreational areas shall be
maintained in a separate fund and shall be used only for the purpose of
acquiring additional recreational areas.
   Subd. 6.   All property conveyed or dedicated at any time to the City
specifically for recreational uses shall be restricted in use for recreational
purposes only and upon acceptance by the City, the property may not be
thereafter disposed of in the manner provided in this section or in any other
manner.
Chapter 8 - Traffic and Motor Vehicles
Section 800 - Traffic and Parking Regulations*
800.01   Highway Traffic Regulation Act Adopted.
   M.S. Ch. 169, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this code as if set out here in full.
800.02   Penalty.
   Any violation of M.S. Ch. 169, commonly referred to as the Highway Traffic
Regulation Act, which occurs within the limits of the City shall be a violation
of this chapter. Any person violating any provision thereof shall be punished
by a fine or imprisonment not to exceed the maximum penalty authorized by state
law.
800.03   Parking Regulations.
(revised 2/23/12)
   Subd. 1   Winter Parking Regulations. Except in compliance with the
directions of a law enforcement officer or in compliance with regulatory
parking signs, no vehicle shall be parked on the improved portion of any street
or highway in the City immediately after the accumulation of two or more inches
of snow and until snow removal or plowing has been completed.
   Subd. 2   Overnight Parking. No vehicle shall be parked on any street
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   Subd. 3   Prohibited Parking Areas. In all residential districts, parking
shall be prohibited on any area of private property except on designated
driveways or parking lots.
   Subd. 4   Parking in Driveways. In all residential districts, there shall be
no more than four vehicles parked on a driveway.
   Subd. 5   Parking on Public Streets. Parking on public streets shall not
exceed six hours.
   Subd. 6   Vehicles over 12,000 Pounds. No motor vehicle or trailer with a
rated gross weight exceeding 12,000 pounds shall be parked or stored in a
residential zone except when loading, unloading or rendering a service.
   Subd. 7   Parking on Boulevard Prohibited. No motor vehicle shall park upon
the boulevard of any public street.
   Subd. 8   Setback from Intersections. Parking shall be set back from street
intersections as follows:
      A.   Twenty (20) feet from crosswalk of any uncontrolled intersection;
      B.   Thirty (30) feet from crosswalk of any controlled intersection; and
      C.   Twenty (20) feet from any intersection without a marked crosswalk.
   Subd. 9   Administrative Procedures. The city administrator shall adopt,
from time to time, procedures to provide for the safe and consistent
application of the parking regulations. The city administrator may grant
variances from the application of parking regulations provided that the
variances can be allowed without creating a safety hazard. Administrative
variances shall be in writing and shall state the specific time limits during
which the variation will be allowed to occur.
   Subd. 10   Impoundment.
      A.   Any vehicle parked in violation of this subsection is hereby
declared to be a traffic safety hazard and nuisance, and the same may be
summarily abated by removing and towing away such vehicle by or under the
direction or at the request of any member of the City's designated law
enforcement provider. Such vehicle shall be stored at such place within or
without the City as may be directed by the City's designated law enforcement
provider; and within fourteen (14) days of such impounding, the City's
designated law enforcement provider shall mail written notice thereof to the
owner at his or her last known address according to the vehicle registration
records of the state. Before the owner or his or her agent shall be permitted
to remove the vehicle from the custody of the City's designated law enforcement
provider, he or she shall furnish satisfactory evidence of identity and
ownership of the vehicle, pay all reasonable charges for the towing and storage
of the vehicle and sign a written receipt for the vehicle.
      B.   As an alternative to the foregoing, the officer may require the
owner of an illegally parked vehicle to remove said vehicle from the subject
street or highway during the times limited above.
   Subd. 11   Prima Facie Evidence of Violation. The operation, use or parking
of a motor vehicle in violation of this subsection shall be prima facie
evidence that the motor vehicle was at the time of the violation controlled,
operated and used by the owner thereof.
   Subd. 12   Temporary Parking Restrictions. The City Administrator or
designee may post temporary parking restrictions on City streets for up to
thirty (30) days in duration. Temporary parking restrictions may include, but
are not limited to, no parking, 2 hour parking, and parking on one side of the
street. (added 6/29/15)
800.04   Unreasonable Acceleration, Speed Limits.
   Subd. 1   Prohibited. Unreasonable acceleration of any motor vehicle on any
public or private road or way within the City, as unreasonable acceleration is
defined in Subd. 2, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
prohibited.
   Subd. 2   Definition. The words "unreasonable acceleration" of a motor
vehicle shall be defined as acceleration without apparent reason, and
accomplished in such manner as to cause squealing or screeching sounds by the
tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the vehicle or both.
   Subd. 3   Prima Facie Evidence. Prima facie evidence of such unnecessary and
unreasonable acceleration shall be squealing or screeching sounds emitted by
the tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the vehicle or
both.
   Subd. 4   Speed Limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
motor vehicle or recreational motor vehicle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the circumstances, and in no event at a speed in
excess of the posted speed limit on any public or private road or way within
the City. Violations may be prosecuted as a petty misdemeanor or by
administrative citation. (Revised 12/12/2022)
800.05   Removal of Key When Parked.
   Subd. 1   Required. No person shall leave a motor vehicle unattended on any
public road or public property in the City, or upon any unattended parking lot
generally held open for the use of the public and operated in connection with a
commercial or business establishment in the City, without first stopping the
engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition of the motor
vehicle, and taking the ignition key with him or her.
   Subd. 2   Police Action. Whenever any officer of the City's designated law
enforcement provider finds any motor vehicle standing in violation of Subd. 1,
the officer shall be authorized and directed to remove from the motor vehicle
the ignition key left therein and to deliver the ignition key to the officer in
charge of the City's designated law enforcement provider with notice being
given to the owner as provided in Section
800.03, Subd. 8.
Section 810 - Recreational Motor Vehicles
810.01   General.
   Subd. 1   Adoption and Incorporation by Reference of Statutes and
Regulations. M.S. §§ 84.787 through 84.929, as now constituted and as hereafter
amended, together with the
regulations of Minnesota Rules Parts 6100.5000 to 6100.6000, as now constituted
and as hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference, made a part of this
chapter as though completely set forth herein, and shall regulate the operation
of recreational motor vehicles on lands not owned by the operator within the
City.
   Subd. 2   Effect of Violation of Statutes and Regulations. Any violation of
the statutes and regulations adopted by reference in Subd. 1 shall be
considered a violation of this section when it occurs within the limits of the
City. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment not to exceed the
maximum penalty authorized by state law.
   Subd. 3   Intent. It shall be the intent of this section to supplement the
laws of this state with respect to the operation of recreational motor
vehicles, in particular, and M.S. Chs. 168 through 171, as amended from time to
time, in general. This section shall not be intended to allow what the state
statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the state statutes expressly allow.
   Subd. 4   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words
and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them:
      ∙   All-Terrain Vehicle. An off road vehicle or motorized flotation-tired
vehicle of not less than three (3) low pressure tires, but not more than six
(6) tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than eight hundred
(800) cubic centimeters and total dry weight of less than six hundred (600)
pounds.
      ∙   Operate. To ride in or on and control the operation of a recreational
motor vehicle.
      ∙   Operator. A person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
recreational motor vehicle.
      ∙   Owner. A person, other than a lien holder, having ownership of or
title to a recreational motor vehicle and entitled to the use or possession
thereof.
      ∙   Recreational Motor Vehicle. A self propelled vehicle and any vehicle
propelled or drawn by a self propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes
including, but not limited to, any snowmobile, trail bike, all terrain vehicle,
hovercraft and other motor vehicle licensed for highway operation, which is
being used for off road recreational purposes.
      ∙   Roadway. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
designed for vehicular traffic.
      ∙   Snowmobile. A self propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice on a natural terrain, steered by wheels, skis or runners.
810.02   Regulations.
   Subd. 1   Compliance with Statutes. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a recreational motor vehicle upon the traveled portion of any public
street or highway except in compliance with all provisions and requirements of
M.S. Ch. 169, as amended from time to time, except those which by their nature
have no application.
   Subd. 2   Registration. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
recreational motor vehicle within the City unless such recreational motor
vehicle is currently and validly registered with the state and its registered
number is conspicuously displayed on the vehicle in accordance with state law.
   Subd. 3   Operator's Age. It shall be a violation for any person under
fourteen (14) years of age to make a direct crossing of a trunk, county state
aid, City road or county highway as the operator of a recreational motor
vehicle. A person fourteen (14) years of age or older, but less than eighteen
(18) years of age, may make a direct crossing of a trunk, county state aid, or
county highway, or City road, only if he or she has in his or her immediate
possession a valid recreational motor vehicle safety certificate issued by the
commissioner of public safety.
   Subd. 4   Permission to Operate on Public Property. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a recreational motor vehicle upon any lands, except
public right of ways owned by the City, county, state or school district and as
provided in Subd. 5, unless permission to do so is lawfully posted upon such
land.
   Subd. 5   Operation within Right of Way. It shall be unlawful for any
person:
      A.   To operate a recreational motor vehicle upon the roadway of any
trunk, county state aid, City or county highway, and, in the case of a divided
trunk or county highway, on that portion of the right of way which lies between
the opposing lanes of traffic, except as provided herein; and
      B.   To operate a recreational motor vehicle at any time within the right
of way of any interstate highway or freeway.
   Subd. 6   Operation on Roadway. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a recreational motor vehicle upon the roadway of any City street,
except as otherwise provided in this section.
   Subd. 7   Permission to Operate on Private Land. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a recreational motor vehicle upon any privately owned
lands without the consent and permission of the owner of such lands, given in
the manner provided in M.S. Ch. 84, as amended from time to time, which is
incorporated by reference and made a part of this section as if set out here in
full.
   Subd. 8   Crossing Streets and Highways.
      A.   With respect to direct crossing of a trunk, county state aid, City
or county highway, such crossings may be made provided:
         1.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety (90)
degrees to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;
         2.   The recreational motor vehicle is brought to a complete stop
before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the highway;
         3.   The driver yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
         4.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway; and
         5.   If the crossing is made between the hours of one half hour after
sunset to one half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on.
      B.   Provided, however, that operation upon a street or highway, as
provided in this section, may be permitted without reference to these
restrictions in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations
where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical.
   Subd. 9   Driving under the Influence. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a recreational motor vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotics or habit forming drugs.
   Subd. 10   Speed Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
recreational motor vehicle at a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper
under the surrounding circumstances.
   Subd. 11   Careless, Reckless Operation. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a recreational motor vehicle in a careless, reckless or negligent
manner so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury
or damage thereto.
   Subd. 12   Proximity to Residences. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a recreational motor vehicle within one hundred (100) feet of a
residential building, except as otherwise specifically permitted.
   Subd. 13   Protection of Vegetation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a recreational motor vehicle in any tree nursery or planting in a
manner which damages or destroys growing stock.
   Subd. 14   Disturbing Peace. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any recreational motor vehicle in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance
and annoys unreasonably, or injures or endangers the health, safety, comfort or
repose of the public.
810.03   Equipment.
   Subd. 1   General. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
recreational motor vehicle, unless it is equipped with at least one headlamp
and one tail lamp, a deadman's throttle, brakes and any other equipment
required by state law, and to standards prescribed by the rule of the
commissioner of highways pursuant to the authority vested in him or her by M.S.
Ch. 84, as amended from time to time.
   Subd. 2   Use of Headlight and Taillight. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate a recreational motor vehicle during the hours between one
half hour before sunset and one half hour after sunrise without the required
headlight and taillight being illuminated.
   Subd. 3   Muffler. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
recreational motor vehicle unless the recreational vehicle is equipped with a
standard engine muffler and exhaust system in good operating condition, as
installed by the manufacturer.
   Subd 4   Noise Making Devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any recreational motor vehicle which has attached to it any type of
noise making devices intended to amplify noise emitted from such machine,
including, but not limited to, devices commonly known as megaphones, expansion
chambers, operational cutouts or other similar devices.
810.04   Inapplicability of Regulations to Governmental Agencies.
   The regulations contained in this section shall not be applicable to the
operation or use of a recreational motor vehicle by agents, representatives,
employees or officials of governmental agencies while in pursuit of their
governmental duties or during emergency situations.
Section 820 - Administrative Citations
(adopted 11/19/10)
820.01   Purpose.
   Arden Hills authorized by resolution the use of administrative citations for
specific traffic offenses, as permitted by the Legislature in Minn. Stat. §
169.999. The City is required by that statute to establish and maintain
procedures through which motorists receiving administrative citations may
obtain an independent hearing or judicial review of a citation. The City
Council finds that establishing a voluntary administrative citation procedure
ensures the availability of an independent hearing and retains full opportunity
to obtain judicial review of a citation.
820.02   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, except as otherwise provided, the following terms
shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
      ∙   Citation. An administrative citation issued to a motorist for a
Designated Traffic Offense occurring within the City.
      ∙   Designated Traffic Offense. Those traffic offenses eligible for
administrative citation as designated by Minn. Stat. § 169.999, subd. 1(b)(1),
(2) and (3), as it may be amended from time to time.
      ∙   Issuing Officer. The licensed peace officer employed by or under
contract with (City) who issues any particular administrative citation.
      ∙   Flyer. A document which informs a person receiving an administrative
citation of:
         A)   the recipient's right to challenge the citation or opt for a
standard criminal citation;
         B)   the City's process for handling challenges to administrative
traffic citations;
         C)   the process for paying a traffic citation; and
         D)   the effect of an administrative traffic citation on a recipient's
driving record.
      ∙   Recipient. The person who receives an administrative citation under
this chapter.
      ∙   Administrator. The Arden Hills City Administrator or City
Administrator's designee.
820.03   Authorization.
   Licensed peace officers employed or under contract with the City may issue
administrative citations for Designated Traffic Offenses occurring within the
City. The fine for committing a Designated Traffic Offense shall be the amount
stated in Minn. Stat. § 169.999, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   Subd. 1   Form of Citation. An issuing officer must use the uniform
administrative traffic citation form approved by the Commissioner of Public
Safety. The officer shall also serve upon the recipient the current version of
the City's response form. The response form shall reference the response
options stated at Section
820.03 (C); and shall provide directions for returning the response form.
   Subd. 2   Delivery to City. The issuing officer shall deliver a copy of the
administrative traffic citation to the City Administrator within a reasonable
time of the date of issuance.
   Subd. 3   Response to Citation. A recipient shall respond to the citation
within 14 days of receipt. The recipient may:
      A.   Admit the violation stated in the citation and agree to pay the
fine;
      B.   Deny the violation stated in the citation and request a hearing; or
      C.   Request that the administrative citation be converted to a standard
traffic citation and filed for processing by the Violations Bureau of the
Ramsey County District Court.
   Subd. 4    Standard Citation Issued If No Response. If the City
Administrator does not receive a written response to a citation within the 14-
day response period, the City Administrator shall request that the peace
officer who issued the citation convert the allegations into a standard traffic
citation, file that regular citation at the District Court and mail a copy to
the recipient.
820.04   Hearing Officers.
   The City shall maintain a list of hearing officers available to conduct
hearings on the merits of an administrative citation, if requested by a
recipient. Hearing officers shall have executed a contract to provide hearing
officer services with the Ramsey County Sheriff's Department. The hearing
officer shall have executed a contract to provide hearing officer services with
the Ramsey County Sheriff's Department or, with one of the cities that receive
law enforcement services from the Ramsey County Sheriff's Department.
   Subd. 1   Request for Hearing. If the recipient responds by requesting a
hearing, the City Administrator shall assign the case to a hearing officer on
the list. The City Administrator shall notify the hearing officer, the
recipient and the issuing officer of the assignment in writing. The hearing
officer shall schedule a hearing within a reasonable date of receiving the
notice. Any delays in holding the hearing shall be reported to the City
Administrator by the hearing officer.
   Subd. 2   Citation Materials. At assignment, the City Administrator shall
transmit a copy of the citation to the hearing officer. Within five days of
assignment, the issuing officer or the officer's department shall transmit
copies of all materials relating to the citation to the hearing officer,
including but not limited to: additional written reports; certificates of
calibration, logs, and other documentation required to support the evidentiary
use of speed detection equipment under Minn. Stat. § 169.14; relevant
certificates of training for the citing officer; and any pictures showing the
alleged offense. The hearing officer shall transmit a copy of any materials
received to the recipient at the earliest opportunity but at least three days
in advance of the hearing.
   Subd. 3   Hearing. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall receive the
testimony of any witnesses, witness statements, and comments presented by the
person cited. The hearing officer will consider these items alongside the
materials submitted by the issuing officer, and may weigh the evidence and make
credibility determinations to the best of the hearing officer's ability. The
hearing officer is not required to apply the rules of evidence in making
determinations about the evidence presented. The issuing officer is not
required to attend the hearing.
   Subd. 4   Decision, Findings. After considering all of the evidence
submitted, the hearing officer shall determine, by a preponderance of the
evidence, whether the person cited did or did not violate the statute or
statutes identified in the citation. The hearing officer shall make written
findings supporting the determination and transmit them to the cited person and
the City Administrator within five days of closing the hearing.
   Subd. 5   Payment Following Finding of Violation. If the hearing officer
finds a violation, the fine for the Designated Traffic Offense is due within 30
days of the date the findings are sent to the recipient. The hearing officer
may not alter or reduce the fine for any offense or combine multiple offenses
into a single fine. Payment of fines due shall be made to the City
Administrator.
   Subd. 6   Standard Citation Issued If No Payment. If payment is not made
within the 30 days, the City Administrator shall request that the issuing
officer or the officer's department issue a standard traffic citation for the
offenses in the administrative citation, mail a copy of the citation to the
individual, and file the citation along with the hearing officer's written
findings with the Ramsey County District Court.
820.05   Designated Administrative Traffic Citation Program Manager.
   Pursuant to Resolution No. 2010-068, the City Council has designated the
Ramsey County Sheriff's Department and its licensed peace officers to
administer the City's administrative traffic citation program and to perform
the duties of the City and the City Administrator as specified therein.
820.06   Severability.
   Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of this Ordinance
be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part
thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
Chapter 9 - Building Regulations
Section 900 - Building Regulations
900.01   Adoption of Minnesota Building Code.
The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and
Industry pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 326B, including all of the
amendments, rules, and regulations established, adopted, and published from
time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the
Building Codes and Standards Unit, is hereby adopted by reference, with the
exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this
ordinance. The Minnesota State Building Code, which includes the International
Fire Code, including Appendix Chapter H and the Minnesota State Fire Code, is
hereby incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set out herein.
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
900.02   Application, Administration and Enforcement.
   Subd. 1   The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall
be in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be
enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota Statutes §
326B.121, Subd. 2(d), when so established by this section.
   Subd. 2   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the
Arden Hills Building Department.
   Subd. 3   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building
Official designated by the City of Arden Hills to administer the code in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes § 326B.133, Subd. 1.
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
900.03   Permits and Fees.
   Subd. 1   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1300.
   Subd. 2   Building Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this
code in accordance with the fee schedule annually adopted by the Arden Hills
City Council. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by this code in accordance with Minnesota Statutes §
326B.148.
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
900.04   Violations and Penalties.
   A violation of the code is a misdemeanor under Minnesota Statutes §
326B.082, Subd. 16.
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
900.05   Building Code Optional Chapters.
   The Minnesota State Building Code, Minnesota Rules Part 1300.0060 allows the
City of Arden Hills to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters
of the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code. The following
optional provisions identified in the most current edition of the Minnesota
State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Arden
Hills building code:
   Minnesota Rules Part 1306.0020, Subp. 1. Requirement. The City hereby adopts
the sprinkler system requirements of Subpart 2 without amendment.
   Minnesota Rules Part 1306.0020, Subp. 2. Existing and new Buildings.
Automatic sprinkler systems for new buildings, buildings with increased floor
area (including the existing building) or buildings in which the occupancy
classification has changed, must be installed and maintained in operational
condition within the structure. The requirements of this subpart apply to
structures that fall within the occupancy classifications established in Part
1306.0030, Items A-D.
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
900.06   Plumbing, plans and specifications, and inspections.
   Subd. 1 All plumbing on private property within the city must comply with
the provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code and this Section.
   Subd. 2 Plans and specifications. Prior to the installation of a system of
plumbing other than for a single-family dwelling, complete plans and
specifications, together with any additional information that the building
official may require, must be submitted in duplicate and approved by the
building official. Construction cannot proceed except in accordance with
approved plans and specifications. Any alteration, extension, or repair of an
existing system is subject to these same requirements, unless waived by the
building official in accordance with Minnesota Rules Part 1300.0215. The
plumbing plan review agreement between the City of Arden Hills and Minnesota
Department of Labor and Industry Plumbing Plan Review shall be on file with the
approved plumbing plan reviewer(s).
   Subd 3. Exceptions. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes § 326B.43, Subd. 2(n),
plumbing plans and specifications for the following projects must be submitted
to the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry for a full plan review:
      A.   State-licensed facilities as defined in Minnesota Statutes §
326B.103, Subd. 13;
      B.   Public buildings as defined in Minnesota Statutes § 326B.103, Subd.
11; and
      C.   Projects of a special nature for which department review is
requested by either the City or the State.
   Subd. 4 Inspections. New plumbing systems or parts of existing plumbing
systems that have been altered, extended, or repaired shall be inspected,
tested, and approved by the building official in 1 accordance with Minnesota
Rules Part 1300.0215, before the plumbing system is put into use. The building
official shall perform the final inspection and witness the test. The building
official shall approve the plumbing system if the system complies with the
requirements of this code, any permit requirements, and the requirements of any
approved plans and specification. Plumbing system tests shall comply with
Minnesota Rules, Chapter 4714.
   Subd. 5 Covering of work. No building drainage or plumbing system or part
thereof shall be covered until it has been inspected, tested, and approved as
herein prescribed.  
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
900.07   (repealed 12/7/05)
900.08   Licenses.
   Subd. 1   Required. No person shall engage in the City in the business of
doing or performing any of the various types of work listed in this section
without first obtaining from the City a license therefore as provided in this
section. Such prohibited types of work are as follows:
      A.   The installation, alteration or repair of any heating system, gas
appliance, gas piping, refrigeration or air conditioning equipment, low or high
pressure steam systems, or any pressure vessel connected to the systems or
equipment;
      B.   The installation, alteration or repair of any gas heating or
refrigeration system or appliances or devices operated in connection therewith;
and
      C.   General contractors doing non-residential work.
   Subd. 2   Exception.
      A.   No license shall be required under the provisions of this section
where the work is to be performed and is within the scope or competence of a
plumber, electrician or steamfitter duly and currently licensed by the state,
or by another tradesman duly licensed therefore by the state.
      B.   Licenses required by the provisions of this section shall not be
required where the subject work is to be performed on a private residence by
the owner of that residence.
   Subd. 3   Application; Investigation. Applications for licenses required by
the provisions of this section shall be submitted to the City Administrator on
forms provided by the City Administrator. Such forms shall require information
from the applicant as to the education, special training and experience of the
applicant in the performance of the work for which a license is requested. At
the discretion of the City Administrator any application may be referred to the
Building Inspector or other appropriate inspector for investigation and report
as to the apparent qualifications of the applicant. All applicants must agree
to perform all licensed work in accordance with the laws of the state,
provisions of this code and other City Ordinances.
   Subd. 4   Insurance Required. No license granted under the provisions of
this section shall become effective until the licensee shall have filed with
the City Administrator a memorandum of public liability and property damage
insurance in the amount set out in the fee schedule appendix to this code for
each injury, set out in the fee schedule appendix to this code for all injuries
and set out in the fee schedule appendix to this code for property damage
coverage for accidents resulting from work performed by the licensee in the
City. The policies shall contain a provision that they will not be canceled
during the term of the license without ten (10) days prior written notice to
the City. Cancellation of the insurance shall be sufficient cause for
revocation of a license granted hereunder, unless the licensee supplies other
adequate insurance as provided in this section, before the expiration of the
notice.
   Subd. 5   Suspension and Revocation. The City Council shall have the power
to suspend or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this section
if work performed by the licensees or under the license or a licensee is found
to be improper, defective or so unsafe as to jeopardize life, health, safety or
property. The Council shall give twenty (20) days notice to the licensee of
intent to suspend or revoke the license, and shall give the licensee an
opportunity to be heard before the revocation or cancellation. All notices
under this section shall be sent to the address of the licensee as shown by the
City records and the license may be suspended or revoked five (5) days after
the date of the hearing provided. At the discretion of the Council, a license
may be suspended until defective or unsafe work is adequately repaired, or the
license may be revoked outright by the Council. License fees shall not be
refunded on suspension or revocation for cause as provided herein.
Section 910 - Swimming Pools
910.01   Definition.
   For the purposes of this section, a "Swimming Pool" shall be defined as a
pool with the capacity referred to in Subsection
910.07 above or below ground, located on private property, and not located or
proposed to be located within a building. This definition shall exclude public
swimming pools, defined as pools designed and proposed for general
nonresidential use, not limited to the family and guests of the residents of
the property upon which the pool is located.
910.02   Compliance.
   No new swimming pool or renovated existing pool shall be used until it
complies with the provisions of this section.
910.03   Variances.
   The procedures and requirements for variances from the provisions of this
section are the same as those prescribed by the zoning ordinance, which is
incorporated and made a part of this section as if set out here in full.
910.04   Permitted Accessory Structure.
   A swimming pool may be permitted within the City only as an accessory
structure to a principal building used for residential purposes.
910.05   Use Restricted.
   A swimming pool shall be for the exclusive use of the occupants of the
principal building and their guests.
910.06   Building Code Applicable.
   A swimming pool shall be deemed to be a structure under the zoning ordinance
of the City and all work shall be done in accordance with the provisions of
this Section, other applicable sections of the City Code, and the Minnesota
State Building Code.
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
910.07   Building Permit Required.
   Subd. 1   A building permit shall be required for any swimming pool with a
capacity of over one thousand (1,000) gallons or one and one-half feet of water
depth.
   Subd. 2   Enlargement or Alteration. A building permit shall be required for
any enlargement or other major alteration of a swimming pool coming within this
section or one that will come within this section because of the enlargement or
alteration.
   Subd. 3   Accessory Structures. A separate building permit unless included
in the swimming pool permit, shall be required for any pump house, filter
house, enclosure for the pool or any other structure erected in conjunction
with a swimming pool. The structures shall conform to all provisions of the
city code or applicable building code.
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
910.08   Conditional Use Permit.
   A conditional use permit pursuant to the zoning ordinance shall be required
for the construction of any structure designed to cover a swimming pool or for
the construction of any accessory structure such as a bathhouse, or other
structure large enough to enclose persons and designed for the accommodation of
persons. Other auxiliary structures, such as those defined in this Section,
shall require a building permit.
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
910.09   Applications.
   The application for a building permit to construct or erect a swimming pool
shall be accompanied by plans of sufficient detail to show:
   Subd. 1   The proposed location and size of the pool, the house and garage,
fencing and other features existing on the lot, such as utility locations and
trees; included shall be the location of the above features on all adjacent
lots;
   Subd. 2   The location, size and a statement as to the types of equipment to
be used in connection with the pool, including but not limited to, filter unit,
pump, wiring, heating unit, backflush and drainage outlet, fencing and the pool
itself; and
   Subd. 3   The finished elevations and final treatment around the pool.
910.10    Fee.
   The normal building permit fee per the adopted City fee schedule shall be
charged for applications made pursuant to this section.
(Amd. Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
910.11   Construction Standards.
   Subd. 1   Location.
      A.   Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility lines nor over
underground utility lines of any type, and shall be located in such manner that
it complies with the provisions of the National Electrical code, a copy of
which is incorporated by reference and made a part of this section as if set
out here in full, and is on file in the office of the City Administrator.
      B.   Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility,
walkway, drainage or other easement.
   Subd. 2   Single-Family Pools.
      A.   "Single-Family Pools," as used in this section, shall be defined to
be swimming pools located on single-family residential property used for
single-family residential purposes.
      B.   The outside perimeter of all swimming pool structures, including all
accessories, shall not be located within ten (10) feet of any side or rear lot
line. The single-family pools shall not be located within any required front
yard.
   Subd. 3   Multi-Family Pools.
      A.   "Multi-Family Pools," as used in this section, shall be defined to
be swimming pools constructed or proposed to be constructed on residential
property used or proposed to be used for multi-family residential purposes,
such as apartment houses and the like.
      B.   The outside perimeter of all swimming pool structures, including all
accessories, shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of any side or rear
lot line.
      C.   Adequate screening including both fencing and landscape treatment
shall be placed between swimming pool structure and adjacent single-family lot
lines.
   Subd. 4   Construction and Equipment.
      A.   The swimming pool shall be designed and constructed in such a manner
so as not to endanger the health and/or safety of its users and to not unduly
interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjacent property.
      B.   The swimming pool shall have adequate provisions to properly
recirculate, filter, algicide and germicide the water of the pool and
instruction for maintenance of same.
   Subd. 5   Water Supply and Drainage.
      A.   Filling of pools via fire hydrants shall require municipal approval.
      B.   There shall be no fixed or direct connection of any swimming pool to
any potable water supply.
      C.   Drainage:
         1.   Drainage of swimming pools onto public streets or into public
drainage ways shall not be permitted without municipal approval.
         2.   Pools shall be constructed and operated in such manner that
backflush or emergency water or water from pool drainage shall pass into an
approved public drainage way or shall remain on the property of the owner, and
water shall not be permitted to drain from the pool, directly or indirectly
onto property other than that of the owner.
   Subd. 6   Electrical. All electrical work shall conform to the National
Electrical Code.
   Subd. 7   Safety Fencing.
      A.   All pools shall be provided with safeguards to prevent children from
gaining uncontrolled access. This shall be accomplished with fencing of not
less than four (4) feet in height. (Ord. 2022-005, passed 8-22-2022)
      B.   All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure
shall be equipped with gates.
      C.   All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
devices placed on the top of the gate or otherwise inaccessible to small
children.
   Subd. 8   Lighting. Lighting used in connection with swimming pools shall be
adjusted in such manner as not to interfere with the reasonable use of adjacent
property and shall be in compliance with applicable zoning regulations for the
district in which the pool is located.
   Subd. 9   Noise. Unreasonably loud noise in connection with the operation of
a swimming pool shall be prohibited.
Section 920 – Zoning Permit Regulations
920.01   Application, Administration, and Enforcement.
   Subd. 1   The application, administration, and enforcement of the zoning
code shall be in accordance with Arden Hills Code of Ordinances. The code shall
be enforced within the limits permitted by Sections 120 and 1370 of the Arden
Hills City Code.
   Subd. 2   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the
Arden Hills Community Development Department.
   Subd. 3   This code shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator designated
by the City of Arden Hills to administer the code in accordance with Arden
Hills Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
920.02   Permits and Fees.
   Subd. 1   The issuance of zoning permits and the collection of fees shall be
as authorized in the Arden Hills Code of Ordinances.
   Subd. 2   Permit fees for zoning permits shall be established by Ordinance
adopted by the City Council and shall be assessed for work governed by this
code in accordance with the fee schedule annually adopted by the Council.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
920.03 Types of Zoning Permits
   Subd. 1   Fences under seven feet in height;
   Subd. 2   Driveway new construction or expansion;
   Subd. 3   Accessory Structures 120 square feet up to 200 square feet;
   Subd. 4   Retaining walls less than four feet or less in height;
   Subd. 5   Decks not attached or adjacent to buildings and 30 inches or less
above grade;
   Subd. 6   Chicken Coops; and
   Subd. 7   Temporary Structures.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 6-24-2024)
Chapter 10 - Utilities
Section 1000 - Water
1000.01   General Operation and Administration.
   Subd. 1   Public Utility. The City water system, hereinafter called "the
water system," shall be operated as a public utility and convenience from which
revenue will be derived, subject to the provisions of this section.
   Subd. 2   General Administration. The general administration of the water
system shall be under the direction and control of the City Administrator, who
shall report to the Council upon request of the Council. The City Administrator
is hereinafter referred to as the Administrator. He or she shall be authorized
to appoint representatives, either salaried or nonsalaried, to discharge the
duties provided by this section and such other responsibilities as may arise in
administration of the water system. The City Administrator shall be promptly
and fully advised as to the appointment of the representatives.
   Subd. 3   Records. The City Administrator shall be responsible for the
keeping of records relating to the water system, including records of permits
and finances in connection therewith.
   Subd. 4   Engineer. The City Engineer shall perform the duties provided for
him or her in this section and shall provide additional consultation and advice
as the City Administrator shall request from time to time.
   Subd. 5   Private Wells. References in this section to the water system
shall not be deemed to apply to privately owned wells unless the language used
specifically requires such application.
1000.02   Use of Water Restricted to Authorized Persons.
   No person shall make, construct or install any water service installation or
make use of any water service which is connected to the water system except in
the manner provided in this section.
1000.03   Willful Damage to Water System.
   No person shall remove, alter, damage or trespass upon any structure,
appurtenance or property of the water system, or cause water to be consumed,
diverted, restricted, wasted or contaminated in any manner unless permitted
pursuant to written authorization or a permit from the City.
1000.04   Discontinuance of Service for Violations.
   Subd. 1   General. Subject to the provisions of this subsection, water
service may be shut off at any stop box connection whenever:
      A.   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any other person
working on any pipes or equipment thereon connected with the water system, has
violated or threatens to violate any of the provisions of this section.
      B.   Any charge for water, service meter, or any other financial
obligations imposed on the present or former owner or occupant of premises
served by the connection are unpaid.
      C.   Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant of the premises
served in connection with the application for service.
   D.    The property is unsecured and/or vacant.
   Subd. 2   Notice.
      A.   Water shall not be shut off under Subd. 1 above until notice and an
opportunity for a hearing shall have first been given to the owner and/or
occupant (the "customer") of the premises involved. The notice shall be
personally served in the same manner as summonses in civil actions and shall
state that if payment, proof of payment or proof of no violation of Subd. 1
above have not been made before a date specified in the notice, but not less
than thirty (30) days after the date on which the notice has been given, the
water supply to the premises shall be shut off.
      B.   The notice shall clearly inform the customer of the available
opportunities to present to the City his or her objections to the bill or the
violation claimed in the notice and shall identify the telephone number,
address and officer or employee of the City who will receive the customer's
payment and/or review the customer's facts and files and has authority to
decide whether payment has in fact been made or a violation has not occurred,
to correct any errors in billing and to arrange for credit terms. The notice
shall also state that the customer may, before the date, demand in writing
(which shall contain the customer's return address) a hearing on the matter.
      C.   If the property is unsecured and/or vacant, then Subd. 2 A and B
above shall not apply and the City may shut off the water to protect the safety
of the premise or property. A good faith effort will be made by the City to
notify the owner prior to the water being shut off.
   Subd. 3   Restriction on Shut-off. If, by the date specified in the notice,
the City has received the customer's demand for a hearing, then the City shall
not shut off the customer's water supply until after the hearing has been held,
and the panel required by this subsection has determined that the water supply
should be discontinued. If the customer has paid to the City his or her
delinquencies, plus the cost of serving the aforesaid notice upon him or her,
or has furnished the City with proof of the payment satisfactory to the officer
specified in the notice, or has cured any nonmonetary violations to the
satisfaction of the officer by the date specified in the notice, then the City
shall not shut off the customer's water supply.
   Subd. 4   Hearing.
      A.   If the customer demands a hearing in writing, the demand must be
received by the City before the date specified in the notice provided in Subd.
2 and must specify the customer's return address or post office address for
purposes of the notice of hearing. The City Administrator shall bring it to the
City Council. The notice of hearing shall specify the date, time and place of
the hearing and the purpose thereof. It shall be sent by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested. The date it is deposited in the U.S.
mail system is the date that it shall be deemed to have been given.
      B.   If, as a result of the hearing, the City Council finds that the
amount claimed to be owed is actually due or that the customer has committed
one (1) of the nonmonetary violations described in Subd. 1 above, and that
there is no legal reason why the water supply of the delinquent customer may
not be shut off in accordance with this section, then the City shall be
authorized to shut off the supply. Where the violation is a nonmonetary one,
the panel shall specify the cure for the violation, if any, and give the
customer a reasonable opportunity to effect the cure before authorizing the
City to disconnect the water supply.
   Subd. 5   Cold Weather Rule. Where a customer's water service is essential
to his or her primary heating service, water shall not be shut off between
October 15 of any year and the following April 15 except in accordance with the
Minnesota Cold Weather Rule found in M.S. § 216B.097, as amended from time to
time.
   Subd. 6   Restoration of Service. When water service to any premises has
been discontinued, service shall not be restored except upon payment of all
delinquent amounts due, or correction of the nonmonetary violation of Subd. 1
hereof to the satisfaction of the City Administrator, plus the costs for
serving the notices required herein above and plus a fee for disconnection and
reconnection in the amounts as are from time to time established by resolution
of the Council.
1000.05   Deficiency and Temporary Shut-off Water.
   The City shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of
water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the
purpose of making repairs or connections, or from any other cause whatever. In
case of fire, or alarm of fire, or in making repairs or construction of new
works, water may be shut off at any time and kept shut off as long as
necessary.
1000.06   Supply from One Service.
   No more than one housing unit or building shall be supplied from one service
connection except by special permission of the City Administrator. Whenever two
(2) or more housing units or buildings are supplied from one pipe connecting to
a distribution main each building or part of building shall have a separate
stop box and a separate meter.
1000.07   Tapping of Mains Prohibited.
   No person except those duly authorized by the City shall tap any
distributing main or pipe of the water supply system, or insert stop cocks or
ferrules in any such pipe.
1000.08   Repair of Leaks.
   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the
service pipe from the curb box into the house or building. In case of failure
upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in his or
her pipe within twenty four (24) hours after verbal or written notice thereof,
the water shall be shut off and shall not be turned on until the sum listed in
the fee schedule appendix to this code has been paid and the leak repaired.
When the waste of water is great, or when damage is likely to result from the
leak, the water may be turned off immediately pending repairs.
1000.09   Abandoned Services.
   Subd. 1   Disconnection. All service installations that have been abandoned
or have not been used for three (3) years shall be disconnected at the main by
the City. All pipe and appurtenances removed from such connections shall be the
property of the City and any expense of the City in connection with the
disconnection shall be charged to the property.
   Subd. 2   New Buildings. When new buildings are erected on the site of
abandoned services, and it is desired to increase or change the old water
service, no connections with the mains shall be made until all the old service
shall have been removed and the main connection plugged by the property owner.
City inspection of the plug will be required. The City Administrator shall have
the power, in his or her discretion, to permit continuance of the old service
until the new service is connected to the property, when immediate removal of
the old service would constitute a hardship
1000.10   Service Pipes.
   Every service pipe shall be laid in such manner as to allow not less than
one foot of extra length and in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement
or otherwise. The service pipe shall be placed no less than seven (7) feet
below the surface and in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture by
freezing. Joints in service pipe or tubing shall be kept to a minimum, with no
slice or coupling allowed in service lines less than one hundred (100) feet in
length on one-inch lines. Large diameter service lines may be spliced as
necessary according to available manufactured lengths.
1000.11   Use Confined to Premises.
   No person shall permit water from the water system to be used for any
purpose except upon his or her own premises unless written consent is obtained
from the City Administrator.
1000.12   Connections at or Beyond City Limits.
   Where water mains of the City or an adjacent municipality are in any street
or alley adjacent to or outside the corporate limits of the City, the City
Administrator may issue permits to the owners or occupants of properties at or
beyond the City limits and accessible to the water mains to make water service
pipe connections with the mains and to be supplied with water from the mains in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this section and all pertinent and
applicable contract provisions.
1000.13   Restrictions and Limitations of Water Use.
   All water customers shall be subject to applicable regulations of the City
or other regulations to which the City is subject by contract relating to
limitations in the time and manner of using water or relating to the
preservation, regulation and protection of the water supply.
1000.14   Private Water Supplies.
   No water pipe of the water system shall be connected with any pump, well,
tank or piping that is connected with any other source of water supply unless
the connection is approved by the City Administrator in accordance with
contract responsibilities of the City and any other pertinent regulations.
1000.15   Private Wells.
   Private wells may be maintained and continued in use after connection is
made to the water system, provided there is no means of cross connection
between the private well and municipal supply at any time. Hose bibbs or
faucets equipped with hose threads that will enable the cross connection of the
two (2) systems are prohibited on internal piping of the well supply system.
The threads on the drain or the bibb of the well volume or compression tank
shall be removed or the drain bibb replaced with a sink faucet without hose
threads. Where both private and City systems are in use outside hose bibbs
shall not be installed on both systems.
1000.16   Use of Water for Air Conditioning.
   All air conditioning systems which are connected directly or indirectly with
the public water system shall be equipped with water conserving and water
regulating devices as approved by the City Administrator.
1000.17   Permits Required for Air Conditioning.
   Permits shall be required for the installation of all new air conditioning
systems connected directly or indirectly to the public water system. The permit
shall be on forms as provided by the City.
1000.18   Connections Barred.
   No connection shall be allowed to a building piping system that contains any
connection, fixture or source of pollution not allowed by the state plumbing
code, the St. Paul Water Department, regulations of the City of Roseville or
other providers.
1000.19   Connections.
   Subd. 1   Applications.
      A.   All applications for permits for service installations and for water
service connections shall be made to the City Administrator on printed forms
furnished by the City.
      B.   Applications for permits for service installation shall be made by
the owner of the property to be served or by the owner's agent and shall state
the size and location of the service connection required. The applicant shall,
at the time of making application, pay to the City the amount of fees or
deposit required for the installation as provided in this section.
      C.   When the service has been installed, application for water service
may be made to the City Administrator by the owner, his or her agent, or the
tenant or occupant of the premises.
   Subd. 2   Meters.
      A.   The size of water service meters shall be subject to approval of the
City Administrator in the case of nonresidential service.
      B.   A meter spacer with valves and tailpiece couplings shall be
furnished to the plumber at the time a connection permit is issued. Meter
spacers shall be picked up when the meter is installed under City supervision
after completion of water service installation.
      C.   The plumber shall notify the City Administrator within twenty four
(24) hours after piping is complete and ready for meter installation, giving
the street address and service installation permit number for the premise
requesting service. Inspections as the City Administrator shall deem
appropriate shall be made on behalf of the City. In all cases, connection to
the system must be made within sixty (60) days after the permit is issued or
the permit shall expire and be invalid.
      D.   Water billings shall start at the time of the installation of the
water meter; or in the event the water meter is not installed within thirty
(30) days, shall commence upon the thirty first day from the date of the
permit, and shall be calculated upon the minimum quarterly rate, prorated on a
monthly basis.
   Subd. 3   Service Charges.
      A.   Permits must be obtained to connect to the existing water service
leads at the curb box and the interior plumbing. The permit fee for each of
these connections shall be as established by ordinance by the Council. No
permit shall be issued except to a licensed plumber.
      B.   In the event that, through the fault or omission of the owner of the
subject property, a curb box or a service lead has not been installed for the
property, the owner will be responsible for the service lead installation,
subject to approval by the public works director. The City must witness all
taps into the City's main lines, which charges shall be as follows:
         1.   The restoration portion of any permit fee will be refunded to the
permit applicant following restoration completion to the satisfaction of the
appropriate city official and/or City Engineer.
         2.   All backfill materials shall be mechanically compacted in twelve
inch layers in place in roadway area to existing street grade. Soils deemed not
suitable for proper compaction must be removed and replaced with clean granular
material at the owner's expense.
      C.   A service charge in the amount established by Council resolution
shall be made for turning on water where service has been turned off for
violation of any provision of this section, except for cases where a higher
charge is provided for.
   Subd. 4   Time for Connections. If, for any cause, the plumber or contractor
laying the service pipe should fail to have the connection made at the time
specified in his or her application, notice shall be given to the City
Administrator fixing another day on which he or she wishes to make connection.
The notice shall be given at least two (2) days prior to the excavation for
laying of the service pipe, and the connection shall be made before 4:30 p.m.,
except in special cases, and then the work shall be done only upon written
order from the City Administrator. In any event, connection shall be made
within sixty (60) days after the permit is obtained.
   Subd. 5   Property Assessments. Before a permit for water main tapping shall
be issued, the following conditions shall be complied with:
      A.   A connection permit to service, directly or indirectly, any lot or
tract of land shall not be issued until the City Administrator shall have
certified to one of the following:
         1.   That the lot or tract of land has been assessed for the cost of
construction of the water main with which the connection is to be made;
         2.   If no assessment has been levied for the construction cost, the
proceedings for levying the assessment have been or will be completed in due
course; or
         3.   If no assessment has been levied and no assessment proceedings
will be completed in due course, that the City has been paid an amount equal to
the estimated assessment against the lot or tract for the construction of the
main.
      B.   If for any reason the City Administrator cannot issue a certificate
as provided in this subdivision, and there has been an assessment proceeding in
connection with the construction of the main, then the City Engineer shall
compute the assessment which would have been levied against the subject lot or
parcel on the same basis as assessments previously levied against other
property for the main, and the City Administrator's certificate may be issued
upon payment of the amount to the City Administrator. In the event that there
has been no assessment proceeding in connection with the laying of the main,
the City Engineer shall compute the charge to be made for the connection on the
basis of the benefit to the property from the construction of the main, and the
City Administrator's certificate shall be issued upon payment of the charge.
      C.   In lieu of requiring payment of the charge as computed under this
subdivision at the time the connection permit is issued, the Council may, upon
request of a property owner desiring the connection, certify the amount to the
county auditor, together with a legal description of the premises served, to
the end that the connection charge shall be paid in equal installments over a
period of twenty (20) years, with interest thereon at the rate of eight (8%)
percent per annum, in the same manner as provided for collection of assessments
in M.S. Ch. 429, as amended from time to time.
   Subd. 6   Turning on Water. No person other than an authorized City employee
shall turn any water supply on or off at the stop box without permission from
the City Administrator.
   Subd. 7   Location of Stop Boxes. Curb stop boxes shall be installed at a
point on the property line most suitable to the property and shall be left in
an accurate vertical position when back filling is completed. Curb stop boxes
will be installed at an approximate depth of seven (7) feet below the finished
grade or the grade established by the City Engineer. Curb stop boxes shall not
be reinstalled in existing or future delivery areas.
   Subd. 8   Supervision by Plumber. All piping connections from the curb box
to the house supply piping shall be made under the supervision of a licensed
plumber.
   Subd. 9   Connections Within City to Systems Outside City.
      A.   The Council recognizes that in certain border areas of the City
water service for property in the City may be more economically and
conveniently obtained from water systems outside of the City.
      B.   In the event a City property owner requests water service of this
City, and the City Engineer advises this City that the property concerned is a
border area to which water service may be best supplied, on a practical and
economic basis, from a water system other than that of this City, upon
recommendation of the City Administrator of this City the Council may permit
connection to the outside water system and permit payment of connection charges
in the manner provided in this section, which could be the other city's charge
or Arden Hills charge, whichever is greater.
1000.20   Rates and Charges.
   Subd. 1   Keeping Water Accounts. All water accounts shall be kept by the
City Administrator by house and street number and under the account number
assigned thereto, and also by the name of the owner. Bills and notices sent out
by the City Administrator shall be sent to the house or street number of the
party. If nonresident owners or agents wish notice sent to a different address
they shall file an application therefor with the City Administrator. Any error
in address shall be promptly reported to the City Administrator.
   Subd. 2   Water Rates.
      A.   The rate due and payable by each water user within the City for
water taken from the water system shall be as established by Ordinance adopted
by the Council.
      B.   In case the meter is found to have stopped, or to be operating in a
faulty manner, the amount of water used will be estimated in accordance with
the amount used previously in comparable periods of the year. If no comparable
period is available the City Administrator shall, with the consent of the
Council, set an estimated charge on the basis of his or her best judgment.
      C.   Where service is for less than a quarterly period, the quarterly
charge shall be prorated on a monthly basis.
      D.   Rates due and payable by each water user located beyond the
territorial boundaries of the City shall be determined by special contract.
      E.   In case a service pipe is connected to the stop box and laid into
the building, but the property owner does not wish to connect immediately to
the building piping for use, the minimum rates shall be charged as provided in
Subpart A above.
      F.   In the event the water customer elects to discontinue use of
municipal water the minimum charge shall continue until such date as the
service pipe is excavated and disconnected at the stop box. The disconnection
shall be inspected by an appropriate City official before backfilling occurs.
      G.   In addition to the above charges for water consumption, each water
user within the City shall pay an additional quarterly demand charge for the
purpose of covering certain fixed costs of the City in maintaining the
municipal water system, which charges shall be as established in resolutions
adopted from time to time by the City Council.
      H.   The owner(s) of any premises shall be solely responsible for the
payment of any water or sewer usage or service charge, whether or not the water
or sewer, usage or service, have been used by the owner(s) or tenants.
   Subd. 3   Payment of Charges.
      A.   Statements for total water charges for the preceding quarterly
period shall be mailed by the City Administrator to each property owner on or
before the tenth day of the month following the rolling billing area.
      B.   Such statements shall be due on the last day of the month following
the quarterly period covered by the statement. Any prepayment or overpayment of
charges may be retained by the City and applied to subsequent quarterly
statements.
   Subd. 4   Delinquency Penalties and Collection of Delinquent Charges.
      A.   A delinquency penalty of eight (8%) percent of the unpaid water bill
for charges shall be charged, effective thirty (30) days after the rolling
billing quarter, in accordance with the following schedule of billing dates:
   For the first quarter      April 30
   For the second quarter      July 31
   For the third quarter      October 31
   For the fourth quarter      January 31
   If the delinquency date falls on a nonbusiness day for the City Hall, the
penalties shall be imposed on the next business day, but first crediting
payments received on that day.
      B.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the delinquency
penalty shall be imposed upon and added to all unpaid water bills by the City
Administrator and mailed in the usual course at the next regular billing date,
showing in the same bill the current billing after the first penalty date.
      C.   The Council has noted that, under Subd. 3, section bills are due at
the end of the billing month, and accordingly the delinquency charge shall be
imposed consistent with the due date of a billing.
      D.   Any amounts due for water charges in excess of 90 days past due, may
be collected in a civil action brought for that purpose in the name of the
City; or the City Administrator, upon direction by the Council, may certify to
the county auditor the amount due, together with the legal description of the
premises served, and the City Administrator, in so certifying, shall add to the
amount as a separate item, in addition to the delinquency penalty hereinbefore
provided, an additional delinquency penalty of eight (8%) percent of the
original unpaid amount, inclusive of any previous delinquency penalty. The
county auditor shall enter the amount as part of the tax levied on the premises
to be collected during the ensuing year. No additional delinquency penalties
shall be added to unpaid bills after certification to the county auditor as
provided in this subdivision.
1000.21   Meters and Hydrants.
   Subd. 1   Meter Required. No person shall use water from the water system or
permit water to be drawn from the system unless the water is metered by passing
through a meter supplied or approved by the City. This requirement shall not
apply to water withdrawn by authorized City employees acting on City business
or to water withdrawn for use in fire fighting. Unless authorized by the City
Administrator, no person shall connect, disconnect, take apart or in any manner
change or cause to be changed, or interfere with any such meter or the action
thereof.
   Subd. 2   Maintenance and Replacement of Meters. The City shall maintain and
repair all meters and, when rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and
tear, the City shall replace them. However, where replacement, repair or
adjustment of any meter is rendered necessary by the act, neglect, including
damage from freezing, hot water backup, or carelessness of the owner or
occupant of any premises, any expense caused the City thereby shall be charged
against and collected from the water consumer.
   Subd. 3   Meter Accuracy Testing. A consumer may have his or her meter
tested for accuracy by making written request and submitting required fee (see
fee schedule appendix to City Code) to the City Administrator. In the event the
test shows an error exceeding the percentage specified in the City's fee
schedule of the water allegedly consumed, the deposit shall be refunded to the
consumer and a correctly registering meter shall be installed, with the bill to
be adjusted in accordance with the corrected reading. If there is no error or
the error is less than the percentage specified in the City's fee schedule, the
deposit shall be retained by the City. Any adjustment shall not extend for more
than one billing period before the date of the request for test. The deposit
charges for meter testing shall be as established from time to time in a
resolution adopted by the Council. (revised 3/11/13)
   Subd. 4   Right of Access. Authorized City employees shall have free access
to premises connected with the water system at reasonable hours of the day for
the purpose of reading and inspecting inspection and performing meter
maintenance.
   Subd. 5   Compound Meters. Where a potable water service line larger than
two (2) inches is installed or where flows are sufficiently large in the
opinion of the City Administrator to require a meter larger than two (2)
inches, the occupant or owner of the subject premises shall cause to be
furnished and installed a compound meter consisting of dual integral measuring
elements for high and low flow rates. The type and manufacturer shall be as
designated by the City Administrator.
   Subd. 6   Fire Protection System. Where a service line is installed to
serve, in total or in part, a private fire protection system, the owner or
occupant of the premises shall cause to be furnished and installed, on the line
serving such purpose, a City approved check type meter.
   Subd. 7   Water Meter Setting. All water meters shall be installed in
accordance with the following rules:
      A.   The service pipe from the water main to the meter, when the pipe
enters the building, shall be brought through the floor or bottom course of
concrete block foundation at a depth in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection
1000.10. However, this may be waived by the City Administrator if strict
compliance with the provision would create a hardship in a particular
situation.
      B.   The meter shall be located so that the bottom of the meter is from
twelve (12) inches to twenty four (24) inches above the finished floor line.
The meter shall be set not less than six (6) inches nor more than twelve (12)
inches measured horizontally from the inside line of the basement wall, unless
an alternate method is approved by the City Administrator.
      C.   All meter installations shall have a lock wing meter ball valve on
the street side of the meter. In no case shall there be more than twelve (12)
inches of pipe exposed between the point of entrance through the basement floor
and the valve. A similar valve shall also be installed on the house side of the
meter. All fittings and pipe shall be red brass or bronze, except that pipe
over two (2) inches in diameter may be iron. The valves shall be brass one
hundred twenty five (125) pounds standard, except valves larger than two (2)
inches may be iron body. There shall also be installed on the house side of the
meter gate valve a three quarter inch side outlet tee and plug to provide for
future installation of a two (2) inch air chamber or shock absorber.
1000.22   Fire Hydrants.
   Subd. 1   Use of Fire Hydrants. No person shall operate fire hydrants or
interfere in any way with the water system without first obtaining a permit to
do so from the City Administrator, with the exception of authorized City
employees on City business or fire fighting personnel. Permits may be issued by
the City Administrator in accordance with the following procedure:
      A.   A permit to use a fire hydrant shall be issued for each individual
job or contract, for a minimum of thirty (30) days and for any additional
thirty (30) day periods as the City Administrator shall determine. The permit
shall state the location of the hydrant and shall be for the use of that
hydrant alone, except as otherwise specified in the permit. A City supplied
meter and valve shall be used at all times while a hydrant is in use. Hydrants
shall be left in the fall upon position with the flow controlled by the meter
valve.
      B.   The applicant for a permit shall make an advance cash deposit in the
amount established by Ordinance adopted by the Council. The purpose of the cash
deposit is to guarantee payment for water used and to cover any breakage or
damage to the hydrant or meter. Such deposit shall be refunded upon expiration
of the permit, after deduction for any applicable charges for water consumption
or damage.
      C.   The user shall pay a rental charge based both upon the time of use
and the gallons of water used. This rental charge shall be established by
Ordinance adopted by the Council.
   Subd. 2   Hydrant Rentals.
      A.   Owners of private property on which fire hydrants are located shall
pay an annual standby charge, the amount of which shall be as established by
Ordinance adopted by the Council. This charge shall be a specified amount per
hydrant. In addition, if the City installs a hydrant on private property at the
request of the owner, the owner shall be charged the actual cost to the City of
materials and labor for the installation.
      B.   This charge shall not apply to a hydrant installed in the usual
manner on boulevards or street right of ways, but only to those installed on
private property.
1000.23   Permits Required for Private Use of Water Towers.
   No person shall install any radio antenna or aerial on, or in any way use,
any municipal water tower for private use without first obtaining a permit from
the Council to do so.
   Subd. 1   Terms of Permit. Any person desiring to obtain a permit to install
a private radio aerial on a water tower shall file an application with the City
Administrator and have the application approved by the City Engineer. If the
permit is issued by the Council it shall only be valid so long as the applicant
pays to the City the fee as has been established by Ordinance adopted by the
Council. The original payment must be made at the time of application for the
permit.
   Subd. 2   Canceling Permits. The Council may at any time cancel any such
permit issued to any person by returning to the holder of the permit the unused
portion of the annual fee.
1000.24   Regulating Nonessentional Water Usage Upon Critical Water Deficiency
   Subd. 1   Purpose. This ordinance establishes water conservation
restrictions; and the plan will be in effect at any time the governor declares
by executive order a critical water deficiency, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
section 103G.291.
   Subd. 2   Definitions.
      Clerk in statutory cities means the person assigned duties pursuant to
Minn. Stat. § 412.151; or the city manager pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 412.601 –
412.751 or in charter cities as determined by city charter.
      Department means the city water department.
      Emergency means the declaration of a critical water deficiency by the
governor.
      Irrigation means the watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas,
gardens, lawns, or any other outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation
utilized for agricultural purposes.
      Notification to public means notification through local media, including
interviews and issuance of news releases.
      Public water supplier means the city or other entity that owns, manages,
or operates a public water supply, as defined in Minn. Stat. § 144.382,
subdivision 4.
      Reclaimed water means water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or
other collection devices and all water utilized more than once before re-
entering the natural water cycle.
      Water Recirculation system means any system which enables a user to reuse
water at least once prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
   Subd. 3   Application.
      A.   This ordinance applies to all customers of public water suppliers
who own or control water use on any premises.
      B.   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water
received from a public water supply for residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provision in
this ordinance.
      C.   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based
upon the declaration of a critical water emergency by the governor.
   Subd. 4   Declaration of Critical Water Deficiency. Upon the declaration of
a critical water deficiency by the governor, the public water supplier shall
immediately post notice of the emergency declaration at the usual meeting place
of the city council, or the official city bulletin board. The city shall
provide notification to the public as quickly as possible or through
established water supply plans emergency response plans or procedures.
   Subd. 5   Mandatory Emergency Water Conservation Measures. Upon declaration
of a water emergency and notification to the public, the following mandatory
restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be enforced:
         (i)   Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands,
and other non-agricultural land, except for those areas irrigated with
reclaimed water, is prohibited.
`         (ii)   Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas,
tennis courts, patios, or other paved areas with water from any pressurized
source, including garden hoses, except to alleviate immediate health or safety
hazards, is prohibited.
         (iii)   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to
a pressurized source is prohibited.
         (iv)   Restaurants and other food service establishments are
prohibited from serving water to their customers, unless water is specifically
requested by the customer.
         (v)   Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas
is prohibited.
         (vi)   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other
exterior water features is prohibited.
         (vii)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types
of mobile equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash
water recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing to
protect public health, safety, and welfare.
   Subd. 6   Variances. The City Clerk or their designee, is authorized to
grant variances to this ordinance where strict application of its provisions
would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted only
for reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a
variance within five (5) days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to
the City Clerk. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council
meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.
   Subd. 7   Violation.
      A.   Violations shall be determined and cited by the City Clerk or his/
her designee. A violator may appeal the citation within five (5) days of its
issuance by submitting a written appeal to the City. The City Council shall
hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City
Council is final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if evidence
is provided that equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A letter
from a qualified vendor or equipment invoice will be required to show proof of
equipment failure.
      B.   Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued,
either personally or by mail, a warning letter that sets forth the violation
and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future violations.
      C.   Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall
be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
violation and shall describe the remedy. Fines shall be added to the monthly
water bill of the owner or current occupant of the premises where the violation
occurred. The imposition of the fine shall in no way limit the right of the
City to pursue other legal remedies.
   Subd. 8   Enforcement. The City Clerk or his/her designee is authorized to
designate city employees or law enforcement personnel to enforce the provisions
of this ordinance.
   Subd. 9   Severability. If any provision of this ordinance or the
application of any provision to a particular situation is held to be invalid by
a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of the ordinance and
the application of the ordinance to any other situation shall not be
invalidated.
Section 1010 - Sewers
1010.01   General Operation.
   The entire municipal sanitary sewer system shall be operated as a public
utility and convenience from which revenues will be derived, subject to the
provisions of this section.
1010.02   Connections Required.
   Subd. 1   Existing Buildings. Any building used for human habitation and
located on property adjacent to a sewer main, or in a platted block through
which the system extends, shall be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer
system within two (2) years from the date on which a connection is available to
the building.
   Subd. 2   New Buildings. All buildings constructed after the adoption of
this code within the City on property adjacent to a sewer main or in a platted
block through which the municipal sanitary sewer system extends, shall be
provided with a connection to the sewer system for the disposal of all human
wastes.
1010.03   Certain Connections Prohibited.
   No buildings located on property lying outside the limits of the City shall
be connected to that portion of the sanitary sewer system of the City
discharging into the Metropolitan Council of Environmental Services Division
(MCES).
1010.04   Supervision of Connections.
   The plumbing inspector shall supervise all sewer connections made to the
municipal sanitary sewer system and excavation for the purpose of installing or
repairing the same.
1010.05   Permits.
   Any person desiring a connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system
shall apply to the City for a permit therefor. The application shall be
submitted on blanks furnished by the City Administrator and shall be
accompanied by plans, specifications and any other information as is desired by
the plumbing inspector, together with the required permit and inspection fee.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connections shall be
borne by the owner, and he or she shall indemnify the City for any loss or
damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of
the sewer connection, including restoring streets and street surfaces. Permits
for the connections shall be issued only to a plumber duly licensed by the
State Board of Health or to anyone not so licensed who owns and actually
occupies as his or her residence the premises or that part of the premises upon
which the sewer connection work is to be performed.
1010.06   Tampering with System.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewer system.
1010.07   Maintenance.
   Each property owner shall be responsible at all times for the maintenance of
his or her sewer connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system, and shall
have the obligation to keep the connection in good repair, to the end that
there shall be no interference or obstruction to the sewer system as a whole,
nor shall there be any violation of this section, and the laws of the state.
The plumbing inspector shall be authorized to make the inspections of the sewer
connections as he or she may deem necessary to accomplish this purpose, and the
property owner shall be responsible for carrying out the instructions as the
plumbing inspector deems necessary to accomplish this purpose.
1010.08   Types of Wastes Restricted or Prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge any wastes or cause or allow any wastes to
be discharged into the municipal sanitary sewer system of the City which do not
comply with the laws and regulations promulgated by the state or as set forth
in this section.
   Subd. 1   Grease, Oil and Sand. To ensure the proper discharge of waste
containing excessive amounts of grease, oil or sand, the City plumbing
inspector may require that grease, oil and sand traps or interceptors be
provided, which traps or interceptors shall comply in all respects with the
requirements set forth in the Minnesota Plumbing Code. Traps or interceptors
shall not be required for private dwelling units which discharge only normal
wastes. Such traps or interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or
her expense, and shall be regularly cleaned and maintained for adequate
performance and efficient operation at all times. Any subsequent alterations or
additions to the traps or interceptors shall not be made without due notice to
and approval by the City plumbing inspector.
   Subd. 2   Industrial Waste. With respect to the discharge or potential
discharge of "industrial waste," which for purposes of this section shall be
defined as any solid, liquid or gaseous waste, including cooling water,
resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources, the discharger or potential
discharger of the industrial waste shall be subject to the requirements and
procedures of the MCES or the disposal system of plans and specifications for
any and all facilities to be used in discharging the industrial waste,
including meters and sampling facilities (if required), prior to construction
and installation of the facilities. The City Engineer shall have first approved
the metering equipment to be or being used prior to the submission of the plans
to the MCES for approval.
   Subd. 3   Drainage Water. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
or cause to be discharged into the municipal sanitary sewer system of the City,
either directly or indirectly, any roof, storm, surface or groundwater of any
type or kind.
   Subd. 4   Objectional Material. It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge or cause to be discharged, or for any property owner to allow the
discharge of, any objectionable material, including, but not limited to, cloth,
rags or similar materials, into the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System. In those
cases where it can be determined that the objectionable materials are being
discharged into the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System from a private sanitary
sewer line, the City's Plumbing Inspector shall notify the property owner to
either discontinue or cause to be discontinued the practice of discharging
objectionable materials into the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System or, in the
alternative, at the property owner's sole expense and cost, the property owner
shall install and maintain traps, grinders, and/or interceptors within that
portion of the private sanitary sewer line which connects to the Municipal
Sanitary Sewer System. The notice shall be sent by certified mail. If the
property owner fails to discontinue or cause to be discontinued the practice of
discharging objectionable materials into the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System or
fails to install and maintain traps, grinders and/or interceptors, the City may
assess the costs incurred by the City for excessive maintenance or repairs to
the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System, and may pursue other legal or equitable
remedies against the property owner.
1010.09   Accidental Discharges.
   Section 5 15 of Article V of the Sewage and Waste Control Rules and
Regulations for the Metropolitan Disposal System, is incorporated and adopted
herein by reference and shall be applicable to any and all accidental
discharges of prohibited waste into the sanitary sewer system of the City which
either directly or indirectly eventuates in such prohibited waste flowing into
the metropolitan disposal system.
1010.10   Construction Requirements.
   Subd. 1   General. Those provisions of the state plumbing code, as contained
in the building code of the City, which apply to the construction, alignment,
grades, joints and connections of sewers and materials used therewith are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if set out here in
full.
   Subd. 2   Use of Old House Sewers. Old house sewers or portions thereof may
be approved for use by the plumbing inspector. The plumbing inspector may
request that the old sewer be excavated for the purpose of facilitating
inspection. No cesspool or septic tank shall be connected to any sewer
connections. If any portion of a house sewer is laid across or over any
existing cesspool or septic tank, the cesspool or septic tank shall first be
pumped clean and filled with earth to the surrounding ground level. Where a
connecting sewer is laid across or over any existing cesspool or septic tank,
only extra heavy cast iron soil pipe, conforming to the A.S.T.M. Standard
Specification A 74 42, shall be used for that portion of the connecting sewer
which is laid across or over the existing cesspool or septic tank.
   Subd. 3   Connections at "Y" Only. Every connecting sewer shall be connected
to the municipal sewer system at the "Y" or sewer connection stubs designated
for the property served by the connection, except where otherwise expressly
authorized in writing by the plumbing inspector. Connections authorized by the
plumbing inspector shall be made only under his or her direct supervision and
in the manner as he or she may direct.
   Subd. 4   Tunneling. Tunneling for distances of not more than six (6) feet
shall be permissible in yards, courts or driveways of any building site. When
pipes are driven, the drive pipe shall be at least one size larger than the
pipe to be laid.
   Subd. 5   Independent Systems.
      A.   The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of new
work installed in an existing building shall be separate from and independent
of that of any other building except as provided for in Subparts B and C of
this subsection.
      B.   Where one building stands to the rear of another building on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
drain from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole shall be considered as one building drain. Where such a building drain is
extended, a clean-out shall be provided immediately inside the rear wall of the
front building.
      C.   Where adjoining property owners desire to construct a common sewer
connection to service both properties, the owners may make written application
to the Council for permission to construct the joint service connection. The
Council may grant such a permit if it determines that the construction of the
joint connection is reasonable and warranted under the existing conditions, and
if independent connections were to be constructed, the minimum length of each
connection would be at least one hundred (100) feet from the property line
abutting the municipal sewer.
   Subd. 6   Repair of Public Right Of Way. No connection to the municipal
sanitary sewer system shall be finally approved until all streets, pavements,
curbs and boulevards or other public improvements thereon have been restored to
their former condition to the satisfaction of the plumbing inspector.
   Subd. 7   Restrictions on Installation of Sump Pump System; Necessity of
Obtaining Permit. Any person installing a subsurface drainage system in
connection with the construction of a building shall include as part of the
system a sump pump which has a permanent discharge connection to the exterior
of the building. Any person installing a sump pump system in an existing
building shall also provide the system with a permanent discharge connection to
the exterior of the building. No person shall install a subsurface drainage
system in connection with new construction or the modification of an existing
building without having first obtained a permit to do so from the City and may
not connect it to the sanitary sewer system.
   Subd. 8   Prohibited Connections of Surface Water and Ground Water Discharge
Facilities to the City's Sanitary Sewer System.
   A.    No person, owner, lessee or occupant of any parcel of land, building,
or premises shall discharge, or permit to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system any surface water or groundwater
including water from roofs, yards, lawns, streets, alleys, groundwater sump
pumps, footing tile, or other natural precipitation.
   B.    A sump pump discharge system shall not be connected directly or
indirectly to the City's sanitary sewer system. A sump pump shall have a
permanently installed discharge line, which provides for year-round discharge
to either the outside of a building or structure, or is connected to the City
storm sewer.
      C.   The system shall consist of a discharge line without valving or
quick connections or flexible sections, which allows the redirection of the
sump pump discharge into the sanitary sewer system. If connected to a City
storm sewer, the system shall include a check valve and an air gap.
   Subd. 9   Inspection. Every person, owner, lessee or occupant of any parcel
of land, building or premises that discharges into the City's sanitary sewer
system shall allow an employee of the city or a designated representative of
the City to inspect the building or premises to confirm that the building or
premises conforms to the requirements of Subdivision 8 of this section. In lieu
of the City inspection, the owner, lessee or occupant may furnish a certificate
from a City registered State licensed plumber certifying that the building or
premises are in compliance with the requirements of Subdivision 8. The City may
periodically re-inspect any building or premises to determine continued
compliance with the requirements of Subdivision 8.
   Subd. 10   Removal of Prohibited Connections; Surcharge ; City
Reimbursement. Any person, owner, lessee or occupant, and any plumber or
building contractor who has presently made or permitted to be made, or shall
make or permit to be made, any connection or installation in violation of
subdivision 8, shall immediately remove such connection or correct such an
installation. The City will reimburse 50% of the cost of removing or correcting
an illegal connection to bring the property into compliance, to a lifetime
maximum of $300.00. If not removed or corrected within sixty calendar days
after notice of the violation has been delivered personally or by certified
mail to such person, owner, lessee or occupant, the City shall impose a
surcharge in the amount directed by the City Council. Such a surcharge shall
also be imposed upon any property owner, lessee, or occupant who, within sixty
days of receiving notice of the need for an inspection, fails to make or keep a
scheduled appointment for the inspection of their property, has not allowed
their property to be inspected, or fails to provide the certificate from a City
registered State licensed plumber as required by Subdivision 9. The owner,
lessee, occupant of a building or premises found to be not in conformance as
required in Subdivision 8 during periodic re-inspections shall be subjected to
a surcharge as provided in Subdivision 10, for all months between the two most
recent inspections or a maximum charge not to exceed twelve (12) monthly
surcharges.
   Subd. 11   Surcharge Fee. Surcharges for buildings or premises that are not
in conformance with Subdivision 8 will be determined by the City Council.
1010.11   Rates and Charges.
   Subd. 1   Established.
      A.   Rates and charges to be imposed on the various categories of
structures connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system shall be
established by Ordinance adopted by the Council. In establishing the rates and
charges, the Council shall employ any one or a combination of the methods and
bases set forth in M.S. § 444.075 (3), as now constituted and as hereafter
amended.
      B.   Charges for mobile homes and apartments shall be billed to the owner
or management of the mobile home court, park or apartment building in which the
same are respectively located. Charges will be based on the number of units.
      C.   Certain premises, because of their discharge of industrial sewage
wastes or voluminous or strong sewage wastes, may be subject to supplementary
charges imposed by governmental agencies or subdivisions other than the City.
In such event, the City may impose, as established by Ordinance and adopted by
the Council, a supplementary charge based generally upon and at least equal to
the amount of the supplemental charge imposed by the other governmental agency
or subdivision.
      D.   All owners of properties other than single family dwellings,
duplexes or two-family dwellings, mobile homes or trailers and apartments which
are not connected to the municipal water system and are not excepted, shall
install a meter on their water supply as part of any building program on the
premises, and in any event within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice
to do so from the City Administrator. Such meter shall be designed in such
manner as to accurately measure water consumption, shall be of a type approved
by the director of public works, shall be maintained in good operating
condition without expense to the City, and access thereto shall be given to
employees of the City at all reasonable times for the purpose of testing or
making readings.
      E.   If the director of public works determines that a portion of the
water measured by the water meter does not and cannot enter the municipal
sanitary sewer system, then the City may permit or require the installation of
other additional meters in such a manner that the quantity of water which
actually could enter the sewer system may be determined.
      F.   The owner of the property shall supply the City, upon request, with
such information as the City may reasonably require related to the use of a
private water system.
      G.   The owner(s) of any premises shall be solely responsible for the
payment of any sewer usage or service charge, whether or not the sewer, usage
or service has been used by the owner(s) or by tenants.
   Subd. 2   Payment. Statements for total sewer charges for the preceding
quarterly period shall be mailed to each customer on or before the tenth day of
the month following the rolling billing quarter. The balances shown due shall
be due and payable at the office of the City Administrator on or before the
last day of the month. Prepayments or overpayments of charges may be retained
by the City and applied to subsequent quarterly statements. The City
Administrator by direction of the Council, may designate another office to mail
notices and receive payments under this subsection.
   Subd. 3   Delinquencies.
      A.   A delinquency penalty of eight (8%) percent of the unpaid sanitary
sewer bill for charges effective on the date stated shall be charged, in
accordance with the following schedule of billing for specific districts:
   For the first quarter      April 30
   For the second quarter      July 31
   For the third quarter      October 31
   For the fourth quarter      January 31
   If the delinquency date falls on a nonbusiness day for the City Hall, the
penalties shall be imposed on the next business day, but first crediting
payments received on that day.
      B.   Except as provided in Subd. 4 below, the delinquency penalty shall
be imposed upon and added to all unpaid sanitary sewer bills by the City
Administrator and mailed in the usual course at the next regular billing date,
showing in the same bill the current billing.
      C.   Seven bills are due at the end of the billing month, and accordingly
the delinquency charge hereunder will be imposed more than a month after the
due date of a billing.
   Subd. 4   Collection. Any amounts due for sanitary sewer charges in excess
of 90 days past due may be collected in a civil action brought for that purpose
in the name of the City; or the City Administrator, upon direction by the
Council, may certify to the county auditor the amount due, together with the
legal description of the premises served, and the City Administrator in so
certifying, shall add to the amount as a separate item, in addition to the
delinquency penalty an additional delinquency penalty of eight (8%) percent of
the original unpaid amount, inclusive of any previous delinquency penalty. The
county auditor shall enter the amount as part of the tax levied on the premises
to be collected during the ensuing year. No additional delinquency penalties
shall be added to unpaid bills after certification to the county auditor.
1010.12   Sewer Availability.
   Subd. 1   Recitals. The metropolitan sewer board has determined to reserve
unused capacity in the metropolitan disposal system each year for local
government units in which new buildings are to be connected to the system and
new connections to the system are commenced during the year, and to allocate
the debt service costs of the unused capacity for the year among the local
government units. In order for the local government units to pay such costs
allocated to them each year, it is necessary to establish appropriate sewer
service availability and connection charges.
   Subd. 2   Establishment of Charges.
      A.   For the purpose of paying costs of reserve capacity allocated to
this City each year by the metropolitan sewer board, there is hereby
established by Ordinance adopted by the Council, a charge for:
         1.   The availability of treatment works and interceptors comprising
the metropolitan disposal system; and
         2.   Connections, direct and indirect, to the metropolitan disposal
system.
      B.   The charge shall be collected on the basis of building permits
issued on the following basis:
         1.   The charge shall be payable on the issuance of each building
permit for new construction issued.
         2.   A charge shall be payable on the issuance of a building permit
for alterations or additions to existing buildings if the alteration or
addition will require additional reserve capacity, and the service availability
charge (SAC) unit shall be determined on the same basis as for new buildings.
      C.   The charge for each building shall be the product of the number of
units of sewage volume which it will discharge and the dollar figure
established by Ordinance adopted by the Council for the year in which the
building permit is issued. A unit of sewage volume shall be one hundred
thousand (100,000) gallons per year and shall be assigned as follows:
         1.   Single family houses, townhouses and duplex units shall each
comprise one unit.
         2.   Condominiums and apartments shall each comprise eighty (80%)
percent of a unit.
         3.   Mobile homes shall each comprise eighty (80%) percent of a unit.
         4.   Other buildings and structures shall be assigned one unit for
each one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons of flow or part thereof which it is
estimated they will discharge.
         5.   Public housing units and housing units subsidized under any
federal program for low and moderate income housing shall be counted as seventy
five (75%) percent of the unit equivalent for that type of housing.
   Subd. 3   Administration. The City Administrator shall prepare or revise
building permit or sewage connection permit application forms to provide
information necessary for the computation of the number of SAC units assignable
to the building or structure in question, and shall collect the applicable
charge before issuance of a permit. The City Administrator shall make such
information available to the MCES upon request. If upon filing a report
covering the permit with the metropolitan MCES. They may determine that a
greater number of units is assignable to the building or structure in question,
any additional amount of cost allocated to the City as a result shall be paid
by the person or company to whom the permit was granted.
1010.13   Underground Installation of Distribution Lines.
   Subd. 1   The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the public and is intended to foster:
      A.   Safe travel over the right-of-way;
      B.   Non-travel related safety around homes and buildings where overhead
feeds are connected; and
      C.   Orderly development in the city. Location and relocation,
installation and reinstallation of facilities in the right-of-way must be made
in accordance with this section.
   Subd. 2   The terms used in this section have the meanings given them.
      A.   Commission. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.
      B.   Facility. Tangible asset in the public right-of-way required to
provide utility service. The term does not include facilities to the extent the
location and relocation of such facilities are preempted by M.S. § 161.45, as
amended from time to time, governing utility facility placement in state trunk
highways. Facility does not mean electric transmission lines, as distinguished
from electric distribution lines.
      C.   Public Right-of-Way. Has the meaning given it in M.S. § 237.162 (3),
as amended from time to time.
      D.   Right-of-Way User:
         1.   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. §
237.162 (4), as amended from time to time; or
         2.   A person owning or controlling a facility, in the right-of-way,
that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has
a right under law, franchise or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
      E.   Utility Service:
         1.   Service provided by a public utility, as defined in M.S. §
216B.02 (4) and (6), as amended from time to time;
         2.   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including the
transporting of voice or data information;
         3.   Services provided by a cable communications system, as defined in
M.S. § 238.02 (3), as amended from time to time;
         4.   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by a local government unit;
         5.   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Ch. 308A, as amended from time to time; and
         6.   Water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating services.
   Subd. 3   Undergrounding. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise between the
applicable right-of-way user and the City, facilities in the right-of-way must
be located or relocated and maintained underground.
   Subd. 4   Undergrounding of New Facilities. A new facility or a permanent
extension of facilities must be installed and maintained underground when
supplied to:
      A.   A new installation of buildings, signs, streetlights or other
structures;
      B.   A new subdivision of land; or
      C.   A new development or industrial park containing new commercial or
industrial buildings.
   Subd. 5   Undergrounding of Permanent Replacement, Relocated or
Reconstructed Facilities. A permanent replacement, relocation or reconstruction
of a facility of more than 300 feet must be located, and maintained
underground, with due regard for seasonal working conditions. For purposes of
this section, reconstruction means any substantial repair of or any improvement
to existing facilities. Undergrounding is required whether a replacement,
relocation or reconstruction is initiated by the right-of-way user owning or
operating the facilities, or by the city in connection with:
      A.   The present or future use by the city or other local government unit
of the right-of-way for a public project;
      B.   The public health or safety; or
      C.   The safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.
   Subd. 6   Retirement of Overhead Facilities. The City Council may determine
whether it is in the public interest that all facilities within the City, or
within certain districts designated by the City, be permanently placed and
maintained underground by a date certain or target date, independently of
undergrounding required pursuant to this code. The decision to underground must
be preceded by a public hearing, after published notice and written notice to
the utilities affected. (Two weeks published: 30 days written.) At the hearing,
the Council must consider items and make findings. Undergrounding may not take
place until City Council has, after hearing and notice, adopted a plan.
   Subd. 7   Public Hearings. A hearing must be open to the public and may be
continued from time to time. At each hearing any person interested must be
given an opportunity to be heard. The subject of the public hearings shall be
the issue of whether facilities in the right-of-way in the City, or located
within a certain district, shall all be located underground by a date certain.
Hearings are not necessary for the undergrounding required.
   Subd. 8   Public Hearing Issues.
      A.   The issues to be addressed at public hearings include, but are not
limited to:
         1.   The costs and benefits to the public of requiring the
undergrounding of all facilities in the right-of-way;
         2.   The feasibility and cost of undergrounding all facilities by a
date certain as determined by the City and the affected utilities;
         3.   The tariff requirements, procedure and rate design for recovery
or intended recovery of incremental costs for undergrounding by the utilities
from ratepayers within the city.
         4.   Alternative financing options available if the City deems it in
the public interest to require undergrounding by a date certain and deems it
appropriate to participate in the cost borne by the ratepayers.
      B.   Upon completion of the hearing or hearings, the Council must make
written findings on whether it is in the public interest to establish a plan
under which all facilities will be underground.
   Subd. 9   Undergrounding Plan. If the Council finds that it is in the public
interest to underground all or substantially all facilities, the Council must
establish a plan for such undergrounding. The plan for undergrounding must
include at least the following elements:
      A.   Timetable for the undergrounding;
      B.   Designation of districts for the undergrounding unless,
undergrounding plan is citywide;
      C.   Exceptions to the undergrounding requirement and procedure for
establishing such exceptions;
      D.   Procedures for the undergrounding process, including but not limited
to coordination with city projects and provisions to ensure compliance with
non-discrimination requirements under the law;
      E.   A financing plan for funding of the incremental costs if the city
determines that it will finance some of the costs, and a determination and
verification of the claimed additional costs to underground incurred by the
utility; and
      F.   Penalties or other remedies for failure to comply with the
undergrounding.
1010.14   Surface Water Management Utility.
   Subd. 1   General Operation. The municipal surface storm water runoff system
shall be operated as a public utility, hereinafter called the "surface water
management utility," pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as amended from time to time,
from which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter
and Minnesota Statutes.
   Subd. 2   Definitions.
      A.   Quarterly Surface Water Management Budget. The estimated quarterly
expenditures for planning and inventories, capital expenditures, personnel and
equipment and operation of the surface water utility, in accordance with
established City policy. This budget shall be established from time to time by
City Council resolution.
      B.   Surface Water Management Fee. The quarterly charge developed for
each parcel of land pursuant to City regulations and zoning classifications and
shall be established by Ordinance adopted by the Council.
      C.   Utility Factor. The ratio of runoff volume, in inches, for a
particular land use, to the runoff volume, in inches, for a 1/3 -acre
residential lot, assuming a two-inch rainfall and soil conservation service, or
(SCS), "Type B" soil conditions.
   Subd. 3   Establishment of Fees. Surface water management fees shall be
established by Ordinance adopted by the Council. The following steps shall be
taken to determine the quarterly fee to be charged to each property:
      A.   A calculation shall be made of the total area, in acres, of all
zoned property within the City.
      B.   A determination shall be made whether each individual property
within these zoning classifications is developed or undeveloped.
      C.   The total number of developed acres of property within these zoning
classifications shall be calculated.
      D.   The total acreage of developed property zoned as R 1, single family
residential, shall be divided by the total acreage calculated in Step C. This
yields the percentage of total developed property that is zoned R 1.
      E.   The City Council shall establish, by resolution, the quarterly
budget for the revenue to be generated.
      F.   The portion of the quarterly budget to be charged against properties
zoned R 1 shall be calculated by multiplying the percentage found in Step D. by
the budge amount in Step E.
      G.   The rate per acre for property zoned R 1 shall be calculated by
dividing the revenue for R 1 properties in Step F, by the total acreage of
developed properties found in Step C. This rate shall be the basis for all
rates charged to any other zoned properties within the City.
      H.   The volume of storm water runoff shall be calculated for all
properties zoned R-1, R-2, R 3, R 4, I 1, I 2, B 1 and B 2. The methods used
for these calculations shall follow the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service guideline for soil types common to Arden Hills. A curve
number shall be chosen for each zoning classification, which shall be an
approximate measure of the percentage of impervious surface on the property.
The volume of runoff for each zoning classification shall be calculated using
the following equation.
   Q = (P - 0.2S)5
      P + 0.8S
   Where   Q = runoff, cfs
   S = (1000/cn) 10, dimensionless
   P = 2, inches
      I.   The runoff value calculated in Step H for R 1 properties shall be
considered the base rate. The runoff value for each of the other zoning
classifications shall then be divided by the base rate to yield a utility
factor for each zoning classification. This utility factor shall be a measure
of the additional runoff created from the property as compared to a single
family lot. The utility factors for each zoning classification shall be listed
in the following subdivision.
      J.   The rate per acre for all zoning classifications, except R 1, shall
be calculated by multiplying the utility factor found in step I by the base
rate determined in Step G.
      K.   The owner(s) of any premise(s) shall be solely responsible for the
payment of any storm water runoff charge calculated for the property.
   Subd. 4   Factors for Determining Fees for Various Land Uses. The utility
factors for various land uses used to determine the surface water management
fees are assigned as follows:
 
Districts Land Use                                           Utility Factor
R 1       Single Family Residential (1\3 acre lots)          1.00
R 2       Single and Two Family Residential; (1/4 acre lots) 1.31
R 3       Townhouse and Low Density Multiple Dwellings       2.72
R 4       Multiple Dwelling                                  2.72
I 1, I 2  Limited and General Industrial                     4.25
B 1, B 2  Limited and General Business                       4.25
 
   Subd. 5   Adjustment of Fees. The City Council may adopt an Ordinance for
the adjustment of the surface water management fees. Information to justify a
fee adjustment shall be supplied by the property owner. Surface water
management fees shall be adjusted under the following conditions:
      A.   The estimated expenditures for the management of surface water shall
be revised at a frequency specified in this code. The fees shall be adjusted
accordingly and will follow established City procedures for this adjustment of
utility (water and sewer) rates.
      B.   Changes in developed conditions of parcels.
      C.   If it can be demonstrated that an individual parcel retains all or a
portion of the rainfall that it receives, the surface water management fee
shall be reduced by a percentage equal to that percent of the parcel which
produces no external runoff. A fee reduction of 20 percent or greater must be
demonstrated.
   Subd. 6   Undeveloped Land. Undeveloped properties, without regard to zoning
classification, shall be assessed at one-half the rate, charged to developed
property zoned as R 1.
   Subd. 7   Exemptions. The following land uses shall be exempt from the
surface water management fee:
      A.   Public Rights of Way;
      B.   Lakes; and
      C.   Parks.
   Subd. 8   Mailing Statements of Charges. Statements for the preceding
quarterly surface water management service shall be mailed to each customer
pursuant to the same procedures as listed under Subsection
1010.11.
   Subd. 9   Fee Appeal. If a property owner or person responsible for paying
the surface water management fee believes that a particular assigned fee is
incorrect, such a person may request that the fee be recomputed. Appeals shall
be heard by the Council once a year in accordance with the schedule established
for credit applications, in established City policy.
   Subd. 10   Penalties for Delinquent Payments of Fees. A penalty equal to
eight percent (8%) of the amount due shall be added to accounts not paid in
full on or before the first day of the second month following the billing
periods and to each quarterly billing thereafter until the amount of the
delinquent account plus accrued penalty is paid in full or otherwise certified
to the county auditor as a delinquent account.
   Subd.11   Collection. Any amounts due for sanitary sewer charges in excess
of 90 days past due may be collected in a civil action brought for that purpose
in the name of the City; or the City Administrator, upon direction by the
Council, may certify to the county auditor the amount due, together with the
legal description of the premises served, and the City Administrator in so
certifying, shall add to the amount as a separate item, in addition to the
delinquency penalty an additional delinquency penalty of eight (8%) percent of
the original unpaid amount, inclusive of any previous delinquency penalty. The
county auditor shall enter the amount as part of the tax levied on the premises
to be collected during the ensuing year. No additional delinquency penalties
shall be added to unpaid bills after certification to the county auditor.
Section 1020 - Illicit Discharge and Connections
1020.01   Purpose.
   The purpose of the ordinance is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural
resources within the City and protect them from adverse effects caused by non-
storm water discharge by regulating discharges that would have an adverse and
potentially irreversible impact on water quality and environmentally sensitive
land. This ordinance will provide for the health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens of the City through the regulation of non-storm water
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as
required by federal and state law. This ordinance establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives
of this ordinance are:
   A)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any person.
   B)   To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
   C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
1020.02   Definitions.
      ∙   Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly
or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance
systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage.
         ∙   Practices that focus on preserving open space, protecting natural
systems, and incorporating existing landscape features such as wetlands and
stream corridors to manage storm water at its source. Other practices include
clustering and concentrating development, minimizing disturbed areas, and
reducing the size of impervious areas.
         ∙   Structural BMP: a physical device that is typically designed and
constructed to trap or filter pollutants from runoff, or reduce runoff
velocities.
      ∙   City. The City of Arden Hills.
      ∙   Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. '
1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
      ∙   Construction Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Construction
Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
      ∙   Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
      ∙   Illegal/Illicit Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-storm water
discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in this ordinance.
      ∙   Illicit Connection. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
         ∙   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system (including
any non-storm water discharge) including wastewater, process wastewater, and
wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the City; or,
         ∙   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by the City.
      ∙   Industrial Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Storm
Water Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
      ∙   Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP). A standard for water quality that
applies to all MS4 operators regulated under the NPDES program. Since no
precise definition of MEP exists, it allows for maximum flexibility on the part
of MS4 operators as they develop and implement their programs to reduce the
discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable, including management
practices, control techniques and system, design and engineering methods, and
such other provisions as the Administrator or the State determines appropriate
for the control of pollutants.
      ∙   MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
      ∙   Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). The system of
conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, channels, or storm drains)
owned and operated by the City and designed or used for collecting or conveying
storm water, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
      ∙   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water
Discharge Permit. A permit issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United
States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
area-wide basis.
      ∙   Non-Storm Water Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of storm water.
      ∙   Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
      ∙   Pollutant. Any substance which, when discharged has potential to or
does any of the following:
         ∙   Interferes with state designated water uses;
         ∙   Obstructs or causes damage to waters of the state;
         ∙   Changes water color, odor, or usability as a drinking water source
through causes not attributable to natural stream processes affecting surface
water or subsurface processes affecting groundwater;
         ∙   Adds an unnatural surface film on the water;
         ∙   Adversely changes other chemical, biological, thermal, or physical
condition, in any surface water or stream channel;
         ∙   Degrades the quality of groundwater; or
         ∙   Harms human life, aquatic life, or terrestrial plant and wildlife;
A Pollutant includes but is not limited to dredged soil, solid waste,
incinerator residue, garbage, wastewater sludge, chemical waste, biological
materials, radioactive materials, rock, sand, dust, industrial waste, sediment,
nutrients, toxic substance, pesticide, herbicide, trace metal, automotive
fluid, petroleum-based substance, wastewater, and oxygen-demanding material.
      ∙   Pollute. To discharge pollutants into waters of the state.
      ∙   Pollution. The direct or indirect distribution of pollutants into
waters of the state.
      ∙   Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
      ∙   Storm Sewer System. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
      ∙   Storm Water. Any surface flow, runoff, or drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.
      ∙   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). A document which
describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site
and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the Maximum Extent
Practicable.
      ∙   Surface Waters. All waters of the state other than ground waters,
which include ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, wetlands, ditches, and public
drainage systems except those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose
of sanitary sewage.
      ∙   Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
storm water, discharged from a facility or the by-product of washing equipment
or vehicles.
      ∙   Watercourse. A ditch, stream, creek, or other defined channel
intended for the conveyance of water, runoff, groundwater discharge or similar
hydraulic or hydrologic purpose.
      ∙   Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
1020.03   Applicability and Administration.
   Subd. 1   Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to all water entering
the storm sewer system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted by the City.
   Subd. 2   Responsibility for Administration. The City and its authorized
representatives are authorized to administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
1020.04   Compatibility with Other Regulations.
   Subd. 1   Compatibility. This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal
any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision
of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever
provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human
health or the environment shall control.
1020.05   Discharge Prohibitions.
   Subd. 1   Illegal Disposal and Dumping.
      A.   No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, or keep any
substance upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, or
other drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private land,
so that the same might be or become a pollutant, unless the substance is in
containers, recycling bags, or any other lawfully established waste disposal
device.
      B.   No person shall intentionally dispose of grass, leaves, dirt, or
landscape material into a water resource, buffer, street, road, alley, catch
basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, flood control
channel, canal, storm drain or any fabricated natural conveyance.
   Subd. 2   Illegal/Illicit Discharges.
      A.   No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or
allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the
municipal storm sewer system or surface water any materials, pollutants or
waters containing any pollutants, other than storm water. The commencement,
conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm sewer system is
prohibited except as described as follows:
         1.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this ordinance: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), sump pumps, crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pools, and any other water
source not containing pollutants.
         2.   Discharges or flow from fire fighting, or other activities deemed
necessary by the City to protect public health and safety.
         3.   Consists of dye testing discharge, as long as a verbal
notification is made to the City Public Works Director prior to the time of the
test.
         4.   Consists of non-storm water discharge permitted under a NPDES
permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued and administered under the
authority of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
   Subd. 3   Illicit Connections.
      A.   No person shall use any illicit connection to intentionally convey
non-storm water to the City's storm sewer system.
      B.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly
includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless
of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
      C.   A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the
person connects a line conveying wastewater to the storm sewer system, or
allows such a connection to continue.
      D.   Improper connections in violation of this division must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City.
      E.   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be
located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written
notice of violation from the City requiring that such locating be completed.
Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of
the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be
identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall
location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer
system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations
are to be documented and provided to the City.
1020.06   Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. Any person responsible for a
property or premise, who is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may
be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm
sewer system. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
1020.07   Access to Facilities
   Subd. 1   When the City has determined that there is a danger to the health,
safety or welfare of the public, City representatives shall be permitted to
enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as
often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to City representatives.
   Subd. 2   Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this
ordinance.
   Subd. 3   The City may seek issuance of a search warrant for the following
reasons:
      A.   If city representatives are refused access to any part of the
premises from which storm water is discharged, and there is probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance; or
      B.   there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this
ordinance or any order issued hereunder; or
      C.   to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community.
1020.08   Watercourse Protection.
   Every person, or such person's lessee, owning property through which a
watercourse passes or is directly adjacent to a watercourse, shall keep and
maintain that part of the watercourse free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or retard the
flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
1020.09   Notification of Spills.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm sewer system, or water of the state,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release according to state and federal laws.
1020.10   Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations.
   The City may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to
minimize danger to persons.
1020.11   Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge.
   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed termination
of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency
for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person
reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this Section, without
the prior approval of the City.
1020.12   Enforcement.
   Subd. 1   Notice of Violation. A violation of this ordinance is a Public
Nuisance. Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the City may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may
require without limitation:
      A.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      B.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      C.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      D.   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
      E.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
      F.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
   Subd. 2   Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any person receiving a Notice of
Violation may appeal the determination of the City. The notice of appeal must
be received within 7 days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on
the appeal before the City Administrator or his/her designee shall take place
within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision
of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
   Subd. 3   Enforcement Measures After Appeal. If the violation has not been
corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation,
or, in the event of an appeal, within 7 days of the decision of the City
Administrator upholding the decision of the City, then representatives of the
City shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above.
   Subd. 4   Cost of Abatement of the Violation. Within 15 days after abatement
of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a
written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 7 days. If the
amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of
the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and
shall constitute a lien upon the property, and the City shall have the right to
assess such cost against the property owned by such violator(s) pursuant to
Minnesota Statute § 429.101.
   Subd. 5   Injunctive Relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate
any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance.
If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
ordinance, the City may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
   Subd. 6   Compensatory Action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings,
penalties, and remedies authorized by this ordinance, the City may impose upon
a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
   Subd. 7   Criminal Prosecution. A violation of this ordinance is a
misdemeanor.
   Subd. 8   Costs and Expenses. The City may recover all attorney's fees court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
   Subd. 9   Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this ordinance are
not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized
enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
Chapter 11 - Subdivisions
Section 1100 - General Provisions
1100.01   Purpose and Interpretation.
   Each new subdivision becomes a permanent unit in the basic physical
structure of the future community, a unit to which the future community will of
necessity be forced to adhere. Piecemeal planning of such subdivisions without
correlation to the City plan, will bring a disastrous disconnected patchwork of
plats and poor circulation of traffic. in order that new subdivisions will
contribute toward an attractive, orderly, stable and wholesome community
environment, adequate municipal services and safe streets, all subdivisions
platted within the incorporated limits of the City following the adoption of
this code, shall in all respects, fully comply with the regulations set forth
in this chapter. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of
the public health, safety and general welfare.
   State law reference Subdivision regulations, M.S.A. § 462.358
1100.02   Scope.
   Subd. 1   Except in the case of a resubdivision, this chapter shall not
apply to any lot or lots forming a part of subdivision plats recorded in the
office of the register of deeds or registrar of titles prior to March 27, 1967,
nor is it intended by this chapter to impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws or provisions of this code except those specifically
repealed by, or in conflict with, this chapter, or with private restrictions
placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreement, or with
restrictive covenants running with the land to which the City is a party;
provided however, that such private restrictions or restrictive covenants may
impose stricter requirements than established by this chapter, but may not
decrease the requirements imposed in this section.
   Subd. 2   In any case where the division of a parcel of land into two (2) or
more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development does not come within the definition of subdivision as defined by
this chapter, a description of such land division shall be filed with the city
administrator who shall submit copies of such division of land to the city
engineer and the Planning Commission. No building permit for such lots or
parcels shall be issued until the description has been filed with the City.
1100.03   Building Permit.
   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building,
structure or improvement on any land required to be subdivided by this chapter
until all requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with.
1100.04   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section.
      ∙   Butt Lot. A lot at the end of a block and located between two (2)
corner lots.
      ∙   City Plan. A comprehensive plan adopted by the City Council
indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes
of public works, places and structures, and for the general physical
development of the City, and includes any unit or part of the plan separately
adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
      ∙   Final Plat. The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's
plan of subdivision is presented to the City Council for approval and which, if
approved, will be submitted to the county register of deeds or registrar of
titles.
      ∙   Lot. A parcel of land in a subdivision, or plat of land,
distinguished from other parcels by description as on a subdivision or record
of survey map or by metes and bounds, for the purpose of sale or lease or
separate use thereof.
      ∙   Easement. A right granted by an owner of land for the specific use of
the land by the public generally, or to a person or persons.
      ∙   Minimum Subdivision Design Standards. The guides, principles and
specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating, among other
things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in
the preliminary plan.
      ∙   Owner. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
      ∙   Pedestrian Way. A way, public or private, running across or located
within a block for use by pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a
"Pedestrian Way," crosswalk or however otherwise designated.
      ∙   Planning Commission. The person or persons designated by the City
Council to advise it on planning matters.
      ∙   Preliminary Plan. The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating
the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the City Council for
its consideration.
      ∙   Protective Covenants. Contracts entered into between private parties
and constitute a restriction on the, use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values.
      ∙   Public Works Design Manual. A manual adopted by the City Council that
details the requirements for public street and utility construction within the
City.
      ∙   Setback Line, Building. A required open space on a lot, which space
is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to
the sky, except as expressly permitted in this chapter and other City
ordinances.
      ∙   Streets. A public way for the conveyance of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, lane, place or however otherwise designated.
         ∙   Community Street. Refers to a street that provides access to the
residences, institutions and businesses on that street, providing a route
through the neighborhood or business district for residents of other
neighborhoods
         ∙   Cul de sac. A street with only one outlet.
         ∙   Major Arterial. A divided highway with four or more lanes and
serves the major centers of activity of a metropolitan area, the highest
traffic volume corridors, and the longest trip desires. The "Major Arterial"
carries a high proportion of the total urban area travel on a minimum mileage.
Almost all fully and partially controlled access facilities are a part, of this
class.
         ∙   Minor Arterial. A street system which interconnects with and
augments the urban major arterial system and provides service to trips of
moderate length at somewhat lower level of travel mobility than major
arterials. This system distributes travel to geographical areas smaller than
those identified with the higher system.
         ∙   Neighborhood Street. A street that provides access to residences
of that street and provides a route through the neighborhood for residences on
other streets. A large proportion of trips have neither an origin nor
destination on that street.
         ∙   Residential Street. A street that primarily serves adjoining
residences with little or no through traffic. Almost all trips have either an
origin or a destination on that street.
         ∙   Street Width. The shortest distance between the lines delineating
the right of way of a street.
      ∙   Subdivider. Any person commencing proceedings to effect a subdivision
of land hereunder for himself or herself or another.
      ∙   Subdivision. The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more
lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcels is less than five (5) acres in
area or is less than three hundred (300) feet in width. The term "Subdivision"
includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall apply to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. The acquisition of land by
any means for purposes of erecting or installing utility lines, including
underground gas lines, overhead power lines, transmitting towers, or similar
utility sites, or easements shall be considered a subdivision when such
utilities are designed to serve more than one lot.
1100.05   Zoning.
   The separate document known as the City of Arden Hills Zoning Ordinance, as
adopted and from time to time amended by the City Council, as incorporated as
Appendix B.
1100.06   Copies of Plats.
   Copies of all of such plats of subdivisions, after the same have been
submitted and approved as provided in this chapter, shall be filed and kept by
the city administrator among the records of the City.
1100.07   Arden Hills Public Works Design Manual.
   All platted subdivisions within the incorporated limits of the City shall be
developed in conformance with the Arden Hills Public Works Design Manual,
unless a waiver is granted by the City Council. The Public Works Design Manual
may be amended from time to time by the City Council. In cases where there is a
conflict between the Public Works Design Manual and this chapter, the Public
Works Design Manual shall supersede.
Section 1110 - Preliminary Plat
1110.01   Filings.
   Before platting or dividing a tract of land into two (2) or more lots or
parcels, an owner or subdivider shall, unless a variance is authorized, file
with the city administrator:
   Subd. 1   Copies of the preliminary plan as required by the City submittal
process.
   Subd. 2   The lump sum fee in cash for the entire subdivision, plus a cash
fee for each lot in the subdivision. Fees shall be as established in a
resolution adopted by the Council. Fees shall be used for expenses of the City
in connection with approval or disapproval of the plan and any final plat which
may thereafter be submitted.
   Subd. 3   If the subdivider requests that any existing special assessments
which have been levied against the premises described in the subdivision be
divided and allocated to the respective lots in the subdivision plat, the city
administrator shall estimate the clerical cost of preparing the revised
assessment roll, filing the same with the county auditor, and making such
division and allocation, and upon approval by the Council of an estimated cost,
the cost shall be paid to the city treasurer in addition to the fees required
Subd. 2 above, to cover the cost of preparing and filing the revised
assessment.
1110.02   Necessary Data.
   Subd. 1   The preliminary plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The size
of the map shall not be less than twenty-two (22) inches by thirty-four (34)
inches. All subdivision maps shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals fifty
(50) feet, unless otherwise required by the City Council.
   Subd. 2   The preliminary plan shall contain the following information:
      A.   Identification and description:
         1.   Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or
be alike in pronunciation or deceptively similar to the name of any plat
theretofore recorded in the county;
         2.   Location by section, town, range or by other legal description;
         3.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor and
designer of the plan;
         4.   Graphic scale;
         5.   North point;
         6.   Date of preparations;
         7.   Letter detailing conformance or differences from all existing
zoning and code requirements; and
         8.   Phasing, if any, with a schedule of anticipated starting and
completion dates for each phase.
      B.   Existing conditions:
         1.   Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated;
         2.   Existing zoning classifications;
         3.   Total approximate acreage;
         4.   Location, widths and names, of all existing or previously platted
streets or other public ways, showing type, width and condition of
improvements, if any, railroad and utility right of way, parks and other public
open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements, and section and
corporate lines within the tract and to a distance of one hundred (100) feet
beyond the tract;
         5.   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, private
utilities, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract and to a
distance of one hundred (100) feet beyond the tract; data of grades of streets,
invert elevations and locations of catch basins and manholes shall also be
shown;
         6.   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land
within one hundred (100) feet, identifying by name and ownership;
         7.   Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of not
more than two (2) feet, except that contour lines shall be no more than one
hundred (100) feet apart; watercourses, marshes, wooded areas rock outcrops,
power transmission poles and lines, current vegetation cover, vegetation to be
removed, existing trees, existing drainage ways and other significant features
shall also be shown;
         8.   One-hundred year flood plan study, including flood fringes and
floodways; and
         9.   Wetland delineation conducted by a reputable and qualified
individual or company, including description and map.
      C.   Subdivision design features:
         1.   Layout of proposed streets, showing right of way widths and
proposed names of streets; the name of any street already in use in this county
shall not be used, unless the proposed street is an extension of an already
named street, in which event the name shall be used;
         2.   Location and widths of proposed alleys, pedestrian ways, trails,
drainage ways and utility easements;
         3.   Typical cross sections of proposed improvements upon streets and
alleys, together with an indication of the proposed storm water runoff;
         4.   Approximate center line gradients of proposed streets and alleys,
if any;
         5.   Location, size and approximate gradient of proposed sewer lines
and water mains if any;
         6.   Layout identification numbers and typical dimensions of blocks
and lots;
         7.   Minimum front and side street building setback lines, indicating
dimensions; and
         8.   Areas, other than streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and utility
easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the
size of such area or areas in acres.
      D.   Other Information:
         1.   Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential
buildings with number of proposed dwelling units; type of business or industry
so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards or
congestion of population;
         2.   Proposed protective covenants, if any;
         3.   Source of water supply;
         4.   Provisions for sewage disposal, drainage and flood control;
         5.   If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan
for the areas, including dimensions; and
         6.   In the event lots in the proposed plat are substantially in
excess of the minimum size required by zoning regulations, a preliminary
resubdivision plan shall be submitted showing a potential and feasible way in
which the excess size lot or lots may be resubdivided in future years to permit
more intensive use of the land.
1110.03   Council Actions.
   Subd. 1   Initial Response. At its next regular meeting following the filing
of the preliminary plan, the City Council shall:
      A.   Set a public hearing on the preliminary plan, which hearing date
shall be not more than forty five (45) days after the date of such setting. The
City Council may authorize the planning commission to conduct the hearing. The
Council shall cause notice of the hearing, to be published in the official City
newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
      B.   Refer two (2) copies of the preliminary plan to the planning
commission for its examination and report and one copy to the city engineer for
his or her examination and report. Copies of the report of the city engineer
shall be given to the City Council and planning commission at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of public hearing.
   Subd. 2   Public Hearings.
      A.   In the event the Council has provided that the public hearing shall
be conducted by the planning commission, the planning commission shall make its
report to the City Council at the first regular meeting of the Council
following the hearing.
      B.   In the event the Council does not refer the public hearing to the
planning commission, the report of the planning commission shall be given to
the Council before the time set for the public hearing.
   Subd. 3   Time Line.
      A.   The City Council shall act on the preliminary plan by resolution
approving or adopting it within thirty (30) days after receipt of the report of
the planning commission, if the planning commission is designated to conduct
the public hearing. If the planning commission does not conduct the public
hearing, then the Council shall take action by resolution within thirty (30)
days after the public hearing.
      B.   If the report of the planning commission has not been received
within seventy five (75) days, after referral of the matter to the planning
commission, the Council may act on the preliminary plan without the report.
   Subd. 4   Approval and Denial. If the preliminary plan is not approved by
the City Council, the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the
proceedings of the Council and transmitted to the applicant. If the preliminary
plan is approved, approval shall not constitute final acceptance of the
subdivision.
1110.04   Qualifications Governing Approval.
   Subd. 1   Revision. The City Council may require such changes or revisions
as it deems necessary for the health, safety, general welfare and convenience
of the City.
   Subd. 2   Scope. The approval of a preliminary plan by the Council is
tentative only, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout as
submitted.
   Subd. 3   Additional Approval Required. Subsequent approval will be required
of the engineering proposals pertaining to water supply, storm drainage,
sewerage and sewage disposal, gas and electric service, grading, gradients and
roadway widths and the surfacing of streets by the city engineer, and other
public officials having jurisdiction, prior to the approval of the final plat
by the City.
   Subd. 4   Flooding. No plan will be approved for a subdivision which covers
an area subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage
facilities which would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots
impossible, unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in
the opinion of the city engineer, make the area completely safe for occupancy,
and provide adequate street and lot drainage.
Section 1120 - Final Plat
1120.01   Filing and Incorporation.
   Subd. 1   Filing. The owner or subdivider shall file with the city
administrator seven (7) copies of the final plat not later than three (3)
months after the date of approval of the preliminary plan; otherwise, the
preliminary plan and final plat shall be considered void unless an extension is
requested in writing by the subdivider and for good cause granted by the City
Council. The owner or subdivider shall also submit at this time an up to date
certified abstract of title or registered property report and such other
evidence as the city attorney may require showing title or control in the
applicant.
   Subd. 2   Incorporation of Changes. The final plat shall have incorporated
in it all changes or modifications required by the City Council; in all other
respects it shall conform to the preliminary plan. It may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plan which the subdivider proposes to
record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms with all
the requirements of this chapter.
   Subd. 3   Verification of Form. The City Council shall consider the final
plat officially filed after the planning commission, the city engineer and the
city attorney have examined it and advised the Council that it is in proper
form.
   Subd. 4   Referrals and Decisions. Within five (5) days after the final plat
is filed, the city administrator shall refer two (2) copies of the final plat
to the planning commission, one copy to the city engineer and one copy to the
city attorney and a copy each to the telephone and power and other utility
companies. The abstract of title or registered property report shall be
referred to the city attorney for his or her examination and report. The
attorney's report shall be given to the City Council within fifteen (15) days.
The reports of the planning commission and engineer shall also be given to the
Council within fifteen (15) days. The Council shall either approve or
disapprove the final plat at its next regular meeting following receipt of the
reports.
   Subd. 5   Reporting and Recording.
      A.   If the final plat is approved by the City Council, the subdivider
shall record it with the county recorder or registrar of titles within sixty
(60) days after the date of approval; otherwise, the approval of the final plat
shall be considered void. In the event that the plat is disapproved, the
grounds for such disapproval must be reported in proceedings of the Council and
be duly transmitted to the applicant.
      B.   The subdivider shall, immediately upon recording, furnish the city
administrator with a tracing and three (3) prints of the final plat showing
evidence of the recording.
1120.02   Necessary Data.
   Subd. 1   General. The final plat shall be prepared by a registered surveyor
and shall conform to all state and county requirements and the requirements of
this section. All information required on the preliminary plan, except that
contained in Subsection
1110.02 D, and topographic data and zoning information, shall be accurately
shown.
   Subd. 2   Additional Delineation.
      A.   The final plats shall include accurate angular and lineal dimensions
for all lines, angles and curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets,
alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public use and other important
features; dimensions of lot lines shall be shown in feet and hundredths;
      B.   When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at
angles other than ninety (90) degrees, the width at the building setback line
shall be shown;
      C.   All blocks shall be identified by consecutive numbers; lots within
each block shall bear consecutive numbers;
      D.   The final plat shall include true angles and distances to the
nearest established street lines or official monuments (not less than three
(3)) which shall be accurately described in the plat;
      E.   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles;
      F.   Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and
lengths of all arcs;
      G.   Accurate location of all monuments;
      H.   Accurate outlines and legal description of any areas to be dedicated
or reserved for public use;
      I.   Certification by a registered surveyor in the form required by M.S.
§ 505.03, as amended from time to time;
      J.   Execution by all owners of any interest in the land and any holders
of a mortgage thereon of the certificate required by M.S. § 505.03, as amended
from time to time, which certificate shall include a dedication of the utility
easements and any other public areas in such form as shall be approved by the
city attorney;
      K.   Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments
currently due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full;
      L.   Form of approval of City Council as follows:
         Approved by the City Council of the City of Arden Hills, Minnesota,
this             day of                    ,                .
                     City Clerk
      M.   Form for approval by county authorities as required.
Section 1130 Minimum Subdivision Design Standards
1130.01   Conformity with City Plan.
   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the City plan.
1130.02   Street Plan.
   Subd. 1   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of
all streets shall conform to the City plan and shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic,
to topographical conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public convenience
and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land
to be served by the streets.
   Subd. 2   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provision for the appropriate continuation of the existing streets in adjoining
areas. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in
new subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of the streets.
1130.03   Streets.
   Subd. 1   Widths. All street widths shall conform to the following minimum
dimensions:
Street Type           Right-of-Way Width Pavement Width
Major Arterial        100 Feet           Determined on a case-by-case basis
Minor Arterial        80 Feet            Determined on a case-by-case basis
Commercial/Industrial 70 Feet         36 Feet Minimum
Community Street      70 Feet         32 Feet Minimum
Neighborhood Street   60 Feet         30 Feet Minimum
Residential Street    60 Feet         28 Feet Minimum
Cul-de-sac            60 Feet         28 Feet Minimum
 
   Subd. 2   Street Deflections. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than ten (10) degrees, they shall be connected
by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than
three hundred (300) feet for residential, neighborhood, and community streets,
and of such greater radii as the City Council shall determine for special
cases.
   Subd. 3   Reverse Curves. Tangents of at least fifty (50) feet in length
shall be introduced between reverse curves on community streets.
   Subd. 4   Street Grades. All center line gradients shall be approved by the
City Engineer after an evaluation of topography, soils, and related
geotechnical information.
   Subd. 5   Vertical Curves. Different connecting street gradients shall be
connected with vertical parabolic curves. Minimum length, in feet, of these
curves shall be fifteen (15) times the arithmetical difference in the percent
of grade of the two (2) adjacent slopes.
   Subd. 6   Residential and Neighborhood Streets. Local streets shall be so
aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
   Subd. 7   Street Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred twenty five (125) feet shall be avoided.
   Subd. 8   Safe Intersections. It shall be evidenced that all street
intersections encourage safe and efficient traffic flow. The angle formed by
the intersecting of streets shall not be less than sixty (60) degrees with
ninety (90) degrees preferred and intersections with more than four corners
shall be prohibited. Landscaping and related improvements shall be constructed
and maintained so that there shall be no obstructions near street intersections
over three (3) feet in height above street pavement level within fifteen (15)
feet of intersecting street right of way lines.
   Subd. 9   Cul de sac. Maximum length for cul de sac streets shall be five
hundred (500) feet measured along the center line from the intersection of
origin to end of right of way, unless there are eighteen (18) or less lots
abutting the cul de sac. Each cul de sac shall be provided at the closed end
with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least one hundred
(100) feet, and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred twenty
(120) feet.
   Subd. 10   Streets Abutting Arterial Streets. Where a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing or planned arterial street, the City Council may require a
local residential or neighborhood street parallel and adjacent to the arterial
street or other such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
   Subd. 11   Half Streets. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with
the other requirements of these regulations and then only when the City Council
finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when
the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever there is an existing half street
adjacent to a tract which is to be subdivided, the other half of the street
shall be platted within the proposed tract. Half streets providing access to a
lot shall not receive a building permit until the other half of the street has
been platted.
   Subd. 12   Reserve Strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited except under conditions approved by the City Council.
   Subd. 13   Railroad or Limited Access Highways Abutting Subdivision. Where a
subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way or limited access
highway right of way, the City Council may require a street approximately
parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential
districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts.
The distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separations.
   Subd. 14   Private Streets. Private streets shall not be approved nor shall
public improvements be approved for any private street. Private streets may be
permitted in planned unit developments.
   Subd. 15   Hardship to Owners of Adjoining Property. The street arrangements
shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in
platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.
1130.04   Alleys and Pedestrian Ways.
   Subd. 1   Alleys may be allowed and all alley right-of-way and pavement
widths must conform to the following minimum standards
 
Classification           Right-of-Way Width Pavement Width
Industrial or commercial 28 feet            20 feet
Residential (two-way)    24 feet            16 feet
Residential (one-way)    20 feet            12 feet
 
   The City Council may require alleys in nonresidential areas where adequate
off street loading space is not available.
   Subd. 2   Pedestrian. Pedestrian ways shall be at least ten (10) feet wide.
1130.05   Easements.
   Subd. 1   Provided for Utilities. Easements at least twelve feet, centered
on rear and other lot lines, shall be provided for utilities and drainage
easements. Easements at least twelve (12) feet wide; contiguous to all planned
boundary lines, street right-of-way lines and centered on rear and other lot
lines, shall be provided for utility and drainage purposes and shall be
dedicated to the public on the plat. They shall have continuity of alignment
from block to block, and at deflection points easements for pole line anchors
shall be provided where necessary. All utility lines for telephone and
electrical service shall be placed in rear lot line easements when carried on
overhead poles.
   Subd. 2   Provided for Drainage. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm
water easement or drainage right of way conforming substantially with the lines
of the watercourse, together with any further width or construction or both, as
shall be adequate for storm water run off.
   Subd. 3   Ponding. Ponding easements shall be required for storm water
ponding areas and shall be taken to two (2) feet above the emergency overflow
elevation or 100-year flood elevation if no emergency overflow elevation is
provided. In addition, if the easement is not adjacent to a public right-of-
way, adequate public access to the easement for maintenance purposes is
required.
   Subd. 4   Utility Easements. Easements for storm sewer, sanitary sewer or
water mains shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width. Additional width
shall be provided when more than one utility is in the same easement, or
because of the unusual depth of utilities.
   Subd. 5   Pedestrian Walkway Easements. Pedestrian walkway easements shall
be provided when deemed essential to provide circulation or access to parks,
schools, playgrounds, shopping areas, transportation or other community
facilities. Such easements shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. In
blocks over five hundred (500) feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
by the City Council in locations deemed necessary to public health, convenience
and necessity.
1130.06   Blocks.
   Subd. 1   Factors Governing Dimensions. Block lengths and width or acreage
within bounding roads shall be such as to accommodate the size of residential
lots required in the area by the zoning ordinance and to provide for convenient
access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
   Subd. 2   Nonresidential Blocks. Blocks intended for commercial,
institutional and industrial use shall be designated as such.
   Subd. 3   Length. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet.
   Subd. 4   Arrangement. A block shall be so designed as to provide two (2)
tiers of lots, unless it adjoins a railroad or limited access highway or lake
or backs on other subdivisions where it may have but a single tier of lots.
1130.07   Lots.
   Subd. 1   Location. All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly
dedicated street or a street that has received legal status as such or will
receive such status upon approval of the subject plat.
   Subd. 2   Size. The lot dimensions in subdivisions shall not be less than
the minimum dimensions required to secure the minimum lot area specified in the
zoning ordinance of the City.
   Subd. 3   Butt Lots. Butt lots shall be platted at least five (5) feet wider
than the average width of interior lots in the block.
   Subd. 4   Side Lot Lines. Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right
angles or radial to the street line.
   Subd. 5   Watercourses. Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, including wetland or marsh, shall have an additional depth
or width as required, to assure house sites that are not subject to flooding.
In addition, all building areas should be located outside the natural feature
and a minimum of two (2) feet above the 100-year flood elevation.
   Subd. 6   Natural Features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall
be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic
spots or similar conditions, which if preserved will add to the attractiveness
of the proposed development.
   Subd. 7   Lot Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over
after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather than
allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
   Subd. 8   Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be platted at least ten (10) feet
wider than the minimum requirement for interior lots as designated in the
zoning ordinances.
   Subd. 9   Grading. Corner lot grading and street intersection grades shall
be such that there shall be no blocking of vision at street intersections over
three (3) feet in height above street pavement level within fifteen (15) feet
of intersecting street right of way lines.
   Subd. 10   Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots shall be avoided
except where lots back on an arterial or community street.
   Subd. 11   Drainage. Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage away
from the building locations and directed down lot lines within the proposed
drainage and utility easements. Any lot drainage that is directed onto an
adjacent lot must be within a drainage easement.
1130.08   Public Use Dedications.
(revised 12/14/15)
   Subd. 1 Public Use Dedications Required.
      A.   Pursuant to Minn. Stat. Section 462.358, Subd. 2b, except as
otherwise provided in this section, the City requires all owners or developers,
as a prerequisite to approval of a subdivision to convey to the City or
dedicate to the public use a reasonable portion of any such proposal for public
use as streets, roads, sewers, electric, gas, and water facilities, storm water
drainage and holding areas or ponds and similar utilities and improvements,
parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, wetlands, or open space,
in such portions to be approved and acceptable to the City.
      B.   As a condition of any conditional use permit or planned unit
development under City Code Section 1355.06, the City may require as a term and
condition of approval, the dedication of land or payment in lieu of dedication
and park improvement fees if the project is determined to result in an
increased demand for park land or park improvements. In establishing the amount
required the City will take into consideration land and facilities provided by
the developer and previous payments or dedications.
   Subd. 2   Suitability of dedicated land. As determined by the City, land
shall be reasonably suitable for its intended use and shall be at a location
convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy
of proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography,
geology, hydrology, tree cover, access, and location.
   Subd. 3   Park, trails, and open space land dedication and development. This
subsection is adopted for the purpose of providing for the recreation, health,
and well-being of the public through the orderly development of an
interconnected system of parks, trails, and open spaces. The City finds that
the dedication and improvement requirements as defined in this subsection are
necessary to meet the minimum needs for parks, trails, wetlands, and open
spaces resulting from development subject to Section 1130.08. At its
discretion, the City may require subdividers or developers to satisfy the land
dedication requirement or the park development fee requirement, or both. In
evaluating the land dedication and park development requirements for a specific
application, the City may consider whether in conjunction with a previous
subdivision an adequate area of land was conveyed or dedicated to the City to
meet the minimum needs for parks, trails, wetlands, and open spaces resulting
from the subject development proposal.
      A.   Residential dedication.
         1.   In residential subdivisions where a land dedication is required,
the following formula shall be used to determine the parkland dedication:
 
Category                   Units Per Acre       Percentage Park Dedication/
                                                Acres of Development
Low Density Residential    Up to 2.5            10 percent
Medium Density Residential More than 2.5 to 8.0 15 percent
High Density Residential   More than 8.0        20 percent
 
         2.   A cash contribution in lieu of land dedication may be required at
the discretion of the City. The cash payment shall be determined based on the
fair market of the land that would otherwise be dedicated to the City.
      B.   Commercial and industrial dedication.
         1.   In commercial or industrial subdivisions where a land dedication
is required, the following formula shall be used to determine the parkland
dedication: seven and a half (7.5) percent of the gross area of the
subdivision.
         2.   A cash contribution in lieu of land dedication may be required at
the discretion of the City. The cash contribution fee shall be seven and a half
(7.5) percent of the fair market value of the unimproved land.
      C.   Park development. In addition to the land dedication requirements as
defined in this subsection, the City may require a park development fee for
subdivisions subject to Section
1130.08 for the purpose of making certain improvements needed to develop parks,
playgrounds, trails, and open spaces, including but not limited to finished
grading, ground cover, landscaping, recreational facilities and equipment,
paving, and utilities. The City may consider a proportionate reduction in the
required park development fee in cases where the subdivider or developer
commits to making certain required park, trail, or open space improvements
within the subdivision area as agreed upon in the development agreement.
         1.   Residential park development fee. In residential subdivisions
where a park development fee is required, the City shall apply the fee on a per
unit basis. The park development fee shall be established by ordinance on a
regular basis.
         2.   Commercial and industrial park development fee. In commercial or
industrial subdivisions where a park development fee is required, the fee shall
be seven and a half (7.5) percent of the fair market value of the unimproved
land.
      D.   Trail connections. In cases where a subdivision borders a trail
identified in the City’s comprehensive plan, the subdivider or developer shall
be responsible for constructing trail improvements that provide connections
from the subdivision area to this trail. The location and specifications of the
trail connections shall be determined by the City Engineer and Community
Development Director.
      E.   Contribution combination. The City may, at its discretion, require
the subdivider or developer to make a combination of cash and land dedication
for parkland. Where a combination of land and cash dedication is made, the land
dedicated will be deducted from the total park dedication land requirement, and
the balance of required dedication acreage will be converted into a cash
contribution in lieu of land dedication pursuant to the fair market value of
the property in the subdivision.
      F.   Miscellaneous requirements. The following requirements apply to all
dedications or conveyances for park, playground, trails, or public open space
purposes:
         1.   City staff recommendation. In each case City staff shall
recommend to the City Council the total area and location of such land that
should be conveyed or dedicated within the development for park, trails, or
open space purposes, or whether a cash contribution in lieu of land dedication
should be required. Such recommendation may take into consideration items such
as the zoning classification of the land to be developed, the particular use
proposed for such land, amenities to be provided and factors of density and
site development as proposed by the developer.
         2.   Acquisition of sites proposed on official map or comprehensive
plan. Where a proposed park, playground, trail, open space or other
recreational area that has been indicated on the official map or comprehensive
plan is located in whole or in part within a proposed subdivision, such
proposed site shall be designated as such on the plat and be dedicated to the
City. If the subdivider chooses not to dedicate an area in excess of the land
required hereunder for such proposed public site, the City may consider
acquiring the site through purchase or condemnation.
         3.   Calculating density. Land area conveyed or dedicated to the City
shall not be used in calculating density requirements of the City Zoning Code
and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of private open space requirements
prescribed in the Zoning Code.
         4.   Park dedication and development fund. Cash contributions shall be
deposited in a designated park dedication and development fund and shall only
be used for the acquisition and development or improvement of parks,
recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, wetlands, or open space.
         5.   Fair Market Value. Fair market value shall be determined as of
the time of filing the Final Plat in accordance with the following:
            (i)   The City and developer may agree as to the fair market value;
or
            (ii)   The fair market value may be based upon a current appraisal
submitted to the City by the subdivider at the subdivider’s expense. The
appraisal shall be made by an appraiser who is an approved member of the SREA
or MAI, or equivalent real estate appraisal societies.
            (iii)   If the City disputes such appraisal, the City may, at the
subdivider’s expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real
estate appraiser, which appraisal shall be conclusive evidence of the fair
market value of the land.
         6.   Property being subdivided without an increase in the number of
lots shall be exempt from park dedication requirements if similar requirements
were satisfied in conjunction with an earlier subdivision. If the number of
lots is increased, then the dedication shall be based on the additional lots
created.
         7.   Any land required to be dedicated for park, trails, or open space
purposes as defined in this section shall be conveyed to the City prior to the
City’s release of the Final Plat for filing.
         8.   Cash contributions for land dedication or park improvements are
to be calculated at the time of the Final Plat approval. The City may require
the payment at the time of the Final Plat approval or at a later time under
terms agreed upon in the development agreement. Delayed payment shall include
interest at a rate set by the City.
Section 1140 Required Improvements
1140.01   Survey Monuments.
   Survey monuments shall be placed and installed at all block corners, angle
points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shown on the
final plat required by the city engineer. Survey monuments shall be cast iron,
as approved by the county surveyor, and shall be set at each corner or angle on
the outside boundary. Pipes or steel rods shall be placed at the corners of
each lot and at each intersection of street centerlines. All United States,
state, county or other official bench marks, monuments or triangulation
stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position.
1140.02   Sewers and Water.
   Sewers and water for the subdivision shall be obtained by connections to the
City water and sewer systems.
1140.05   City Improvements.
   The subdivider shall deposit with the city administrator a sum equal to one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated cost as determined by the
city engineer of the following improvements to be constructed and furnished
within the subdivision, or shall have given a performance bond in the same
amount to the City to cover the cost of the improvements. The improvements
shall be installed and completed in accordance with the plans and
specifications prepared by the city engineer, and at the time of such approval
of the final plat the City Council may insert a time limit for the completion
of the improvements and the performance bond or deposit made by the owner or
subdivider shall be in accordance with the time limitation. The improvements to
be constructed and finished by the owner or subdivider shall include the
following:
   Subd. 1   Street Grading. Street grading of the full width of the right of
way, including boulevard, and sidewalk benches of each street dedicated in the
plat.
   Subd. 2   Street Surfacing.
      A.   All streets shall be improved with pavements constructed to
specification of the city engineer to over all width in accordance with the
following minimum dimensions:
Type of Street          Pavement Width
                        (in between face of curbs)
Major Arterial          Determined on a case-by-case basis
Minor Arterial          Determined on a case-by-case basis
Commercial / Industrial 36 Feet Minimum
Community Street        32 Feet Minimum
Neighborhood Street     30 Feet Minimum
Residential Street      28 Feet Minimum
Cul-de-sac              28 Feet Minimum
 
      B.   Pavements in cul de sac turnarounds shall have a minimum outside
diameter of one hundred (100) feet.
   Subd. 3   Sod. Provide turf and four inches of top soil between pavement
edge and lot line.
   Subd. 4   Street trees and lighting. Street trees and lighting are required
as follows:
      A.   Each lot shall be provided with a minimum of three (3) trees to be
placed in the front yard. They must be placed inside the property line and not
in the boulevard unless approved by the city engineer. The type of tree shall
be subject to city approval (The city will provide a list of species).
Coniferous trees must be at least six (6) feet high and deciduous trees must be
at least two and one-half (21/2) inches in diameter at the time of
installation. This requirement may be waived by the city where the applicant
can demonstrate that a suitable tree having a minimum diameter of two and one-
half (21/2) inches for deciduous and six-foot height for coniferous and four
(4) feet above the ground is located in an appropriate location on the lot. No
clearcutting of woodland areas shall be permitted except as approved in a
subdivision, planned unit development or site plan application.
      B.   A streetlight plan must be submitted to accommodate safe travel and
to preserve the character of the neighborhood. Streetlights are required.
   Subd. 5   Street Markers. All necessary street markers and traffic signs
shall be installed.
1140.04   Additional City Improvements.
   Subd. 1   General. It shall be the declared policy of the City to proceed as
soon as practicable after final approval of a subdivision plat with
installations within the subdivision of such improvements as may be determined
to be necessary by the City Council, such as central wells, water mains, street
grading, street surfacing, sanitary and storm sewers, water pumping and storage
facilities and hydrants. The city engineer shall be directed to prepare plans
and specifications for the same upon acceptance of the final plat and shall
submit his or her recommendations for the improvements, together with estimated
costs, to the City Council. The Council may authorize preparation of plans and
specifications by an engineer employed by the subdivider at his expense and
under the direction and subject to the approval of the city engineer. Upon
acceptance of the final plat the Council may commence assessment proceedings
for the furnishing and construction of the improvements within the subdivision,
and may order the improvements as it deems expedient and necessary.
   Subd. 2   Alternative. In the alternative, the City Council may authorize
the execution of a contract between the City and the subdivider requiring the
subdivider to furnish and to construct the improvements at the sole cost of the
subdivider, in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract
conditions approved by the Council, which shall include provision for
supervision of details of construction by the city engineer, and grant to the
engineer authority to correlate the work to be done under the contract with
other improvements in the subdivision which may be constructed by the City
under contract with others. The subdivider as contractor shall furnish a surety
bond with penalty equal to 1.25 times the cost of the improvements to be made
under the contract as estimated by the city engineer, which bond will be in
form required by statute for public contractors bonds and will identify the
improvements and the time schedule for their completion.
1140.05   Utilities.
   All utilities shall be installed underground as provided in this code. All
underground work shall be completed prior to street surfacing.
1140.06   Sidewalks.
   Sidewalks may be required along both sides of all streets; pedestrian ways
shall be paved and fenced as approved by the City Council.
1140.07   Curb and Gutter.
   Concrete curb and gutter shall be required.
1140.08   Stormwater Management.
   Stormwater management plans shall comply with Rule C: Stormwater Management
Plans of the Rice Creek Watershed District Rules.
Section 1150 Variances and Exemptions
1150.01   Granting Variances.
   Subd. 1   The City Council may grant a variance from the regulations
contained in this chapter as part of the plat approval process following a
finding that all of the following conditions exist:
      A.   The hardship is not a mere inconvenience;
      B.   The condition or conditions upon which the request is based are
unique and not generally applicable to other property;
      C.   The granting of a variance will not be substantially detrimental to
the public welfare and is in accord with the purpose and intent of this
chapter, the zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan.
   Subd. 2   In making these findings, the Council shall consider the nature of
the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the
number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the
probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the
vicinity. In granting a variance as provided in this section, the Council shall
prescribe only such conditions that it deems desirable or necessary to the
public interest.
1150.02   Applications.
   Application for any variance shall be in writing by the subdivider at the
time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the City
Council, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and
shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid
the Council in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for the
development shall include the covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions
necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan.
1150.03   Minor Subdivisions of Unplatted Property.
   Subd. 1   General. In the case of a proposed subdivision of an unplatted
tract of land, which subdivision is small in size and of minor importance and
which tract is located in an area where conditions are well defined, the City
Council, upon review and after report of the planning commission, may exempt
the subdivider from compliance with some of the provisions of this chapter. The
provisions from which the subdivision may be exempted shall be specified by the
planning commission at its first meeting at which the subdivider's application
under this paragraph is presented.
   Subd. 2   Special. Such subdivision may even be exempted from the platting
requirements of this chapter and may be allowed to be accomplished by means of
a survey or registered land survey provided that the following requirements
have been met:
      A.   The resultant parcels abut on and have access to an existing public
street, road, thoroughfare or highway;
      B.   The subdivision will not involve the opening, widening or extension
of any public or private street, road, thoroughfare or highway and will not
involve the dedication, reservation or construction of any type of public
utility;
      C.   The subdivision will not obstruct future streets which have been
planned by the City;
      D.   The subdivision will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to adjacent tracts in the area in which the subdivision tract is
located;
      E.   The registered land survey conforms in all respects to the
provisions of M.S. § 508.47 (4), as amended, the terms of which are
incorporated herein by reference, or the survey contains at least the following
items:
         1.   Graphic scale;
         2.   North point;
         3.   Date of preparation;
         4.   Names and addresses of the owner, and registered land surveyor
who prepared the survey;
         5.   Legal descriptions of the tract as a whole and the resultant
parcels;
         6.   Location, width and names of all existing or previously platted
streets, roads, thoroughfares or highways adjacent to the subdivision tract;
         7.   Location of all monument, stakes, benchmarks or triangulation
stations in or adjacent to the subdivision tract;
         8.   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or
other underground facilities within the subdivision tract and to a distance of
one hundred (100) feet beyond the outer limits of the tract;
         9.   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided tracts
within one hundred (100) feet of the subdivision tract, identifying the same by
name and ownership;
         10.   Existing zoning classification of the district within which the
subdivision tract is located;
         11.   Total approximate acreage of the subdivision tract and acreage
or square footage of the resultant parcels;
         12.   Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals in
not more than two (2) feet and depiction of significant features on or within
the subdivision tract such as watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops and powers transmission poles and lines;
         13.   Certification by the registered land surveyor who prepared the
survey.
      F.   Monuments or stakes shall be placed and installed at all corners and
angle points of the resultant parcels;
      G.   The resultant parcels will not have setbacks and dimensions less
than those required in the zoning ordinance, as amended;
      H.   Drainage and utility easements along lot lines and any other
easements required by this chapter.
      I.   A grading plan with drainage calculations shall be submitted if
required by the city engineer.
      J.   The subdivider has complied with the requirements of this chapter
which the planning commission or City Council have made the subdivision by
registered land survey or survey specifically subject to.
   Subd. 3   Such filing fee as has been established in a resolution adopted by
the Council shall be paid the zoning administrator with every application for
an exemption under this paragraph.
1150.04   Division or Consolidation of Platted Lots of Record.
   In the case of an application to divide one or more lots platted into lots
and blocks and designated in a subdivision plat on file and of record in the
office of the recorder or registrar of titles for the county, into one or more
separately described parcels, or an application for the consolidation of two or
more such platted lots or parts thereof into one or more tracts, the City
Council, upon review and after report of the planning commission, may approve
the subdivision or consolidation, upon compliance with the following
conditions:
   Subd. 1   Survey. The owner(s) of the platted lot(s) to be so divided or
consolidated shall file with the zoning administrator a survey or registered
land survey of the lot(s) to be divided or consolidated. The survey or
registered land survey shall be prepared and certified by a Licensed Surveyor.
   Subd. 2   Relation to Zoning Ordinance. The parcels or tracts resulting from
the division or consolidation, as depicted in the survey or registered land
survey, shall not have an area, dimensions or setbacks which are less than the
minimum requirements specified for the zoning district in which the parcels or
tracts are located in the zoning ordinance.
   Subd. 3   Public Welfare. It is determined that the proposed division or
consolidation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
adjacent tracts in the area in which the subdivision tract is located.
   Subd. 4   Conformity. The proposed division or consolidation shall conform
to such other requirements of this chapter, which the planning commission has
specifically made such division or consolidation subject to at its first
meeting at which the application for the division or consolidation is
submitted. The City Council may add to or subtract from the requirements
specified by the planning commission additional requirements of this chapter
which it deems necessary for the protection of the health, safety, general
welfare and convenience of the City and to secure the objectives of this
chapter. Prior to the City Council's granting the owner(s) an exemption
pursuant to this paragraph, the owner(s) shall comply with all the requirements
of this chapter which the planning commission or City Council have specifically
made the division or consolidation subject.
   Subd. 5   Such filing fee as has been established in a resolution adopted by
the Council shall be paid the zoning administrator with every application for
an exemption under this paragraph.
Chapter 12 - Sign Code
Section 1200 - Purpose and Intent
1200.01   Recitals.
   This Chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Arden Hills Sign
Code, except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this Chapter."
1200.02   Purpose and Findings.
   The purpose and findings of this Chapter are as follows:
   Subd. 1 Purpose. This Sign Code is intended to establish a comprehensive and
balanced system of sign control that accommodates the need for a well-
maintained, safe, and attractive community, and the need for effective
communications, including business identification. It is the intent of these
sign regulations, to promote the health, safety, general welfare, aesthetics,
and image of the community by regulating signs that are intended to communicate
to the public in all areas of the City. It is not the purpose or intent of this
Chapter to regulate the message displayed on any sign. The purpose of this
Chapter is to authorize:
   A.   Permanent signs which establish a high standard of aesthetics and are
appropriate for the planned character in each sign district as established in
Section 1240;
   B.   Signs which are compatible with their surroundings;
   C.   Signs which are designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a
manner that does not adversely impact public safety or create a hazard to
motorists, pedestrians, or cyclists;
   D.   Signs that are proportioned to the scale of, and are architecturally
compatible with, principal structures;
   E.   Permanent signs which give preference to the on-premise owner or
occupant;
   F.   Temporary commercial signs and advertising displays which provide an
opportunity to advertise while restricting signs that create visual clutter and
hazards at public right-of-way intersections;
   G.   Minimize adverse effects on nearby property; and,
   H.   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set
forth herein under the authority of the City.
   Subd. 2 Findings. The City finds it is necessary for the promotion and
preservation of the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the
community to control the construction, location, size, and maintenance of
signs. Further, the City finds:
   A.   Permanent and temporary signs have a direct impact on and relationship
to the image and aesthetic of the community;
   B.   The manner of installation, location and maintenance of signs affects
the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community;
   C.   An opportunity for viable identification of community businesses,
residences, and institutions must be established;
   D.   The safety of motorists, cyclists, pedestrians and other users of
public streets and property is affected by the number, size, location and
appearance of signs that create a hazard for drivers, particularly from dynamic
display signs;
   E.   Installation of signs suspended from, projecting over, or placed on the
tops of buildings, walks or other structures may constitute a hazard during
periods of high winds and an obstacle to effective fire-fighting and other
emergency service;
   F.   Uncontrolled and unlimited signs and sign types, particularly dynamic
display signs, adversely impact the image and aesthetic attractiveness of the
community and thereby undermine economic value and growth;
   G.   Uncontrolled and unlimited signs, particularly temporary signs which
are commonly located within or adjacent to public right-of-way or are located
at driveway/street intersections, result in roadside clutter and obstruction of
views of oncoming traffic. This creates a hazard to drivers and pedestrians and
also adversely impacts a logical flow of information;
   H.   Commercial signs are generally incompatible with residential uses and
should be strictly limited in residential zoning districts; and
   I.   The right to express noncommercial opinions in any zoning district must
be protected, subject to reasonable restrictions on size, height, location and
number.
1200.03   Scope of Regulations.
   The sign regulations set forth in this Chapter shall apply to all structures
and all land uses. This Chapter describes the signage standards for the nine
sign districts that overlay the zoning districts of the City. Specific
additional regulations are established for signs which are unique in purpose
and not easily addressed by district regulations. No person, property owner,
lessee shall place, erect, alter, modify, enhance or change in any way a sign
that does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter and all other
applicable regulations.
1200.04   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phase, or other part of this
Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
the validity or enforceability of the remaining portion of this Chapter. The
City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the Chapter in each
section, subsection, sentence, or phase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subjections, sentences, clauses, or phrases are
declared invalid.
Section 1210 - Definitions
1210.01   Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context
clearly indicated a different meaning:
· Auxiliary sign. A sign that provides direction for internal circulation,
parking or entry, restrictions on parking, security warnings, or other similar
primarily noncommercial signs that are directed at people that are entering,
exiting, or on a particular property. Auxiliary signs do not include outdoor
advertising signs.
· Banner. Any temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar material mounted
to a pole or a building at one (1) or more edges.
· Billboard. See "Outdoor advertising sign."
· Canopy/awning sign. A message or logo on an awning or canopy which is
constructed according to the requirements of the building code, is an integral
part of the building, and is consistent with the architecture and design of the
building.
· Clear vision area. The clear vision area shall be an area within a triangle
that is measured along the edge of the driving surface of the road starting at
the intersection of two roads (public or private) and extending thirty (30)
feet in each direction from the intersection and then a line connecting these
two end points.
· Changeable message sign. A message that is not permanently attached to the
sign face but is not a dynamic display. The message is changed manually.
· Commercial message sign. Any message which identifies a business or product
or promotes the sale of any product or service.
· Dynamic Display. Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement
or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically removing
and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or
change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other component of
the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology or method
allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or
mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This also includes, but
is not limited to, any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking,
projecting, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating
panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink," or any
other method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of
images or displays.
· Freestanding sign. A self-supporting sign usually held up by uprights placed
in the ground or any other base that is anchored to the ground.
· Grand opening. Commencement of operation of a new business. For purposes of
the ordinance, a grand opening is considered to occur if there is a business
name change or change in type of business or activity.
· Graphic sign. A sculpture attached to or sign painted directly on a wall that
is primarily symbolic or representational in nature and not alpha or numeric in
content or copy.
· Illuminated sign. Any sign, which has characters, letters, figures, designs
or outlines which is illuminated by an artificial light source.
· Incidental sign. Any sign that is generally not understandable or readable
from property other than where the sign is located, such as from adjacent
property or a public street, as determined by the City Administrator of their
designee.
· Lighting, backlit. An illuminated sign where the light source which
illuminates the wall behind individual sign letters is hidden from view. The
sign letters are opaque and appear as a silhouette against the lighted surface.
· Lighting, external. The sign is illuminated by means of external light
fixtures directed at the sign.
· Lighting, internal. An illuminated sign having the source of illumination
located inside a translucent panel and is not directly visible.
· Menu Board Sign. A freestanding exterior sign adjacent to the drive-through
lane at a drive-through facility that identifies items for sale at the facility
and their associated prices for customers. The menu board must comply with
§1240.02 of this chapter.
· Monument sign. A freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground
or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and is less than sixteen (16)
feet in height.
· On-premise sign. A sign whose message is related to the property or the
activity and use occurring on the property on which the sign is located. On-
premise signs include multi-tenant identification signs that may advertise
tenants on different property provided such tenants are within the same
approved PUD and parking is shared between properties.
· Outdoor advertising sign. Any sign that is located outdoors and that
advertises a product, business, service, event, or any other matter that is not
available, or does not take place, on the same premises as the sign. Outdoor
advertising signs are commonly called billboards. An outdoor advertising sign
does not include a sign that is not readily understandable or readable from
property other than where the sign is located, such as from adjacent property
or a public street, as determined by the City Administrator or their designee.
· Permanent sign. Any sign that is not temporary.
· Pole sign. A freestanding sign that is elevated off the ground by one or more
poles.
· Portable sign. A temporary sign with or without copy and graphic that is
designed or intended to be moved or transported but not including banner signs.
Examples of portable signs include, but are not limited to: A-frame or T-frame
signs, sandwich signs; signs designed to be transported by trailer or on
wheels; and signs mounted on a vehicle for advertising purposes, except signs
identifying a business when the vehicle is being used in the normal day-to-day
operation of that business. A sign may be a portable sign even if it has wheels
removed, was designed without wheels, or is attached to the ground, a
structure, or other sign.
· Projecting sign. A sign, other than a wall sign, that is attached to and
projects more than eighteen (18) inches from the building façade.
· Public sign. A traffic control sign in Minnesota State Statutes; any
identification sign installed in a public park by a public authority; and any
other identification, regulatory, or warning sign approved by the City Council
for installation on public land.
· Re-facing. The process of replacing the sign copy, message, logo, or graphic
on a sign without altering or moving the structure to which the sign face is
attached.
· Roof sign. A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or on a parapet
wall that is above the roof line.
· Rotating sign. A sign or a portion of a sign which moves in a rotating
oscillating or similar manner other than changing signs.
· Service area canopy. Open air roof-like structure that projects from the wall
of a building or is freestanding and is for the purpose of shielding equipment
and/or people from the elements; is often found covering service or gasoline
station islands.
· Sign. Any written message, pictorial presentation, number, illustration,
decoration, banner or other device that is used to announce, direct attention
to, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known. For purpose of
maintenance or removal, the term "sign" shall also include frames and support
structures.
· Sign area. The area in square feet of smallest rectangle, circle, or triangle
that contains the sign copy.
· Sign height. The distance measured perpendicular from the highest point of
the sign structure to the average elevation of the street used for access to
the property.
· Temporary sign. A sign designed to be displayed for a limited period of time
that is not permanently affixed to the land or to a structure.
· Wall sign. A sign attached to or erected against an exterior wall surface of
a building or structure.
· Window sign. A sign mounted inside of a building within the window area that
is applied or fastened to the window in a manner that is intended to be viewed
from outside the building.
Section 1220 - Permit and Review Process
1220.01   Permit Required.
   Except for those signs listed in Section
1230.01, no sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, maintained, moved,
or enhanced in the City without obtaining a sign permit from the City. The
content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not be considered
when approving or denying a sign permit; however, the content must be submitted
to evaluate the sign copy area and to restrict permanent off-premise signs. A
separate sign application shall be required for each sign.
1220.02   Application Process.
   An application for a sign permit shall be on the City's official sign
application. Unless waived by the City Administrator or their designee, each
application shall contain the following information or it shall be considered
incomplete:
   Subd. 1 Name, signature, address, and phone number of the property owner
(required).
   Subd. 2 Name, signature, address, and phone number of the applicant (if
different than the property owner).
   Subd. 3 Parcel ID of the property.
   Subd. 4 A complete set of plans drawn to scale showing the necessary
elevations, setbacks, size, and details to fully and clearly represent the
construction and place of the signs(s).
   Subd. 5 Type of sign (wall, monument, pole, etc.).
   Subd. 6 Certification by the applicant(s) indicating the application
complies with all requirements of this Chapter.
   Subd. 7 A separate building permit may also be required from the Building
Official for signs involving new or modified sign structures.
   Subd. 8 If the applicant is not the property owner, the applicant shall
obtain written permission from the property owner and provide a copy to the
City prior to approval of the permit.
1220.03   Review Process.
   The City Administrator or their designee shall approve or deny the sign
permit application in an expedited manner, no more that thirty (30) days from
the receipt of the completed application, including applicable fees. All
permits not reviewed within thirty (30) days shall be deemed approved.
Applicants shall be notified in writing if the application is denied, including
the reasons for denial.
1220.04   Appeals Process.
   Appeals shall be made to the Planning Commission in writing within fifteen
(15) days of the confirmed delivery of the denial letter for the sign permit
application. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing as soon as
practicable but not more than forty-five (45) days after confirmed receipt of
the appeal to review the appeal and make a recommendation to the City Council.
The City Council shall review the Planning Commission's recommendation as soon
as practicable but not more than forty-five (45) days after the Planning
Commission's recommendation.
1220.05   Fees.
   Sign permit fees and the impoundment fee shall be set by the City Council by
ordinance on an annual basis.
1220.06   Inspection & Enforcement.
   Subd. 1 Inspection Authority. All signs shall be subject to inspection by
the City Administrator or their designee, who is hereby authorized to enter
upon any property of premise to ascertain whether the provisions of this
Chapter are being obeyed. Such entrance shall be made during business hours
unless an emergency exists.
   Subd. 2 Signs in Disrepair. The City Administrator or their designee may
order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the
maintenance provisions of this ordinance. Upon failure to comply with such
notice within the time specified in such order, the City Council may declare
the sign to be a public nuisance, impound it, and assess the cost of removal to
the sign owner or the sign owner's agent.
   Subd. 3 Impoundment of Signs on Public Property or Within Public Right-of-
way. The City Administrator or their designee may, at any time and without
notice, impound signs that have been installed on public property, within a
public right-of way, or within a public easement that are in violation of this
Chapter. The sign owner or their agent may retrieve an impounded sign subject
to the following rules:
   A.   Payment of an impoundment release fee. Any subsequent impoundment(s),
within one calendar year, for a particular property or sign owner will require
payment of double the initial impoundment release fee.
   B.   Any impounded sign may be retrieved from the impound area within three
(3) business days of the impoundment or the City Administrator or their
designee may dispose of it. The impound area can be located by contacting City
Hall. Any cost incurred by the City for disposal of an impounded sign may be
assessed to the sign owner or the sign owner's agent.
   C.   The City shall have no obligation to notify a property owner that it
has impounded a sign.
   D.   The City shall not be held liable for any damage to an impounded sign.
Section 1230 - Exempt and Prohibited Signs
1230.01   Exemptions.
   All signs shall require an approved sign permit prior to placement except
for the signs specifically noted in this section. Exempted signs shall not
reduce the permitted signage for a property. These exemptions shall not relieve
the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its maintenance and its
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or any other law or ordinance
regulating the same.
   Subd. 1 Government Signs. All governmental signs, including but not limited
to traffic control and other regulatory purpose signs, street signs,
identification signs, informational signs, danger signs and railroad crossing
signs.
   Subd. 2 Non-commercial Signs in an Election Year. In years where a federal,
state or local government election is conducted within the city, non-commercial
signs may be posted no more than 70 days prior to that election. These non-
commercial signs shall be placed in accordance with Section 1230.02 and 1250.03
Subd 2, 3, and 4. Those responsible for posting the signs shall remove any
signs within 10 days following an election.
   Subd. 3 Address Signs. Address identification not exceeding four (4) square
feet in area for each structure or portion of a structure with an assigned
address. Street identification numbers are required in all sign districts and
should be clearly visible from the street.
   Subd. 4 Exempt Residential Signs. Properties in Sign Districts 1 and 3 shall
be allowed up to eight (8) square feet of signage provided that a single sign
is no larger than six (6) square feet, the signs are not illuminated, and
freestanding signs are at least five (5) feet from any property line.
   Subd. 5 Temporary Off-premise Signs. Temporary off-premise signs as
designated in Section
1250.03.
   Subd. 6 Portable Signs. Portable A-frame, T-frame, sandwich , or other
similar signs that do not exceed six (6) square feet in size, are not
illuminated, are located within fifteen (15) feet of the primary entrance to a
building, and are displayed only during the hours of business operation. No
more than two of these signs shall be in place at any given time.
   Subd. 7 Incidental Signs. Incidental signs or signs within a building
provided that the sign is not readily visible from the public right-of-way,
adjacent properties, and are not illuminated.
   Subd. 8 Window Signs. Window signs that are inside of a building shall not
require a permit but shall be in accordance with Section
1240.02 Table 1.
   Subd. 9 Non-commercial Signs. Any sign display or device allowed under this
section may contain, in lieu of other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial
message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to
a commodity service for sale, and that complies with the size, height and
lighting requirements of this Chapter.
(revised 1/27/2020)
1230.02   Prohibited Signs.
   The following signs shall be prohibited in all sign districts:
   Subd. 1 Signs with Moving, Swinging, Revolving, or Rotating parts.
   Subd. 2 Dynamic Display Signs. Dynamic display signs shall be prohibited,
except as provided in section
1240.04 of this code section.
   Subd. 3 Roof Signs.
   Subd. 4 Projecting signs.
   Subd. 5 Noncompliant Signs. Any sign not constructed, wired, assembled,
attached or supported in conformance with applicable building or other codes
and regulations;
   Subd. 6 Signs in the Right-of-way. Signs in the public right-of-way except
as provided for in Section
1250.03, by Minnesota Statutes, or allowed by the agency regulating the right-
of-way;
   Subd. 7 Signs attached to public utility poles, trees, street signs,
stoplights, or fences;
   Subd. 8 Permanent outdoor advertising sign, including billboards;
   Subd. 9 Portable Signs. Portable signs shall be prohibited, except for
portable A-frame, T-frame, sandwich, or other similar signs that do not exceed
six (6) square feet in size.
   Subd. 10 Signs in the Clear Vision Area.
   Subd. 11 Signs Imitating Traffic Control Signs. Signs which are designed to
resemble official traffic signs except signs which are used to control traffic
on private property;
   Subd. 11 Any sign, sign type, sign lighting, or sign technology not
specifically listed as permitted in this Chapter shall be prohibited.
Section 1240 - General Sign Regulations
1240.01   Regulation by Sign District.
   For the purpose of regulating signs, the following nine sign districts are
adopted:
District Description
District Description
1        All residential properties zoned R-1 or R-2.
2        All non-residential uses in the R-1 through R-4 zoning districts.
3        All residential properties zoned R-3 and R-4.
4        All properties fronting on County Road E east of Highway 51 except for
         those properties with frontage on Lexington Avenue.
5        All properties fronting on Lexington Avenue South of Interstate 694.
         All properties zoned for commercial or industrial use fronting on
6        Lexington Avenue north of Interstate 694, properties along Highway 96,
         and properties located in the B-1 zoning district.
7        All properties in the I-Flex, Gateway Business, or other commercial or
         industrial district without frontage on a roadway designated above.
8        All properties zoned Neighborhood Business.
9        The parts of the TCAAP area not fronting on Highway 96.
 
1240.02   Permitted Sign Type, Area, Height, and Illumination by Sign District.
   All signs shall conform to the applicable standards in Table One: Sign
Standards by Sign District. The following provisions shall also apply:
   Subd. 1 Wall Sign. Wall signs shall not extend more than eighteen (18)
inches from the wall they are attached to.
   Subd. 2 Freestanding Pole or Monument Signs.
   A.   No more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted on any site
except in cases where properties front more than one public street. For
properties that front more than one public street, an additional freestanding
sign may be permitted for each street front provided that each additional
freestanding sign does not exceed half the size of the maximum sign area
allowed for a freestanding sign in the underlying sign district.
   B.   The sign area of a freestanding sign shall only be calculated using one
side of the sign. If the two sides are different sizes, the larger side shall
be used for determining sign area.
   C.   Freestanding signs in Sign Districts 4 and 5 shall be monument type
ground signs with the copy resting on and supported by a solid base of brick or
rock-faced block in a color similar to or complimentary to the main structure
on the site. The material of the base must extend at least one-half way up the
sides of the sign face.
   D.   Freestanding signs shall be located at least five (5) feet from any
property line and shall not project over the property line. However, if the
bottom edge of the sign copy is not located at least ten (10) feet above the
ground with supports that do not encroach on the clear vision area of
approaching traffic, the sign shall be located to preserve the clear vision
area.
   E.   The total area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed 1.5 times the
permitted sign copy area of a freestanding sign. The total sign area includes
all sign copy, graphics, decorative features, borders, and structural supports
except for the poles.
   Subd. 3 Service Area Canopy. Each edge of a service area canopy facing a
street is permitted twenty-five (25) square feet of sign area in addition to
all other sign area permitted on the site. Such signage may be illuminated
externally, internally, or backlit, but no other part of the face of the canopy
shall be illuminated.
   Subd. 4 Awnings and Canopies. No part of an awning or sun canopy shall be
less than eight (8) feet or greater than twelve (12) feet above grade. Any sign
area on the awning, if illuminated, will be deducted from the permitted wall
sign area. The fabric or material used for the awning or canopy must be opaque
and no internal illumination is permitted.
Table 1240.02 - Sign Standards by Sign District available in PDF, click HERE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1675.png]
 
    Subd. 5 Adult Use Signs. In addition to this Chapter, all adult use
oriented signs shall comply with the sign requirements in the Adult Use
Ordinance. Where any provisions of this Chapter conflict with the Adult Use
Ordinance, the provision that is more stringent shall be applied.
1240.03   Manual Changeable Message Sign.
   No more than thirty-five (35) percent of the actual sign area of a permitted
sign in a non-residential sign district shall be capable of displaying manually
changing messages. The remainder of the sign area shall not have the capability
to change messages even if not used. Manual changing message signs shall not
include dynamic displays.
1240.04   Menu Board Signs
All Menu Board Signs for fast food restaurant uses. Drive-through menu board
sign are allowed for fast food restaurant uses provided the requirements in
this section are met.
Subd. 1. Location: All drive-through menu board signs shall be single sided and
located adjacent to the drive-through lane and shall not be located in any
required setback. Signs may be affixed to the building.
Subd. 2. Height: A drive-through menu board sign shall not exceed eight (8)
feet above grade in height.
Subd. 3. Size: A drive-through menu board sign shall not exceed forty (40)
square feet.
Subd. 4. Number: Up to two drive-through menu board signs are permitted per
drive-through lane. The total surface area of the two signs shall not exceed
forty (40) square feet.
Subd. 5. A Drive-through menu board signs shall comply with the following
standards:
   A.   The images, colors, and text may not change more than five (5) times
per day;
   B.   All images, colors, and text shall be static with no flashing,
scrolling, or animation; and
   C.   At any time the business or drive-through is closed to the public, any
Drive- through menu board sign shall be turned off until the business or drive-
through is open to the public.
   D.   Signs with speakers or intercoms shall be designed and located in a
manner to direct noise away from adjoining properties. Speaker noise shall not
be audible to adjacent residential properties.
   E.    The sign(s) shall not be located as to impair the vision of the driver
of a vehicle traveling either into, out of, or through the drive-through lane.
Section 1250 - Special Provisions
1250.01   Allocation of Permanent Signs on Multi-Tenant Developments and Sites.
   In multi-tenant buildings or sites, the permitted sign area and sign types,
except for freestanding signs, may be installed by each individual business
establishment that has exclusive use of some portion of the street or otherwise
primary level of the building and direct access to the outside. Tenants located
on the street or otherwise primary level in a center with a common mall or
atrium shall be considered to have direct access to the outside for the purpose
of this section. The management and ownership of any business establishment
proposing to install signage must be separate and distinct from the management
and ownership of any other establishment in the same building or on the same
building lot. Each establishment must be separated from all other
establishments by demising walls [as per the International Building Code]
having no openings or passages.
   Subd. 1 Multi-tenant Buildings and Properties Sign Allocation. Signage for
establishments occupying a multi-tenant building or site but not located on the
street or primary level of the building must be provided from the allocation of
sign area and type to the occupants of the street or primary level of the
building as determined by the property owner.
   Subd. 2 Freestanding Signs on Multi-tenant Buildings and Properties. For
freestanding signs, a multi-tenant parcel shall be considered one parcel and
freestanding signs shall be permitted in accordance with Section
1240.02 Table 1. In the case of multiple tenant sites, the permitted
freestanding sign area shall be allocated by the property owner among its
tenants.
1250.02   Temporary On-premise Signs.
   Except as provided for in 1250.03, all other temporary signs shall require
an approved sign permit prior to placing the sign and shall conform to the
following:
   Subd. 1 Temporary Sign Permit Length. Temporary signs, including portable
signs, streamers, pennants, banners, balloons, inflatables or other similar
object with a commercial message, may be displayed on three (3) occasions per
calendar year with a maximum of ten (10) days for each occasion. The three (3)
occasions may be used consecutively with one permit. Temporary sign permits are
nontransferable to other properties or establishments on the same property.
   Subd. 2 Single occupant parcels.
   A.   No more than one permitted temporary sign shall be permitted at any
given time. The area of the temporary signage shall not exceed one half of the
permitted sign area as allowed in Section
1240.02 Table 1 for a particular sign type in the underlying sign district;
   B.   Freestanding temporary signs shall only be permitted in districts where
freestanding signs are permitted as allowed in Section
1240.02 Table 1. If a conforming freestanding sign is already in place, the
temporary freestanding sign shall be attached to or near to the existing
freestanding sign;
   Subd. 3 Multi-tenant parcels.
   A.   Each individual business establishment that has exclusive use of some
portion of the street or otherwise primary level of the building and direct
access to the outside qualifies for the temporary signs permitted in Section
1250.02 Subd 1. Sign permits shall not be transferrable to other business
establishments.
   B.   Temporary wall signage may be permitted for each individual business
establishment that has exclusive use of some portion of the street or otherwise
primary level of the building and direct access to the outside. The total
temporary wall sign area for each tenant shall not exceed one half of the
permitted permanent wall sign area as allowed in Section
1240.02 Table 1. Each business shall not have more than one wall or
freestanding temporary sign at a time.
   C.   One temporary freestanding sign may be permitted for each individual
business establishment that has exclusive use of some portion of the street or
otherwise primary level of the building and direct access to the outside. The
total area of all temporary freestanding signage for the parcel shall not
exceed one half of the permitted area of permanent freestanding signage for the
parcel as allowed in Section
1240.02 Table 1. The total permitted temporary freestanding sign area shall be
allocated by the property owner or their designee among its tenants.
   Subd. 4 Grand Openings. New businesses with grand openings are eligible for
one additional temporary sign permit of any type permitted in the underlying
sign district with an approved permit. The sign may be in place for up to
thirty (30) days provided all other requirements in this section are met and
the required permits are obtained. This eligibility shall expire six months
after the business opens.
   Subd. 5 Lease or Vacant Space. Buildings or parcels with space for sale or
lease may obtain a temporary sign permit for one temporary wall or monument
sign that does not expire until seven (7) days after the building or parcel is
leased or sold. A wall sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in
size and shall be used in place of a permanent wall sign. A freestanding sign
shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in size and shall be attached or
immediately adjacent to an exiting freestanding sign. All other provisions in
this section
1350.02 shall apply.
   Subd. 6 Temporary Sign Height. A temporary sign shall not exceed the height
limits listed in Section
1240.02 Table 1 for a permanent sign of a particular sign type in a given
district, including inflatable signs and balloons.
   Subd. 7 Sign Installation. Temporary signs shall be secured and well-
constructed so as not to create a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles.
   Subd. 8 Illumination. A temporary sign shall not be illuminated.
   Subd. 9 Location. The permitted location of all temporary signs are subject
to change as determined by the City Administrator of their designee in order to
protect the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics.
   Subd. 10 Mounds View, Bethel University, and Northwestern College Banner
Signs. Temporary banner signs for athletic fields at Mounds View High School,
Bethel University, and Northwestern College shall be exempt from the provisions
of this section and shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter
1250.04.
1250.03   Temporary Off-premise Signs.
Each residential property is allowed up to five (5) freestanding, temporary,
off-premise signs in the city right-of-way or on private property provided the
signs meet the standards of this section: (revised 1/27/2020)
   Subd. 1   Sign Number Limit. Signs shall be four (4) square feet or less in
size, and less than four (4) feet high;
      A.   Signs shall be non-illuminated;
      B.   Signs shall be within one mile of the property for which the signs
are advertising (this provision does not preempt the sign regulations for
neighboring communities);
      C.   Signs shall be displayed no more than three consecutive days in any
seven day period.
   Subd. 2   Permission. The sign owner shall obtain permission from the
property owner to place a sign on their property or on property that shares a
property line with the adjoining right-of-way where the sign is located.
      The sign owner shall obtain permission from the property owner on which
the sign is placed. The property owner may withdraw that permission at any
time.
      A.   Failure to obtain permission may result in removal of the sign.
      B.   Sign(s) are prohibited on land owned by the city, county, federal
government and school district(s).
   Subd. 3   Right-of-way Regulatory Authority. Sign(s) placed within city
right-of-way, shall not be placed within five (5) feet of the edge of the
roadway pavement or curb.
      Exception. If the five (5) foot distance places the sign on a trail or
sidewalk surface then the signage shall be placed on the dwelling side of the
sidewalk.
      A.    Sign(s) placed in Ramsey County or State of Minnesota right-of-way
shall be subject to Ramsey County and State of Minnesota regulations.
      B.   Failure to obtain permission from the appropriate agency may result
in removal of the sign.
   Subd. 4   Disclaimer. The City of Arden Hills shall not be responsible for
damage to any signs placed in the right-of-way.
1250.04   Temporary Banner Signs for Athletic Fields at Mounds View High
School, Bethel University, and Northwestern College.
    Athletic fields at Mounds View High School, Bethel University, and
Northwestern College may be permitted to have temporary banner signs attached
to the fences of their athletic fields provided that such signage faces the
field of play so that the impact of the signage is directed only to those
utilizing the field or watching the sporting event, and not surrounding
property owners. In addition, to the greatest extent possible such signage
shall not obstruct sightlines to the athletic field for those watching the
sporting event from the bleachers or other designated viewing areas. The
content of temporary banner signage shall comply with the sponsorship sign
regulations as established by Mounds View High School, Bethel University, or
Northwestern College for their respective athletic fields. The City
Administrator or Administrator's designee shall determine if the signage is
visible from a public roadway or from property outside of Mounds View High
School, Bethel University, and Northwestern College. If found to be visible,
the signs shall comply with the following size limitations and shall follow the
sign permit process as described below:
   Subd. 1 Individual Sign Area. Temporary banner signs shall not exceed fifty
(50) square feet each.
   Subd. 2 Total Signage Area. The temporary banner sign shall not exceed a
massing of over nine hundred and sixty (960) square feet in one area or a total
of two thousand (2000) square feet.
   Subd. 3 Time Limit. Temporary banner sign shall not be displayed for more
than ninety (90) consecutive days or more than one hundred and eighty (180)
days during the calendar year.
   Subd. 4 Permit Requirements. Sign permits shall not be required for
individual banner signs but shall be required where a new group massing of
signage is requested.
   Subd. 5 Compliance. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the
provisions of this section (including but not limited to: the dimensions of
individual banner signs, the dimensions of that group of banner signs, and the
total square feet of temporary banner signs).
1250.05   Permanent Scoreboard Signs for Athletic Fields at Mounds View High
School, Bethel University, and Northwestern College.
   Athletic fields at Mounds View High School, Bethel University, and
Northwestern College may be permitted to have permanent scoreboard signage at
their athletic fields that is clearly secondary to the overall appearance of
the scoreboard. Such signage shall face the field of play so that the impact of
the signage is directed only to those utilizing the field or watching the
sporting event, and not surrounding property owners. The content of scoreboard
signage shall comply with the sponsorship sign regulations as established by
Mounds View High School, Bethel University, and Northwestern College, for their
respective athletic fields. The City Administrator or the Administrator's
designee shall determine if the signage is visible from a public roadway or
from property outside of Mounds View High School, Bethel University, and
Northwestern College. If found to be visible, the signs shall comply with the
following size limitations and shall follow the sign permit process as
described below:
   Subd. 1 Sign Area. Scoreboard signage shall not exceed thirty percent (30%)
of the total scoreboard area, nor shall any one scoreboard sign exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the total scoreboard area.
   Subd. 2 Sign Permit Required. Since the scoreboard signs are permanent in
nature, the applicant shall be required to obtain sign permit approval prior to
the installation of any new scoreboard sponsorship signs; at such time the
applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this section.
1250.06   Permanent Signs for Athletic Fields at Mounds View High School,
Bethel University, and Northwestern College.
   Athletic fields at Mounds View High School, Bethel University, and
Northwestern College may be permitted to have permanent signage at their
respective athletic fields. Such signage shall be permanent in nature and shall
not be lit by a direct lighting source. Signs may be an entrance gate style
sign, signage affixed directly to a press box/grandstand, or signage included
on the scoreboard. Such signage shall be constructed of durable materials
(finished metal, finished wood, plastic). The City Administrator or
Administrator's designee shall determine if the signage is visible from a
public roadway or from property outside of Mounds View High School, Bethel
University, and Northwestern College. If found to be visible, the signs shall
comply with the following size limitations and shall follow the sign permit
process as described below:
   Subd. 1 Sign Area. The signage area of entrance gate signs shall not exceed
thirty (30) square feet, the signage area of press box/grandstand signage shall
not exceed eighty (80) square feet, and scoreboard field naming signage shall
not exceed forty (40) percent of the total scoreboard area.
   Subd. 2 Total Sign Area. The cumulative total of permanent signage shall not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
   Subd. 3 Sign Permit Required. Since the signage would be permanent in
nature, the applicant shall be required to obtain a sign permit approval prior
to the installation of any new signage; at such time the applicant shall
demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this section.
Section 1260 - Sign Standard Adjustments
1260.01   Sign Standard Adjustments.
   Adjustments to the requirements and standards for the height, number, type,
lighting, area, and/or location of a sign or signs established by this Chapter
may be approved with a Site Plan Review or a Planned Unit Development process
as described for in Section
1320 and
1355 of the Zoning Code. This provision shall not be used to permit dynamic
display signage. In order to approve any sign standard adjustment, the
following criteria of Subd. 1 or Subd. 2 shall be satisfied, and the necessary
criteria of Subd. 3 shall be satisfied:
   Subd. 1 There are site conditions which require a sign adjustment to allow
the sign to be reasonably visible from a street immediately adjacent to the
site;
   Subd. 2 The sign adjustment will allow a sign of exceptional design or a
style that will enhance the area or that is more consistent with the
architecture and design of the site;
   Subd. 3 The sign adjustment will not result in a sign that is inconsistent
with the purpose of the zoning district in which the property is located or the
current land use.
Section 1270 - Maintenance Repair
1270.01   Maintenance and Repair.
   All signs shall be kept in good repair and free from peeling paint, rust,
damaged or rotted supports, framework or other material, broken or missing
faces or missing letters. Any structure from which a sign has been moved or
removed shall be repaired with materials and/or painted or stained to match the
existing background.
   Subd. 1 Sign Permit Not Required. Activities considered normal maintenance
and repair and not requiring a sign or building permit shall include activities
such as replacing or repairing lamps, ballasts, transformers, trim, sign
fasteners, nuts, or washers; painting the pole of freestanding signs; and
painting the cabinet of freestanding signs or building signs.
   Subd. 2 Sign Permit Required. For any sign that required a permit, the
following activities shall not be considered normal maintenance and repair a
permit shall be required:
   A.   Re-facing a sign, except for the text on a manual changeable message
sign.
   B.   Removing the sign for the repair of the cabinet or any part thereof.
   C.   Changes made to a sign's size or illumination, including, but not
limited to, height, width, weight, area, adding or removing illumination
   D Changes in poles, structural supports, bases or shrouds, footings or
anchor bolts, moving the sign to a new location, or replacement of the interior
or exterior cabinet frame, except the sign face.
   Subd. 3 Building Permit. A building permit may be required for any signs
involving the construction of or changes to a sign structure and/or electrical
connections as determined by the Building Official.
Section 1280 - Non-Conforming Signs
1280.01   Non-conforming Signs.
   It is the intent of this Chapter that non-conforming signs shall not be
enlarged or expanded, nor be used as grounds for adding other signs or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district. It is further the intent of this
Chapter to permit legal non-conforming signs to remain provided that such signs
are safe, maintained so as not to be unsightly, and have not been abandoned or
removed subject to the following provisions:
   Subd. 1 Non-conforming Sign Continuance. A legal non-conforming sign may be
continued through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement
but shall not be expanded or moved to a new location.
   Subd. 2 Non-conforming Sign Discontinuance. If the use of the non-conforming
sign or sign structure is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the sign
or sign structure shall not be reconstructed or used except in conformity with
the provisions of this Chapter.
   Subd. 3 Non-conforming Sign Damaged or Destroyed. Should such non-conforming
sign or sign structure be damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent
greater than fifty (50) percent of its market value or structure and all
required permits for its reconstruction have not been applied for within one-
hundred eighty (180) days of when the sign or sign structure was damaged, it
shall not be reconstructed or used except in conformity with the provisions of
this Chapter.
   Subd. 4 Sign Regulation Conformance. Should such sign or sign structure be
permanently moved for any reason for any distance, it shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the sign district in which it is located after it is
moved.
   Subd. 5 Loss of Non-conforming Land Use. An existing sign devoted to a use
not permitted by the
Section 1320, Zoning Ordinance, in the zoning district in which it is located
shall not be enlarged, expanded or moved except in changing the sign to a sign
permitted in the sign district in which it is located.
   Subd. 6 Loss of Non-conforming Status. When a building or use loses its
nonconforming status, all signs devoted to the structure or use shall be
removed and all signs painted directly on the structure shall be repainted in a
neutral color or a color which will harmonize with the structure.
Chapter 13 - Zoning Code
Section 1300 - Title, Purpose, and Intent
1300.01   Title.
   Chapter 13, which includes Sections
1300,
1305,
1310,
1315,
1320,
1325,
1330,
1335,
1345,
1350,
1355,
1360,
1365, and
1370 of the City Code shall be known, cited as, and referred to as the Arden
Hills Zoning Code, except as referred to herein where it shall be known as
"this Code".
1300.02   Purpose and Intent.
   This Code is enacted for the following purposes:
   Subd. 1   To promote the general public health, safety, comfort and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Arden Hills, Minnesota.
   Subd. 2   To promote the character of and preserve and enhance the
properties and areas within the city including wetlands, ponds and marshes.
   Subd. 3   To divide the city into zones or districts on the basis of the
use, location, construction, reconstruction and alteration of land and
structures for residence, business, industrial and public purposes.
   Subd. 4   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and safety.
   Subd. 5   To prevent the overcrowding of land by undue concentration of
population.
   Subd. 6   To promote the proper use of land and structures.
   Subd. 7   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings, structures and
land shall conform for the benefit of all.
   Subd. 8   To prohibit the use of buildings, structures, and lands that are
incompatible with the intended use or development of lands within the specified
zones.
   Subd. 9   To promote the safe and efficient movement of people and goods.
   Subd. 10   To facilitate the provisions of public services.
   Subd. 11   To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public
health and welfare by providing for the off-street parking of vehicles and
vehicle loading areas.
   Subd. 12   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, offensive
noise, vibration, dust, odor, glare, hazardous waste, pollution and hazards in
the interest of public health, comfort and general welfare.
   Subd. 13   To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies provided for herein.
Section 1305 - Rules, Scope, Interpretation, & Definitions
1305.01   Rules of Construction.
   The language set forth in the text of this Code shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction.
   Subd. 1   The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes
the singular.
   Subd. 2   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the
future includes the present.
   Subd. 3   The word "shall" is mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
   Subd. 4   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   Subd. 5   All measured distances expressed shall be to the nearest tenth of
a foot and its metric equivalent.
   Subd. 6   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece" and
"parcel" of land.
   Subd. 7   The words "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for",
"designed for", "intended for", "improved for", "maintained for" and "occupied
for".
1305.02   Scope.
   From and after the effective date of this Code, the use of all land and
every structure, building or portion of a building erected, altered with
respect to area, added to or relocated, and every use accessory thereto, in the
City of Arden Hills, shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
Any existing structure and any use of land not in conformity with the
regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming uses or
structures.
   This Code does not abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private
agreement where such is legally enforceable, provided that where the
regulations of this Code are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or
requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the
requirements of this Code shall govern.
1305.03   Interpretation.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of this Code impose
greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation,
the provisions of this Code shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this
Code, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be
controlling.
1305.04   Definitions.
(revised 07/27/20; revised 04/10/2023; revised 04/24/2023; revised 8/28/2023;
revised 07/22/2024; revised 11/24/2024; revised 5/27/2025)
      ∙   Acre. A quantity of land containing forty-three thousand, five
hundred and sixty (43,560) square feet or one hundred sixty (160) square rods
in whatever shape and pattern (e.g. circular, square, triangular, irregular,
broad or narrow).
      ∙   Acre, net (as applied to PUD density calculations). One (1) acre of
land, minus the two-thirds (2/3) of that portion of the acre encompassed by
wetlands, one-half (1/2) of that portion of the acre encompassing wholly or
partially hills, mounds, or slopes that drop at a rate of twelve percent (12%)
or more per every fifteen (15) feet or more of distance; and the entire area of
public streets.
      ∙   Administrative officer. The zoning administrator, building inspector,
their deputies or assistants, and any other officials of the city charged with
or engaged in the administration of this Code or any portion thereof.
      ∙   Administrator. The zoning administrator.
      ∙   Agriculture, Commercial Outdoor Cannabis. See “Cannabis cultivation”.
(added 11/25/24)
      ∙   Agriculture, Commercial Indoor Cannabis. See “Cannabis cultivation”.
(added 11/25/24)
      ∙   Agricultural uses. Uses customarily associated with the growing of
farm produce and the raising of farm animals for general use; but not including
raising and feeding (feed lots) of livestock, fur farms and kennels.
      ∙   Alteration. As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or by
moving from one location to another.
      ∙   Alley. A minor public or private way which is used primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or side of a lot abutting on a street.
      ∙   Animals, domestic. Common household pets, such as dogs and cats,
other animals kept for amusement, companionship, decoration, or interest.
      ∙   Animals, farm. Animals traditionally kept or raised on a farm for the
purpose of providing food or products for sale or use, such as cattle, horses,
goats, sheep, swine, fowl, bees, and animals raised for fur.
      ∙   Animals, wild. Animals such as wolves, tigers and poisonous snakes
that are not normally a domestic animal or farm animal and would ordinarily be
confined in a zoo or found in the wild.
      ∙   Antenna. Equipment, used for transmitting and/or receiving
telecommunication, television or radio signals, which is located on the
exterior, or outside, of any building or structure.
      ∙   Antenna, dish. A parabolic-shaped antenna (including all supporting
apparatus) which is used for transmitting or receiving telecommunication,
television or radio signals, which is located on the exterior, or outside, of
any building or structure.
         ∙   Class I: Dish Antenna under thirty (30) inches or more in
diameter; six (6) feet in surface area; or six (6) feet in height.
         ∙   Class II: Dish Antenna thirty (30) inches or more in diameter; six
(6) square feet or more in surface area; or six (6) feet or more in height.
      ∙   Apartment. A room or suite of rooms located in a one- or two-family
building or multiple dwelling, which shall include a bath and kitchen
accommodation, intended or designed for use as an independent residence by a
single household.
      ∙   Appeal. An application for the review of an order, requirement,
decision, determination or interpretation of this Code made by an
administrative officer in the application and/or enforcement of this Code.
      ∙   Basement. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level. (revised 05/05/10)
      ∙   Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment
having the following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less
than 18 percent over a distance for 50 feet or more shall not be considered
part of the bluff): (added 02/22/10)
         ∙   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
         ∙   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water
level of the water body;
         ∙   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25
feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30 percent or
greater; and
         ∙   The slope must drain toward the waterbody.
      ∙   Bluff impact zone. A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the
top of a bluff. (added 02/22/10)
      ∙   Board. The board of appeals and adjustment established by this Code.
      ∙   Boarding house. A structure where sleeping rooms are provided, with a
common entrance, internal access to all rooms, one (1) or more bathrooms, and
one (1) or more kitchens to provide lodging for at least three (3) but not
exceeding five (5) persons. A boarding house is distinguished from a transient
accommodation such as a hotel or motel as defined in this chapter.  (added 7/
14/10)
      ∙   Boulevard. That portion of a street lying between the lateral line of
the roadway portion thereof (i.e., the back of the curb or curb line) and the
right-of-way line thereof which may contain within its boundaries a sidewalk or
portion of driveway.
      ∙   Brewpub. A restaurant that also has a facility that manufactures and
distributes intoxicating malt liquor or wine in total quantity not to exceed
250,000 barrels a year on the premises.  (added 10/29/12)
      ∙   Building. A structure which is designed and suitable for the
habitation or shelter of human beings or animals, or a shelter or storage of
property, or is used for trade or manufacturing.
      ∙   Building line. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high
water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
(revised 02/22/10)
      ∙   Building, accessory structure or use. A subordinate building
structure or use which is located on the same lot on which the principal
building or use is situated and which is reasonable necessary, appropriate and
incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such principal building or
principal use.
      ∙   Building envelope. (See Lot, Buildable portion of.)
      ∙   Building height. The vertical distance from the average elevation of
the grade along a face of a building to the highest point of the roof surface
of flat roofs, the deck line of mansard roofs, or the average height between
the eaves and the highest ridge of gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. The height of
a stepped or terraced building shall be the height of the tallest segment of
the building.
      ∙   Building inspector. The inspector as provided for in the building
code.
      ∙   Building, principal. A building in which the principal use, of the
lot on which it is located, is conducted.
      ∙   Bulk. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and location of same with respect to one another and includes the
following items:
         ∙   Size and height of buildings or structures.
         ∙   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
street or to other buildings or structures.
         ∙   Gross floor area of buildings or structures in relation to lot
lines, street or to other buildings or structures.
         ∙   All open spaces allocated to buildings or structures.
         ∙   Amount of lot area per dwelling unit.
      ∙   Bulk materials. Uncontained solid matter such as powder, grain,
stone, sand, sulfur, etc., that has a tendency to become airborne.
      ∙   Business. Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein
merchandise is exhibited and sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and
materials, or whereby services are offered for compensation.
      ∙   Business services. Services performed primarily for other businesses,
including such services as secretarial, clerical, employment agencies, business
machine service, printing, etc.
      ∙   Caliper inches. The diameter of a tree measured at 4.5 feet above the
ground. (added 4/28/08)
      ∙    Call Center. An office for providing incoming and outgoing telephone
and computer services, customer service, technical service, or telemarketing
activities through electronic communications. (added 7/27/20)
      ∙   Cannabis cultivation. Growing cannabis plants from seed or immature
plant to mature plant, harvesting the cannabis flower from a mature plant, and
packaging and labeling immature cannabis plants and seedlings and cannabis
flower for sale. (added 11/25/24)
      ∙   Cannabis, Mezzobusiness. A cannabis business that conducts an
operation pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 342.29, as it may be amended.
The use may include, but is not limited to, cannabis cultivation, cannabis
manufacturing, cannabis sales retail, cannabis wholesaling. (added 11/25/24)
      ∙   Cannabis, Microbusiness. A cannabis business that conducts an
operation pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 342.28, as it may be amended.
The use may include, but is not limited to, cannabis cultivation, cannabis
manufacturing, cannabis sales retail, cannabis wholesaling. (added 11/25/24)
      ∙   Cannabis Testing Facility. A cannabis business that conducts an
operation pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 342.37, as it may be amended.
(added 11/25/24)
      ∙   Cemetery/Memorial garden. Land used or dedicated to the burial of the
dead, including crematoriums, mausoleums, funeral chapels and necessary sales
and maintenance facilities.  (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Clear vision area. The clear vision area shall be an area within a
triangle that is measured along the edge of the driving surface of the road at
the intersection of two roads (public or private) and extending thirty (30)
feet in each direction from the intersection with a line connecting the two end
points. (revised 3/18/09)
      ∙   Clear-cutting. The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a
contiguous patch, strip, row, or block. (revised 02/22/10)
      ∙   Clinic. A building for out-patient medical treatment of humans or
small animals.
      ∙   Clubs and lodges. Buildings and facilities owned and operated by a
corporation or association of persons for social, recreational, charitable,
educational or cultural purposes, but not operated primarily for profit or for
purposes which are customarily associated with a business.
      ∙   Clubs, sports and fitness. A place of assembly where membership may
be required and is directed toward the general public with the commercial
promotion of sports and physical fitness.
      ∙   Commission. The Planning Commission, as established by the Code of
Ordinances, City of Arden Hills,
Chapter 2.
      ∙   Commercial recreation, indoor. A commercial recreational use
conducted within an enclosed building, including arcade, arena, art gallery,
assembly hall, athletic and health clubs, auditorium, bowling alley, club or
lounge, community center, pool or billiard hall, or a variety of organized or
franchised sports, including but not limited to basketball, ice hockey,
wrestling, soccer, tennis and volleyball. This definition does not include
public uses on public property.  (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Commercial recreation, outdoor. An accessory commercial recreational
use conducted outdoor including but not limited to horseshoes, bocce ball, or
cornhole. (added 4/24/2023)
      ∙   Comprehensive plan. A compilation of policy statements, goals,
standard and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development,
both private and public, of the city and its environs and may include, but is
not limited to, the following items: Statements of policies, goals, standards,
a land use plan, a community facilities plan, a transportation plan and
recommendations for plan execution.
      ∙   Conditional use. A use which, because of unique characteristics,
cannot be classified as a permitted use in a district, and which, after due
consideration by the Planning Commission and Council, pursuant to the
applicable procedures contained in this Code and the Arden Hills City Code of
Ordinances, may nevertheless be permitted with restrictions on a site by
conditional use permit granted by the Council.
      ∙   Conditional use permit (C.U.P.). A permit required for certain land
uses classified as Conditional Accessory Uses or Conditional Principal Uses.
      ∙   Consumer small loan establishment. Any establishment that offers
consumer small loans, commonly referred to as "payday loans," as defined in
Minnesota State Statute 47.60 as amended from time to time. (added 12/3/08)
      ∙   Council. The City Council, as established by the Code of Ordinances.
      ∙   Crematorium. A facility containing properly installed, certified
apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation. (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Critical root zone. The minimum area around a tree that should remain
undisturbed. To calculate the critical root zone, measure the tree's caliper
inches. For each caliper inch of tree, 1.5 feet of root radius must be
protected. For example, if a tree's is 10 caliper inches, then its critical
root radius is 15 feet (10 x 1.5 = 15). The critical root zone is 30 feet.
(added 4/28/08)
      ∙   Day care facility. Any licensed facility, public or private, which
for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or more persons with care,
protection, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance
on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, in
a place other than the person's own home, including but not limited to day care
centers, day nurseries, daytime activity centers, day treatment programs, and
day services. (revised 7/14/10)
      ∙   Day care, family. Day care for no more than ten children at one time
of which no more than six are under school age. The licensed capacity must
include all children of any caregiver when the children are present in the
residence.  (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Day care, group family. Day care for no more than 14 children at any
one time. The total number of children includes all children of any caregiver
when the children are present in the residence. (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Density. The number of dwelling units permitted by this Code on one
(1) acre.
      ∙   Density net. The number of dwelling units permitted by the Code on
one (1) net acre of land.
      ∙   Density transfer. The relocation of housing units or square footage
of building area computed on part of a building site to another part of the
site resulting in an increase in density to the transfer area for the purpose
of preserving open space, forested areas, environmental or terrain features
deemed worthy of preservation by the Planning Commission.
      ∙   Density zoning. Density zoning shall be interpreted as the provision
of lot areas smaller than the minimum requirement of this Code under conditions
whereby the total number of dwelling units is not greater than the amount
permitted under normal conditions.
      ∙   Dog kennel, Commercial. A structure specifically designed and
commercially used for the harboring of three (3) or more dogs that are more
than three (3) months old.
      ∙   Dog kennel, Residential. A structure specifically designed and
residentially used for harboring of up to three (3) dogs that are more than
three (3) months old.
      ∙   Dog run. A structure specifically designed for domestic use for the
harboring and exercise of not more than two (2) dogs.
      ∙   Drive-up Window. A window or other opening at a business
establishment that allows customers to purchase and/or receive a service or
product without having to enter the building. (added 12/03/08)
      ∙   Dwelling. A building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively
for residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family and multiple
family uses, but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, boarding or
rooming houses, tents, seasonal cabins, or motor homes or travel trailers.
      ∙   Dwelling, live-work unit. A dwelling unit in combination with a shop,
office, studio, or other work space within the same unit, where the resident
occupant both lives and works. A live-work unit is not synonymous with a home
occupation because it is designed as a mixed-use facility, whereas the home
occupation is secondary and accessory to the residential use.  (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Dwelling, multiple family. A dwelling containing three (3) or more
attached dwelling units.
      ∙   Dwelling, single-family. A dwelling that consists of one (1) dwelling
unit.
      ∙   Dwelling, two-family. A dwelling that consists of two (2) dwelling
units.
      ∙   Dwelling unit. A residential building or portion thereof intended for
occupancy by one (1) family with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, tents, seasonal cabins,
boarding or rooming houses, motor homes or travel trailers.
      ∙   Dwelling unit, single-family attached. A dwelling unit which is
located on its own individual lot but joined along a single lot line to one (1)
or more other dwelling units with a party wall and having a separate point of
entry.
      ∙   Dwelling unit, single family detached. A dwelling which is not joined
to any other dwelling unit, and is located on a separate lot with the structure
surrounded by open space and having a separate point of entry.
      ∙   Easement. A right or privilege in favor of a person or a government
authority to use a parcel of land or portion thereof for specific purpose.
      ∙   Enclosed Parking. A structure used for the storage of a vehicle which
must be covered and completely enclosed by walls or doors on four sides. (added
10/4/12)
      ∙   Equal Degree of Encroachment. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so the flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
      ∙   Event Center. An establishment which is rented by individuals or
groups to host scheduled private events including but not limited to weddings,
cultural celebrations, corporate functions, and banquets. Such use may or may
not include 1) kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food; 2)
the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption only during
scheduled events and not open to the general public; and 3) outdoor gardens,
patios or outdoor gathering areas. (added 7/22/24)
      ∙   Exterior storage. The storage of goods, materials, equipment,
manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.
      ∙   Family. An individual or two (2) or more persons, each related to the
other by blood, marriage, adoption or foster care, or a group of not more than
four (4) persons, some or all of whom are not related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together and maintaining a common household. (These
regulations shall not be applied so as to prevent the City from making
reasonable accommodation as required by the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act
of 1988).
      ∙   Financial institution. An establishment that provides financial and
banking services to consumers or clients. Typical uses include banks, savings
and loan associations, credit unions, investment companies, and automated
teller machines (ATMs). Financial institution shall not include a consumer
small loan operation.  (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Flood. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in
the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.
      ∙   Flood frequency. The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
      ∙   Flood fringe. That portion of the flood plain outside of the
floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in
the Flood Insurance Study for the City.
      ∙   Flood plain. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake
or watercourse which have been or may be covered by the regional flood.
      ∙   Flood-proofing. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
      ∙   Floodway. A wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
      ·   Floor area. Means the sum of the horizontal area of all floors of a
building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the
centerline of walls separating two buildings, Excluding: decks, garages,
covered porches conforming with Section
1325.03 Subd 2.D; attics, crawl spaces and basements that do not meet the
minimum ceiling height per Minnesota State Building Code requirements.
      ∙   Floor area ratio (F.A.R.). The ratio obtained by dividing the sum of
a building's floor area by the amount of lot area.
      ∙   Frontage. The uninterrupted front boundary line of a lot, or the
length of such line, which abuts on a street.
      ∙   Garage, private. An accessory building or portion of the principle
building which is intended and used for the storage of the private passenger
vehicles of the family or families who reside upon the lot upon which the
garage is located.
      ∙   Garage, repair. A building or space for the repair or maintenance of
motor vehicles, including body work, painting and vehicle wash, and incidental
display and sales of automotive products but not including factory assembly of
such vehicles, auto wrecking, or junkyards.
      ∙   Garage, truck. A building that is used or intended to be used for the
storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors and commercial vehicles
exceeding one-ton rated capacity.
      ∙   Grading and Excavating. The act of excavation or filling or
combination thereof to alter the contour of land for development purposes.
(added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Hemp Concentrate. The extracts and resins of a hemp plant or hemp
plant parts, including when refined to increase the presence of targeted
cannabinoids or when intended to be consumed by combustion or vaporization of
the product and inhalation of smoke, aerosol, or vapor from the product. (added
8/28/2023)
      ∙   Hemp-Derived Consumer Product. A product intended for human or animal
consumption, does not contain cannabis flower or cannabis concentrate, and
containing or consisting of hemp plant parts; or containing hemp concentrate or
artificially derived cannabinoids in combination with other ingredients. (added
8/28/2023)
      ∙   Hemp Plant. All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis that has a
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of no more than 0.3 percent on a dry
weight basis. (added 8/28/2023)
      ∙   Higher education, campus. The facilities for technical colleges,
junior colleges, colleges and universities approved by the Minnesota Higher
Education Coordinating Board for the Minnesota Department of Education. These
facilities can include, but are not limited to, classrooms; laboratories;
seminaries; dining and residence halls; athletic, wellness, and spiritual
facilities; administrative offices; performance art centers; parking and
transit structures; and child care facilities. (added 9/25/2017)
      ∙   Home occupation. The accessory or conditional accessory use of a
residential structure for any gainful occupation or profession.
      ∙   Hospital. An institution licensed by the state department of health,
providing primary health services and medical or surgical care, to sick or
injured persons, primarily inpatients. May include related facilities such as
laboratories, outpatient facilities, or training facilities. (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Hotel/motel. Any building, or group of buildings, having five (5) or
more guest rooms intended or designed to be rented or hired out to be occupied,
or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by transient guests. (revised 7/14/
10)
      ∙   House of worship. A place of worship or religious assembly and its
accessory facilities used by the congregation such as the following: rectory,
meeting hall, offices for administration of the institution, licensed child or
adult daycare, playground, or cemetery. A house of worship does not include
buildings or uses used exclusively for residential, schools, recreational,
commercial, or other uses not normally associated with worship.  (revised 7/14/
10)
      ∙   Household. The person or persons occupying a single dwelling unit. A
household may consist of a single family, one (1) person living alone, two (2)
or more families living together or any group of related or un-related persons
who share living arrangements.
      ∙   Industry. Uses such as the manufacturing, compounding, processing,
packaging, treatment, assembling or warehousing of products and materials.
      ∙   Junkyard. An open area where waste, used or second-hand materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber,
tires and bottles. A junkyard includes a vehicle wrecking yard but does not
include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
      ∙   Landscape lot area. That portion of a lot required to remain as open
space, free of buildings, parking and drives. Landscape lot areas may consist
of:
         ∙   Naturally vegetated areas,
         ∙   Wetlands or ponding areas,
         ∙   Planting beds, ground cover and mulch areas (vegetative, rock,
bark chip, etc.),
         ∙   Decorative walkways and areas not to exceed fifteen percent (15%)
of the required landscape lot area, and
         ∙   Outdoor recreation areas.
      ∙   Landscaping. Plantings such as trees, grass, shrubs.
      ∙   Land Reclamation. The reclaiming of land by depositing and/or
excavating material so as to alter at the minimum four hundred (400) cubic
yards of the existing grade, either by hauling and/or regarding the area, shall
constitute land reclamation. (added 11/27/23)
      ∙   Light Manufacturing, Cannabis. A hemp business that conducts an
operation pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 342.31, as it may be amended.
(added 11/25/24)
      ∙   Light Manufacturing, Lower-Potency Hemp Edible. A hemp business that
conducts an operation pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 342.45, as it may
be amended. (added 11/25/24)
      ∙   Loading area. Any area where trucks are maneuvered and parked, for
the purposes of loading or unloading products, materials or equipment.
      ∙   Lot. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds measurement,
reference to a registered land survey, plat, record of survey map, or other
means, and separated from other parcels or portions by said description, and
which is occupied by, or is suitable under this Code and other applicable
ordinances for occupancy by one (1) principal building, or used together with
any accessory buildings or uses and such open spaces as are required by this
Code.
      ∙   Lot area. The total site area within the lot lines.
      ∙   Lot area, net buildable. The space remaining on a lot after the
minimum landscape area, open space and setback requirements of this Code have
been met.
      ∙   Lot area per family. The lot area per family is the lot area required
by this Code to be provided for each family in a dwelling.
      ∙   Lot, buildable portion of. (Building Envelope) The area of a lot on
which a principal structure may be placed. The portion of a lot remaining after
the minimum building setbacks have been met. (Lot area, net buildable, is more
limiting as other deductions are included).
      ∙   Lot, corner. A lot situated at and abutting on the intersection of
two (2) or more streets having an angle of intersection of not more than one
hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting upon a curve street shall be
deemed a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at its point of beginning
within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the
street line intersect at the interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-
five (135) degrees. A corner lot shall maintain front yard requirements for
each street frontage.
      ∙   Lot coverage. The total allowable amount of lot area, expressed as a
percentage, which may be covered by a principal use and its accessory
structures.
      ∙   Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the mean front road
and the mean rear lot line. The greater frontage of a corner lot is its depth,
and its lesser frontage is its width.
      ∙   Lot line. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or
separate ownership or separately described; except that where any portion of
the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed
to be the street or alley line.
      ∙   Lot line, front. The boundary of a lot abutting a street. On a corner
lot, the shortest street lot line shall be the front lot line.
      ∙   Lot line, rear. The lot line most nearly parallel to and most remote
from the front lot line.
      ∙   Lot line, side. Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines. On a
corner lot, the longest street lot line shall be a side lot line.
      ∙   Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
      ∙   Lot, reversed corner. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the
side of another lot whether across an alley or not.
      ∙   Lot of record. A lot existing as of April 10th, 1993, date of this
Code or approved by the city as a lot subsequent to such date, and includes
non-conforming lots.
      ∙   Lot, shoreline. A lot having one (1) or more lot lines fronting on
public waters.
      ∙   Lot, through. A lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting
two (2) substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a
through lot, the determination of whether the street frontage is to be
considered a front yard or rear yard shall be as subject to the provisions of
this Code.
      ∙   Lot width. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines at
the minimum front setback line.
      ∙   Lower-Potency Hemp Edible. Any product that (1) is intended to be
eaten or consumed as a beverage by humans; (2) contains hemp concentrate or an
artificially derived cannabinoid, in combination with food ingredients; (3) is
not a drug; (4) consists of servings that contain no more than five milligrams
of delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, 25 milligrams of cannabidiol, 25 milligrams of
cannabigerol, or any combination of those cannabinoids that does not exceed the
identified amounts; (5) does not contain more than a combined total of 0.5
milligrams of all other cannabinoids per serving; (6) does not contain an
artificially derived cannabinoid other than delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol; (7)
does not contain a cannabinoid derived from cannabis plants or cannabis flower;
and (8) is a type of product approved for sale by the Office of Cannabis
Management or is substantially similar to a product approved by that Office,
including but not limited to products that resemble nonalcoholic beverages,
candy, and baked goods. Lower-Potency Hemp Edibles includes “edible cannabinoid
products” as defined by Minn. Stat. § 151.72. Lower-potency hemp edibles do not
include products containing only nonintoxicating cannabinoids. (added 8/28/
2023)
      ∙   Lower-Potency Hemp Edible Sales. The processing or sale of lower-
potency hemp edibles or hemp-derived consumer products. (added 8/28/2023)
      ∙   Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building's lowest floor.  (added 05/05/10)
      ∙   Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein; except that the term includes any structure which
meets all the requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certification and complies with the standards established
under this Code and Minnesota State Statutes as amended from time to time. The
term "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle."
(revised 05/05/10)
      ∙   Manufacturing and processing. All uses which include the compounding,
processing, packaging, treatment, or assembly of products and materials.
Generally, these are industries dependent upon raw materials refined elsewhere.
These uses include, but are not limited to: fabrication of wood, metal, and
plastic products; assembly of electronic components, equipment, and appliances;
processing of chemicals, plastics, food products, and nonalcoholic beverages;
manufacturing of clothing and textile products; distribution centers, lumber
yards, printing and binding shops, machine shops, sheet metal shops, sign
shops, contractor's shops and storage yards.
         ∙   Class I: Above uses without exterior storage.
         ∙   Class II: Above uses with permitted exterior storage.
      ∙   Metes and bounds. A method of property description utilizing
directions and distances commencing from and terminating at an easily
identifiable point.
      ∙   Microbrewery. A facility that manufactures and distributes
intoxicating malt liquor or wine in total quantity not to exceed 250,000
barrels a year. A microbrewery may have space dedicated as a taproom to
distribute on-sale and off-sale alcohol in compliance with MN state statute
340A.301, subd. 6b. (added 10/29/12)
      ∙   Microdistillery. A facility that manufactures and distributes
premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons
in a calendar year. (added 10/29/12)
      ∙   Mineral extraction. The use of land for surface or subsurface removal
of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, and other nonmetallic minerals not
regulated under Minn. Stat. Chapts. 93.44 - 93.51; or Successor Statutes.
Mineral extraction does not include grading and excavating as defined in this
Chapter.  (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Mobile home. A manufactured home designed, constructed, and equipped
for use as a single-family dwelling, which has a width of less than twenty (20)
feet over more than twenty-five (25) percent of its length; or which is not
placed on a permanent foundation complying with the requirements of the state
building code or which is not continuous and solid for the entire perimeter of
the structure.
      ∙   Mobile home park. Any premises on which are parked two (2) or more
occupied mobile homes, excluding premises on which mobile homes are sold for
removal to another site.
      ∙   Mortuary, funeral home. An establishment engaged in undertaking
services such as preparing the dead for burial and arranging and managing
funerals, but not including a crematorium. (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Motorized vehicle leasing and rentals. A business that leases or
rents motorized vehicles to the general public. Includes minor services and
washing as an accessory use. Not more than eight (8) rental or lease vehicles
on site at one time.
      ∙   Motorized vehicle service. A business that provides repair or
maintenance services for motorized vehicles including engine repair,
replacement or parts and engine service, but does not include body work,
painting, factory assembly of vehicles or vehicle wrecking yards.
      ∙   Multiple occupancy building. A building containing two or more
independent businesses with or without separate exterior entrances and for
which signage, parking and site requirements are unified in a consistent visual
and functional manner.
      ∙   Native vegetation. "Native Vegetation" - Plant species indigenous to
Minnesota, or that expand their range into Minnesota without being
intentionally or unintentionally introduced by human activity, and are
classified as native in the Minnesota Plant Database (Minnesota DNR, 2002 or as
amended). Native Vegetation does not include Weeds. (revised 02/22/10)
      ∙   Nonconforming building. A building lawfully existing as of the
effective date of the adoption of this Code, or amendment hereto, which under
the provisions of this Code could not be built because of restrictions on
height, setbacks, yards, lot coverage, floor area ratio, or other
characteristics of the building or its location on the lot where it exists.
      ∙   Nonconforming use. A building, structure or use of a building,
structure or parcel of land, or a portion thereof, lawfully existing as of the
effective date of the adoption of this Code or amendment hereto, as a matter of
right or by permit, which is not permitted in the zoning district in which it
is located.
      ∙   Nonintoxicating Cannabinoid. A cannabinoid that when introduced into
the human body does not impair the central nervous system and does not impair
the human audio, visual, or mental processes. Nonintoxicating cannabinoid
includes but is not limited to cannabidiol (CBD) and cannabigerol (CBG) but
does not include any artificially derived cannabinoid and must contain less
than 0.3% tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). (added 8/28/2023)
      ∙   Nursery. Any land used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers, and other
live plants for sale and commerce.
      ∙   Nursing Home and Assisted Living Facility. A facility that provides
daily assistance and long-term residence for disabled or elderly individuals.
This includes a combination of housing, supportive services, personalized
assistance and health care designed to respond to the individual needs of those
who need help with activities of daily living, such as dressing, grooming,
bathing, etc. (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Obstruction. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel, modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which
may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
      ∙   Office(s). A room, suite of rooms, or a building containing rooms or
suites of rooms in which persons conduct commercial activities, provide
professional services, or carry on occupations and where goods are not stored,
produced, sold at retail or repaired, including but not limited to the
following: executive and administrative offices, business offices such as
insurance, real estate, sales and similar offices, professional offices such as
offices of engineers, surveyors, architects, accountants, attorneys and
bookkeepers and similar offices, but excluding medical clinics. (revised 7/14/
10)
      ∙   Office showroom/warehouse. An office facility in which more than 50
percent of the total floor area is utilized for the display and sale of goods
or merchandise on the premises, and/or for the storage and distribution of
goods or merchandise from the premises. (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Off-street parking areas. Structures or areas of ground used for the
storage or parking of motor vehicles.
      ∙   Open sales lot. Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying
and selling any goods, materials, or merchandise, and for the storing of same
under the open sky prior to sale.
      ∙   Open space. (See landscape lot area.)
      ∙   Ordinary high water level. The boundary of public waters and
wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which
has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape and as determined by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
The ordinary high water mark is commonly that point where the natural
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
(revised 02/22/10)
      ∙   Outdoor display and sales. The display of goods for sale or rent
outside an enclosed building. (added 3/28/16)
      ∙   Park facilities. The use of any lots or parcel of land and any
structure or building thereon for public active and passive recreation purposes
by the Arden Hills Parks and Recreation Department or the Ramsey County Parks
and Recreation Department. (added 11/25/13)
      ∙   Parking space. A land area of such shape and dimensions and so
prepared as to be usable for the parking of a motor vehicle, and so located as
to be readily accessible to a public street or alley. Truck loading and
unloading space shall not be included in such area.
      ∙   Pathway, pedestrian way. A public or private way, running across or
located within a platted lot or block or an unplatted parcel of land, used
primarily for pedestrian traffic.
      ∙   Pawn shop. The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business. (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Pawnbroker. (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b), "pawnbroker"
means a person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on
the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or in the business of purchasing
tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition that it may be
redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period
of time.
      ∙   (b) The following are exempt from the definition of "pawnbroker": any
bank regulated by the state of Minnesota, the comptroller of the currency of
the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the board of
governors of the Federal Reserve System, or any other federal or state
authority and their affiliates; any bank or savings association whose deposits
or accounts are eligible for insurance by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or any successor to it and all affiliates of those banks and
savings associations; any state or federally chartered credit union; and any
industrial loan and thrift company or regulated lender subject to licensing and
regulation by the Department of Commerce. (revised 7/14/10)
      ∙   Person. Any individuals, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic; includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof.
      ∙   Personal services. Services customarily rendered for compensation.
Such services shall only involve minor storage and related sales of products
and supplies related to the service offered and for customers ordinarily
utilizing the service offered. Typical personal services include but are not
limited to: apparel tailoring and cleaning; hair styling, trimming and cutting;
beauty services; photographic services; and other services of a similar nature.
      ∙   Planned unit development (P.U.D.). The development of a tract of land
in a unified manner, pursuant to a development plan specifically approved by
the city.
      ∙   Planning commission. The planning agency of Arden Hills as prescribed
in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 462.354. It is advisory to the City Council on
all matters related to the Comprehensive Plan and all official controls that
implement the Comprehensive Plan, and all other matters referred to it by the
City Council.
      ∙   Protected waters. Any waters of the State as defined by State law.
However, no lake, pond or flowage of less than ten (10) acres in size and no
river or stream having a total drainage area less than two (2) square miles
shall be regulated for the purposes of these regulations.
      ∙   Public use. The use of any lot, parcel of land and any structure or
building thereon exclusively for public purposes by any department or branch of
government, federal, state, county or city, excluding independent school
districts, without reference to the ownership of said lot, parcel of land,
building or structure.
      ∙   Public waters. Means a body of water capable of substantial
beneficial public use. This shall be construed to mean, for the purposes of
these regulations, any body of water, which has the potential to support any
type of recreational pursuit or water supply purpose. A body of water created
by a private user where there was no previous shoreland, as defined herein, for
a designated private use authorized by the commissioner of natural resources,
shall be exempt.
      ∙   Railroad right-of-way. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operation, but not including depots, loading platforms,
station, train sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops or
water towers.
      ∙   Reach. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
      ∙   Recreation, commercial. Recreational facilities which are operated
for profit or render a service which is customarily considered as a business.
      ∙   Recreation, residential. Play apparatus such as swing sets and
slides, sandboxes, poles for nets, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands,
and similar equipment or structures, when used on residential property, but not
including electronic towers, tree houses, swimming pools, playhouses exceeding
twenty-five (25) square feet of floor area, or sheds utilized for storage of
equipment.
      ∙   Recreational vehicles (RVs). Vehicles for recreational or utilitarian
uses that can be driven, towed, or hauled. Including, but not limited to, motor
homes and travel trailers, snowmobiles, pull campers, all terrain vehicles
(ATVs), tent trailers, or other similar vehicles.  (revised 02/07/08)
      ∙   Recreational vehicles (for the purposes of
Section 1335 only). A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to
be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of
Section 1335, the term recreational vehicle shall be synonymous with the term
travel trailer/travel vehicle. (added 05/05/10)
      ∙   Recreational Vehicles, Utility Trailers, Riding Lawn Mowers, and
Watercraft Height. The distance as measured from the ground to the highest
point of the recreational vehicle, utility trailer, or watercraft, including
any covering, as stored. This does not including antennas and utility/
mechanical systems provided they are accessory and take up no more than ten
(10) percent of the roof surface area. RVs and watercraft on a trailer shall be
measured as one. (revised 02/07/08)
      ∙   Recreational Vehicles, Utility Trailers, Riding Lawn Mowers, and
Watercraft Length. The distance as measured from end to end of the recreational
vehicle, utility trailer, or watercraft, including any hitch, motor, and
covering, as stored. RVs and watercraft on a trailer shall be measured as one.
(revised 02/07/08)
      ∙   Regional flood. A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-
year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base
flood", 1 percent annual chance flood, or 100-year elevation.
      ∙   Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the
elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
(added 05/05/10)
      ∙   Research animals. Animals kept in a laboratory setting for the
purpose of testing and research related health care products.
      ∙   Research and development facility. Establishments which conduct
research, development, or controlled production of high technology electronic,
industrial, or scientific products or commodities for sale; or establishments
conducting educational or medical research or testing. May include limited
accommodations for researchers or research subjects. Research with animals is
considered a separate category. (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Residence hall, dormitory. A building designed for or used as group
living quarters for students of a high school, college, university or seminary,
organized and owned, or leased in its entirety, by a high school, college,
university or seminary. (added 7/14/10)
      ∙   Residential facility. Any licensed facility, public or private, which
for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or more persons with a twenty-
four (24) hours per day substitute for care, food, lodging, training,
education, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation and treatment they need,
but which for any reason cannot be furnished in the person's own home,
including but not limited to, state institutions under the control of the
commissioner of public welfare, foster homes, residential treatment centers,
maternity shelters, group homes, residential programs, or schools for
handicapped children.
      ∙   Restaurant. A business establishment whose principal business is the
preparation, service and sale of food and beverages to be consumed by customers
while seated at tables or counters located within the building on the premises.
      ∙   Restaurant, fast food. Any restaurant which meets a number of the
following requirements:
         ∙   Customarily provides quick service to its customers;
         ∙   Offers to its customers a limited, standardized menu of
inexpensive food and/or beverages;
         ∙   Serves its customers from a counter located within the building on
the premises and does not customarily offer service at the table by waiter or
waitress;
         ∙   Allows customers to consume their orders of food and/or beverages
at tables or counters within the building, in their automobiles parked on the
premises, or away from the premises as the customers choose;
         ∙   Packages and services a substantial proportion of its food and/or
beverages in disposable wrappers, containers, cartons, boxes and bags;
         ∙   Provides a number of trash, litter, or garbage cans in the parking
areas and within the building on the premises for the deposit of the disposable
packaging in which the food and/or beverages are provided;
         ∙   Prepares and cooks a substantial proportion of its food in volume,
in advance of orders by customers, and usually in anticipation of predicted
volumes of customers at certain times of the day;
         ∙   Specifies the items of food and/or beverage offered to customers
on signs, placards, posters, valances, or boards posted in conspicuous places
throughout the building rather than on printed menus given to the customers;
         ∙   Generates a high volume and rapid flow of in-and-out traffic
because of its quick service mode of operation.
      ∙   Retail, Cannabis Sales. The sale of cannabis plants and seedlings,
adult-use cannabis flower, and adult use cannabis products directly to
consumers. (added 11/24/24)
      ∙   Retail sales and service. An establishment engaged principally in the
sale or rental of primarily new goods and the provision of services directly to
the consumer, excluding those uses defined more specifically in this Code.
Motor vehicle sales, motor vehicle leasing and rentals, exterior equipment
rental and sales lots, repair garages, pawn shops, thrift stores, and open
sales lots are not included in this definition of retail sales and service.
(revised 2/29/16)
      ∙   Roadway. The entirety of a private street and that portion of a
public street extending from the back of the curb (i.e., the curbline) on one
side to the back of the curb (i.e., the curbline) on the other side, used
primarily for vehicular traffic.
      ∙   Schools, bus terminal. School bus terminal shall be a building or
space engaged primarily in the transportation and activities associated with
the transportation of students.
      ∙   Schools, general education. Nursery, primary, elementary and
secondary schools.
      ∙   Schools, specialized education. Trade, vocational, business, barber,
beauty, art, music, dancing, driving and other professional schools, with or
without on-site housing. (revised 01/20/11)
      ∙   Service station. A place where gasoline, kerosene, diesel or other
motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles are
offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor
vehicles. Includes greasing and oiling, one-bay motor vehicle wash and the sale
of automobile accessories on the premises. Also includes minor repairs,
incidental body and fender work, minor painting and upholstering, replacement
of parts and motor services to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding
one and one-half (1.5) tons capacity. It shall not include major general
repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers;
collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair;
overall painting or paint job.
      ∙   Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the
ordinary high water level or between a structure and a road, well, highway, or
property lines.
      ∙   Setback, minimum building. The minimum horizontal distance allowed by
this Code, between a structure and a lot line.
      ∙   Shore impact zone. The land located between the ordinary high water
level and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of the structure
setback. (revised 02/22/10)
      ∙   Shoreland. The land located within the following distances from
protected waters:
         ∙   One thousand (1,000) feet from the ordinary high water mark of a
lake, pond, or flowage; and
         ∙   Three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream, or the landward
extent of a flood plain on such rivers or streams, whichever is greater.
         ∙   The practical limits of shorelands may be less than the statutory
limits where the limits are designated by natural drainage divides at lesser
distances, as shown on the official zoning map of the City.
      ∙   Sidewalk. A hard surfaced public or private way, used primarily for
pedestrian traffic.
      ∙   Sign. A name, identification, description, display, logo,
illustration or device which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building or other surface or piece of land, and which directs
attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business.
      ∙   Significant tree. A tree that is important to the site and the
neighborhood character, that is structurally sound and healthy, and that meets
at least one of the following standards:  (revised 04/28/08)
         ∙   A deciduous hardwood tree that is at least ten (10) caliper
inches, including but not limited to, ironwood, catalpa, oak, hard maple,
walnut, hickory, birch, black cherry, hackberry, locust and basswood.
         ∙   A deciduous softwood tree that is at least twelve (12) caliper
inches, including but not limited to, cottonwood, poplars/aspen, box elder,
willow, silver maple and elm.
         ∙   A coniferous evergreen tree having foliage on the outermost
portion of the branches year-round and which is at least fifteen (15) feet or
more in height.
         ∙   A group of deciduous trees that are at least eight (8) caliper
inches or coniferous trees that are at least fifteen (15) feet in height, that
provide a buffer or screening along an adjacent public street or between
differing land uses.
      ∙   Soil processing. The processing of sand, gravel or other materials
mined from the land.
      ∙   Solar Energy System. A system or set of devices whose primary purpose
is to collect, convert, store and distribute solar energy, including for
heating and cooling of buildings, electricity generation, water heating and
other energy-using processes. (added 4/10/2023)
      ∙   Staging Area. Any exterior area that is used to load, unload, stack,
pile, store or assemble materials, equipment or vehicles to be used either on
site or off site.
      ∙   Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if no such floor above,
the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
      ∙   Story, half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above
the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the
floor area is finished for use. A half-story containing independent apartment
or living quarters shall be counted as a full story.
      ∙   Streets. A public or private way, consisting in the case of a private
way of a roadway and in the case of a public way of a roadway and a boulevard
(the latter of which may contain a sidewalk), used primarily for vehicular
traffic, whether designated as a street, avenue, parkway, road, lane,
throughway, expressway, highway, place or however otherwise designated. The
term "streets" includes the following classifications:
         ∙   Collector street. A street which carries traffic from local
streets to streets and highways of higher classifications. It provides for both
land access service and local traffic movements within residential
neighborhoods, commercial areas and industrial areas.
         ∙   Cul-de-sac. A street with a circular turn-a-round and only one
outlet.
         ∙   Local street. A street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
         ∙   Minor arterial. A street system that interconnects with and
augment the urban major arterial system and provide service to trips of
moderate length at somewhat lower level of travel mobility than major
arterials. This system distributes travel to geographical areas smaller than
those identified with the higher system.
         ∙   Major arterial. Usually a divided highway with four (4) or more
lanes and serves the major centers of activity of a metropolitan area, the
highest traffic volume corridors, and the longest trip desire. The major
arterial carries a high proportion of the total urban area travel on a minimum
mileage. Almost all fully and partially controlled access facilities are a part
of this class.
         ∙   Expressway. A type of major arterial with a controlled access
roadway and expressway ramps to provide ingress or egress to other levels of
streets. The use of expressway ramps allows the uniform flow of traffic on a
major arterial highway without undue delays.
      ∙   Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial
changes in the roof and exterior walls.
      ∙   Structure. Anything constructed, the use of which requires a
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, signs, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria otherwise specified in the zoning
code, and other similar items.
      ∙   Structure, accessory. A detached, subordinate structure, the use of
which is incidental and related to that of the principal use of or principal
structure on the lot on which it is located.
      ∙   Structure, multiple-occupancy. (See Multiple occupancy building).
      ∙   Structure, principal. The predominant structure upon a lot in which
the principal use of the lot is conducted.
      ∙   Structure, temporary or portable. A structure which is not intended
for permanent occupancy but which may be suitable in certain situations for
specific periods of occupancy pending either construction of permanent
facilities or a change in conditions that will eliminate the need for the
temporary structure. Portable classrooms, portable offices, and air-supported
structures are examples of temporary or portable structures.
      ∙   Studios. A building or space within a building where professional
artists, musicians, photographers, dancers, designers, etc. practice their
profession or teach; display and sales of products used or produced in the
profession is considered an accessory use.
      ∙   Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. (added 05/05/10)
      ∙   Substantial improvement. (added 05/05/10) Within any consecutive 365-
day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance
and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This
term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
         ∙   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
         ∙   Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
"historic structure." For the purpose of this Ordinance, "historic structure"
shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
      ∙    Thrift Store. (revised 5/27/2025)  A business for which the stock of
goods is primarily used and may include the following operational
characteristics:
         ∙   Processing, conditioning, cleaning, or repair of used or returned
items for resale.
         ∙   Storage of used items on site for processing, resale, or disposal.
         ∙   Receipt of goods through purchase, consignment, or donation.
         ∙   Class I: Above uses in a business located within a multi-tenant
building which occupies less than 7,000 square feet or less than 20 percent of
the building square footage in a multi-tenant building, whichever is lower.
         ∙   Class II: Above uses in a business located within a standalone
building or located within a multi-tenant building which occupies greater than
7,000 square feet or greater than 20 percent of a multi-tenant building.
      ∙   Tower. Any pole, spire or structure, or any combination thereof, to
which an antenna is attached, or which is designed for an antenna to be
attached, and all supporting lines, cables, wires and braces; including but not
limited to a free-standing radio (including ham radio and private radio
transmitting) or television receiving antenna, a windmill, and a wind-power
generator.
      ∙   Townhouse. A single-family dwelling, which maintains private ingress
and egress, contains no independent dwellings above or below it, and is
attached to other similar dwellings by a common wall.
      ∙   Use. The purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is
designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
      ∙   Use, accessory. A use which is incidental to the principal use of the
lot on which it is maintained or conducted.
      ∙   Use, principal. The primary or predominant use for which the lot and
structure, if any located thereon, is conducted or maintained.
      ∙   Use, principal multiple-operation. A business or industrial operation
which consists of two or more distinguishable uses, all of which are dependent
upon each other, but none of which is predominately or clearly the principal
use and all of which are generally compatible with the permitted allowable uses
in the district.
      ∙   Use, conditional accessory. A use which is both an accessory use and
a conditional use and which, after due consideration by the Commission and
Council, pursuant to the applicable procedures contained herein, may be allowed
as an accessory use by Conditional Use Permit granted by the Council.
      ∙   Use, conditional principal. A principle use which, because of unique
characteristics, cannot be classified as a permitted principle use in any
particular district, and which, after due consideration by the commission and
council, pursuant to the applicable procedures contained herein, may
nevertheless be allowed on a site in a particular zoning district by
Conditional Use Permit be granted by the council. Includes temporary uses which
require conditional approval before being allowed.
      ∙   Utility distribution lines. The distribution facilities of electric
power, gas, water and communication companies which directly serve abutting
properties.
      ∙   Utility substation. A structure used for the relay or distribution of
electric, water, sewer, telephone, etc., services.
      ∙   Utility transmission lines. The transmission facilities of electric
power and communication companies which do not directly serve abutting
properties.
      ∙   Utility trailer. Equipment used for recreational or utilitarian
purposes that can be towed; such as special purpose trailers (i.e. boat
trailers, ATV trailers) or other hauling trailers.  (revised 02/07/08)
      ∙   Utility vehicle. A vehicle, with or without a motor, and/or adapted
for temporary living, sleeping, business or storage purposes; having a frame,
but no foundation other than wheels, blocks, studs, jacks, horses or skirting,
which does not reach or meet building code requirements and has been or may be
equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting purposes. This term
shall include travel trailers, camping trailers, tent trailers, recreation
vehicles, farm tractors, riding yard and garden tractors and trailers. A
permanent foundation shall not change the character of the vehicle.
      ∙   Variance. A modification or variation of a specific permitted
development standard required as a provision of this Code, to allow an
alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official
control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of
alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance, except
that modification in the allowable uses within a district shall not be allowed
as a variance. (revised 05/05/10)
      ∙   Vehicle wash. A building, or portion thereof, which principal use is
the washing of vehicles.
      ∙   Vehicle wrecking yard. Any open space where three (3) or more used
motorized vehicles are stored which do not possess current state auto licenses.
      ∙   Warehousing. The storage and distribution of materials or equipment
within an enclosed building, but not including personal storage facility.
(revised 7/14/10)
      ∙   Watercraft. Motorized water-oriented vehicles including, but not
limited to, power boats, cruisers, jet skies, fishing/hunting boats, pontoon
boats, and any non-motorized craft with greater than a two person capacity.
This definition excludes non-motorized one and two person crafts such as
canoes, kayaks, and paddle boats. (revised 02/07/08)
      ∙   Waterfront uses. Boat docks and storage, water recreation equipment
and other uses normally associated with to lakeshore property.
      ∙   Wetlands. Transitional low-lying areas between terrestrial and
aquatic systems, either created or natural, covered with shallow and sometimes
temporary or intermittent waters as defined in the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service Circulator No. 39. This includes, but is not limited to
swamps, marshes, bogs, sloughs, wet meadows, and shallow lakes and ponds with
emergent vegetation. (revised 02/22/10)
      ∙   Wetland alteration. Alteration of a wetland includes changes to the
wetland and/or wetland buffer strip in regards to size, depth or contour;
dredging; tilling; damming; alteration of the watercourse; ditching; tiling;
grading; draining; discharge of water; appropriation of water; changes in
vegetation; or otherwise altering or destroying a wetland or wetland buffer or
their functions. Alterations would not include Native Vegetation plantings or
selective clearing or pruning of prohibited or restricted noxious weeds, unless
within a Drainage and Utility Easement in which case submission of and written
approval by the City is required.  (added 02/22/10)
      ∙   Wetland buffer strip. An area of vegetated ground cover around the
perimeter of a wetland that, either in its natural condition or through
intervention, has the characteristics of buffering the wetland from surrounding
landscaping.  (added 02/22/10)
      ∙   Wetland delineation. An assessment tool utilized to determine the
boundary of a wetland using the US Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation
Manual (January 1987) as well as any additional boundary determination
requirements established in Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420. A "Wetland
Delineation Report" is a document that summarizes the observations, results and
conclusions performed during the assessment when wetlands are present.  (added
02/22/10)
      ∙   Yard, front. A yard extending along the full length of the front lot
line between the side lot lines.
      ∙   Yard, minimum required. The minimum open space extending between a
minimum building setback line and the adjoining lot line in which a principle
building may not be placed and in which accessory buildings may only be placed
as regulated in this Code.
      ∙   Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main
building.
      ∙   Yard, side. A yard between the building and the adjacent sideline of
the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
      ∙   Yard area, required rear. The minimum required rear yard depth
multiplied by the average width of the total rear yard.
      ∙   Zoning map. The map or maps incorporated into this Code as a part
hereof, delineating the zoning districts.
Section 1310 - Minimum Compliance Requirements
1310.01   Compliance with this Zoning Code.
   No building, structure or parcel of land may hereafter be used or occupied
and no building permit shall be issued for any structure or use which does not
conform to the provisions of this Code, except as hereafter provided under
Section 1350.
1310.02   Requirements Not To Be Reduced.
   No existing lot, yard, or parking area shall be so reduced in area or
dimension as to make any such area or dimension less than the minimum required
by this Code, and if already less than the minimum required, it shall not be
further reduced, except as provided by the variance provision in
Section 1355 Subd 4.
   No yard or open space provided about any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this Code shall be considered as providing a
yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or open space on
adjoining premises shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on a
lot whereon a building is to be erected.
1310.03   Use of Pre-Existing Lots.
   Subd. 1   If two or more pre-existing, contiguous lots, including Lots of
Record, in total could not be divided into two or more lots meeting the
requirements of
Section 1320 and are held by the same owner on November 13, 2006, they shall be
considered one lot for building and zoning purposes. A covenant, duly filed and
recorded, shall be required before a building permit is issued thereon.
   Subd. 2   Lots joined together for zoning or building purposes shall not be
divided in the future, but shall be tied together by restriction filed with the
County.
Section 1315 - Zoning Map and Boundaries of Zoning Districts
1315.01   Zoning Map.
   The boundaries of the zoning districts defined in
Section 1320 are hereby established as of November 13, 2006, and shown on the
map entitled "Official_Zoning_Map_of_Arden_Hills,_Minnesota," which map is
properly approved and filed in the office of the City Administrator. (revised
8/27/18 and reprinted 4/24/24; updated May 2025; updated October 2025)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2073.png]
 
1315.02   Boundaries of Zoning Districts.
   District boundary lines as indicated on said map are intended to follow
street right-of-way lines, street centerlines or lot lines unless a boundary
line is otherwise indicated on said map.
   In the case where a boundary line does not appear to follow a property line,
street or right-of-way line, or where such line is not dimensioned on said map,
the boundary line shall be determined by the scale appearing on the map.
   Whenever any public street is vacated by official action, the zoning
districts abutting the centerline of said vacated street should not be affected
by such action.
1315.03   Annexed Territory.
   A building moratorium shall apply, not to exceed the time permitted by State
Statutes, to any territory annexed to the City, until such time as a detailed
study by the Planning Commission has taken place as to the proper zoning for
the property newly acquired. Following such study the City shall proceed to
zone the property in accord with the procedures prescribed by this Code for
rezoning.
1315.04   Zoning and the Comprehensive Development Plan.
   Any application to consider a change in zoning by the City shall
concurrently be accompanied by an application to amend the Comprehensive
Development Plan in accordance with the proposed rezoning, if the rezoning is
not consistent with the Plan.
Section 1320 - District Provisions
1320.01   Establishment of Districts.
   The zoning districts designated herein are hereby established so as to
assist the City in carrying out the intent and purpose of its Comprehensive
Development Plan for the City and to control development in a manner consistent
with the provisions of adequate public services and utilities.
1320.02   Designation of Zoning Districts.
(revised 09/25/17)
   For the purposes of this Code the City of Arden Hills is hereby divided into
the following zoning districts:
      R-1   Single Family Residential District
      R-2   Single and Two-Family Residential District
      R-3   Townhouse and Low Density Multiple Dwelling District
      R-4   Multiple Dwelling District
      B-1   Limited Business District
      B-2   General Business District
      B-3   Service Business District
      B-4   Retail Center District
      NB   NB District
      CC   Civic Center District
      GB   Gateway Business District
      I-1   Limited Industrial District
      I-2   General Industrial District
      I-Flex   I-Flex District
      PUD   Planned Unit Development Overlay District
      CD   Conservation District
      POS   Parks and Open Space District
      INST   Institutional District
1320.03   Allowable Uses.
(revised 09/25/17)
   Uses allowed in any district.
   Subd. 1   Permitted Principal Uses (P) - Those uses that are allowed as a
matter of right and multiple operation uses, as defined herein, if at least one
of the operations is a permitted use and none of the operations is classified
as a conditional use. Permitted multiple family residential, business or
industrial uses are required to submit a site plan in accordance with the
requirements in
Section 1355.
   Subd. 2   Conditional Uses (C) - Those uses that are allowed only after
issuance of a Conditional Use Permit as required in
Section 1355.
   Conditional Uses may include those uses that are:
      A.   Listed as conditional uses on the Land Use Chart (
1320.05)
      B.   Not listed on the Land Use Chart as either permitted or conditional
uses, but which have been reviewed by the Planning Commission and designated by
the City Council as conditional uses which are similar to those listed;
      C.   Uses that are both accessory uses and conditional uses (CA);
      D.   Multiple Operation Uses as defined herein, if at least one of the
operations is classified as a conditional use.
   Subd. 3   Accessory Uses (A) Those uses that are incidental to the principal
use of the premises on which it is conducted.
   Subd. 4   Conditional Accessory Uses (CA) Those uses that are both accessory
uses and conditional uses, including those listed on the Land Use Chart.
   Subd. 5   Planned Unit Development - PUD (D) Those uses allowed only after
issuance of a PUD Permit. Uses allowed in a PUD may include permitted uses,
uses by conditional use permit, accessory uses and conditional accessory uses.
The underlying zoning district(s) establishes the basic allowable uses and the
general development standards.
   Subd. 6   For any new construction or alteration, building permits must be
secured pursuant to the provision of the building code and this Code.
   Subd. 7   Where questions arise as to whether a proposed use falls within a
permitted use category and/or a conditional use category and/or an accessory
use category, or whether a specific use that is not included on the Land Use
Chart should be allowed in a particular district, the Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation to the City Council which shall make the final
determination that the use is similar to other allowable uses in the district
or that a zoning code amendment procedure should be initiated.
1320.04   Purpose of Districts.
(revised 9/25/17; revised 04/10/2023)
   Subd. 1   R-1 Single Family Residential District (revised 6/23/11)
      A.   To establish areas for the development of single family detached
housing at a maximum density of approximately three (3) units per net acre.
      B.   To reserve development areas for single-family housing.
      C.   To restrict encroachment of incompatible uses.
      D.   To maintain density limitations.
      E.   To take advantage of municipal utilities.
      F.   To preserve open space.
      G.   To allow educational uses on campus-like settings which are
compatible with adjacent residential uses.
   Subd. 2   R-2 Single Family and Two Family Residential District
      A.   To establish areas for the development of single and two (2) family
housing at a maximum density of approximately five units per net acre.
      B.   To reserve development areas for single and two family housing.
      C.   To restrict encroachment of incompatible uses.
      D.   To maintain density limitations.
      E.   To take advantage of municipal utilities.
      F.   To preserve open space.
   Subd. 3   R-3 Townhouse and Low Density Multiple Dwelling District
      A.   To provide areas offering a broad development range in housing units
with a maximum density of eight (8) units per net acre.
      B.   To retain the environment and character of less intensive residence
areas through carefully established bulk and lot area requirements.
   Subd. 4   R-4 Multiple Dwelling District
      A.   To establish areas for the development of multiple dwelling
structures with a maximum density of twelve (12) units per net acre.   
      B.   To permit the most intensive residential development allowed in the
City.
      C.   To maintain an essentially residential character in areas developed
at a more intensive density.
   Subd. 5   NB Neighborhood Business District
      A.   To be located at the edge of residential neighborhoods.
      B.   To provide a limited range of over-the-counter, convenience, retail,
and service uses to accommodate the needs of the adjacent residents.
      C.   To place limitations on the type, size and intensity of uses within
this district, given its proximity to residential uses.
      D.   To place emphasis on convenience for pedestrian, bicycle, and public
transportation access to the use.
      E.   To accommodate, where possible, a public commons giving residents a
place to gather and interact with one another.
      F.   To ensure adequate buffering is provided on these sites for the
adjacent residential uses.
      G.   To require, where applicable, compliance with the City's gateway
requirements.
   Subd. 6   B-1 Limited Business District
      A.   To establish areas for the location and development of
administrative office buildings and related office uses which are subject to
more restrictive controls.
      B.   To provide a district which is related to and may reasonably adjoin
high density or other residential districts.
      C.   To establish a business district in which there is limited contact
with the public and no exterior display or selling of merchandise to the
general public.
   Subd. 7   B-2 General Business District (revised 12/03/08)
      A.   To be a place in which people can live, work and play.
      B.   To create a compact, architecturally diverse, pedestrian- and
bicycle-friendly community with a distinct identity.
      C.   To provide a connected sidewalk system and places for people to
gather and socialize.
      D.   To implement design standards to promote an attractive environment
with lasting and sustainable value.
      E.   To group compatible retail and service business uses that tend to
draw trade that is naturally interchangeable and promotes business prosperity.
      F.   To provide an adequate supply of businesses and professional service
areas to meet the needs of the residents.
      G.   To minimize the effects of traffic congestion, noise, odor, glare
and similar safety problems.
      H.   To implement the Plan known as the "Guiding Plan for the B2
District," which was adopted by the City Council on October 27, 2008.
   Subd. 8   B-3 Service Business District
      A.   To accommodate an adequate supply of businesses and services that
serve the community and motorists traveling through the community with a broad
range of services and goods.
      B.   To provide locations for uses that may be incompatible with retail
centers, thereby keeping the retail centers compact and convenient.
      C.   To keep services in close proximity to arterial streets or highways
in areas that are appropriately designated on the Comprehensive Plan.
      D.   To encourage grouping of compatible and mutually supportive business
uses and services.
      E.   To promote business prosperity.
      F.   To establish a high standard of development and design that produces
a positive visual image and minimizes the effects of traffic congestion, noise,
odor and glare.
      G.   To allow a transitional reuse of existing buildings until market
conditions warrant redevelopment.
      H.   To enhance redevelopment potential by prohibiting uses that would
impede redevelopment.
      I.   To ensure acceptable traffic operations on local streets.
      J.   To promote flexibility in land uses and site development standards
to achieve the purposes of the district.
   Subd. 9   B-4 Retail Center District
      A.   To meet retail shopping needs of the surrounding community by
providing a district that will accommodate a wide range of retail goods and
services.
      B.   To promote business prosperity by creating an attractive and
functional retail center.
      C.   To provide an integrated retail trade center that groups compatible
retail uses in one or more multiple-occupancy buildings. Free standing, single-
occupancy buildings will be allowed if planned and constructed as part of a
unified development that contains a retail center or is developed after such a
retail center is developed.
      D.   To produce a positive visual image by establishing a high standard
of design and development.
      E.   To allow transitional uses that will allow an orderly phasing out of
existing uses and development that are not appropriate in a contemporary retail
center and a phasing in of uses and development as warranted by market
conditions.
      F.   To encourage grouping of uses that are mutually supportive and have
similar requirements for vehicular and pedestrian accessibility and exposure.
      G.   To alleviate potential traffic congestion on local streets by the
design of the circulation pattern and arrangement of uses.
   Subd. 10   CC Civic Center District
      A.   To implement that part of City of Arden Hills Comprehensive Plan
known as the Civic Center (CC) area.
      B.   To create a destination-oriented area that serves as focal point for
the Community where a mix of uses including public, small retail, educational,
semi-public facilities and some mid-to-high-density housing are located.
      C.   To bring forth a government center that would integrate Sunfish Lake
with a civic campus and commercial area, and create a gathering/activity place
that is unified in purpose, design and use.
      D.   To require strict development standards and building materials to
create a high quality civic environment.
      E.   To preserve, protect, and enhance existing development adjacent to
the district.
      F.   To promote compact, unified development that takes advantage of the
proximity to the adjacent open space areas and regional transportation
facilities.
      G.   To minimize the effects of traffic congestion.
      H.   To allow development that will insure reasonable traffic operation
on the internal and surrounding transportation systems including Lexington,
Hamline, and Highway 96.
      I.   To encourage arrangement of uses that are mutually supportive and
have similar requirements for vehicular and pedestrian accessibility and
exposure.
   Subd. 11   GB Gateway Business District
      A.   To implement that part of Arden Hills Comprehensive Development Plan
known as the I-694/I-35W Plan.
      B.   To promote high quality, unified, large-scale development in a
manner similar to a planned unit development.
      C.   To take full advantage of the site's location as documented and
described in the NE I-694/I-35W Plan.
      D.   To allow only development that will create an attractive environment
and a positive image for this site, which is one of the most visible in the
community and represents the City's last major development site.
      E.   To protect the site's environmental resources.
      F.   To promote flexibility in land uses and development standards to
achieve the objectives of the I-694/I-35W Plan.
      G.   To allow development that will insure reasonable traffic operation
on the internal and surrounding transportation systems.
   Subd. 12   I-1 Limited Industrial District
      A.   To allow only those types and intensities of industrial uses that do
not detract from the surrounding area.
      B.   To maintain performance standards to keep the intensity of land
utilization lower than in the general Industrial District.
   Subd. 13   I-2 General Industrial District
      A.   To provide an area where more intensive light industrial land uses
may locate.
      B.   To present the least deleterious effect to adjacent, less intensive
land uses.
   Subd. 14   I-FLEX District
      A.   To preserve, protect, enhance and perpetuate existing development in
the district.
      B.   To attract new development that is compatible with existing
development in the district in terms of use, performance, character, quality
and appearance of buildings and sites.
      C.   To permit only those uses that will have traffic generation
characteristics that are compatible with existing development in the district
and that will ensure reasonable traffic operation on streets in the vicinity.
      D.   To encourage new site development that will be compatible with
existing site development standards of existing development in the district.
      E.   To promote flexibility in land uses and site development standards
to achieve the objectives of the I-Flex District.
   Subd. 15   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District
      A.   To allow flexibility in land development to benefit from new
technology in building design and construction and in land development.
      B.   To encourage variety in the organization of site elements, land uses
(residential and non-residential), building densities, and building and
dwelling types.
      C.   To promote higher standards of site and building design through the
use of trained and experienced professional land planners, landscape
architects, registered architects, engineers and surveyors to prepare plans for
all PUD's.
      D.   To preserve and enhance desirable site characteristics and open
space.
      E.   To promote more efficient and effective use of land, open space and
public facilities
      F.   To effectuate the policies and standards of the Arden Hills
Comprehensive Development Plan.
   Subd. 16   POS Parks and Open Space District (added 11/25/13)
      A.   To support the Arden Hills Parks, Trails, and Open Space Plan and
the Ramsey County Parks and Recreation System Plan.
      B.   To provide an area for publicly owned lands that have recognized
outdoor recreational or open space resources.
      C.   To support community health through the provision of active and
passive outdoor recreational opportunities.
      D.   To promote natural and ecological stewardship.
      E.   To conserve vital environmental resources.
   Subd. 17   CD Conservation District (added 11/25/13)
      A.   To provide a "holding" zone for federally owned lands on the Arden
Hills Army Training Site to ensure that future development is staged, maintains
a sustainable level of public expenditures for utilities and services, and
protects those areas generally determined to be unsuitable for development due
to the presence of wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, certain drainage and
soil conditions, and critical wildlife habitat.
      B.   To provide for areas for the development of solar energy systems.
   Subd. 18   INST Institutional District (added 9/25/17)
      To establish areas for the post-secondary education of general public.
      To establish areas for the training of well-educated and talented
workforce.
      To provide for the ability of the post-secondary students to live and
have their daily needs met on the campus of the post-secondary education
institution.
      To provide the opportunity for athletic programs to be created for the
post-secondary students while providing opportunities for the general public to
experience these athletic programs.”
1320.05   Land Use Chart.
(revised 5/24/21; revised 04/10/2023; revised 4/24/2023; revised 8/28/2023,
revised 2/12/24, revised 7/22/24; revised 11/25/24; revised 5/27/25)
Note: To view 1320.05 Land Use Chart in PDF, click HERE
Uses: Zoning Districts:
      R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 NB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 CC GB I-1 I-2 I-FLEX CD POS INST
Uses:          Zoning Districts:
               R- R-2 R-3 R-4 NB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 CC GB I-1 I-2 I-   CD POS INST
               1                                               FLEX
Antenna, Dish  CA CA  CA  CA  CA CA  CA  CA  CA  CA CA CA  CA  CA   CA CA  CA
or Tower
Agriculture,
Commercial     == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == C  ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Cannabis
Boarding house C  C   C   C   == ==  ==  ==  ==  C  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Brewpub        == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   C   C   == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Business       == ==  ==  ==  == A   P   P   P   C  P  P   P   P    == ==  ==
service
Cannabis,      == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  C   == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Mezzobusiness
Cannabis,      == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  C   == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Microbusiness
Cannabis
Testing        == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == C  ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Facility
Clinic,        == ==  ==  ==  P  P   P   P   P   C  P  P   P   P    == ==  ==
medical office
Club or lodge  == ==  ==  ==  == P   P   P   ==  C  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
(non-profit)
Club , sports  == ==  ==  ==  == A   P   P   P   C  P  P   ==  P    == ==  ==
& fitness
Commercial
recreation -   == ==  ==  ==  == ==  P   P   P   == == P   ==  ==   == ==  ==
indoor
Commercial
recreation -   == ==  ==  ==  == ==  A   ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
outdoor
Daycare
Facility, over == ==  ==  ==  P  P   P   P   P   == P  P   P   P    == ==  ==
10
Day care,
family - 10 or A  A   A   A   A  ==  A   ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
less
Day care,
group family - CA CA  CA  CA  CA ==  CA  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
14 or less
Dog kennel     == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   C   ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Dog run        A  A   A   ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Drive -up      == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   C   C   == A  ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
windows
"Dry cleaning
& laundry,     == ==  ==  ==  C  ==  A   A   ==  == A  ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
pick-up
station"
"Dry cleaning
& laundry,     == ==  ==  ==  C  ==  C   C   ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
self-service
laundry"
Dwelling:      D  D   D   D   == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
density zoning
Dwelling:
multiple       == ==  C   C   C  ==  C   ==  ==  C  C  ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
family
Dwelling:
single-family  C  C   D   D   == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
attached
Dwelling:
single-family  P  P   P   P   == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
detached
Dwelling: two- C  C   P   P   C  ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
family
Dwelling:      == ==  ==  ==  C  ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
live-work unit
Event Center   == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Financial
institution &  == ==  ==  ==  P  P   P   P   P   C  P  P   P   P    == ==  ==
service
Garage, truck  == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == C   C   ==   == ==  ==
Higher
Education,     == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  C
Campus
Home
occupation :   A  A   A   A   A  ==  ==  ==  ==  A  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Class I
Home
occupation :   CA CA  CA  CA  CA ==  ==  ==  ==  C  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Class II
Hospital       == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Hotel/motel    == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   P   C   C  C  ==  ==  C    == ==  ==
House of       C  C   C   C   C  C   C   C   C   C  == ==  ==  C    == ==  ==
worship
Light
Manufacturing, == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == C  ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Cannabis
Light
Manufacturing, == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == C  ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Lower-Potency
Hemp Edible
Lower-Potency
Hemp Edible    == ==  ==  ==  CA ==  CA  CA  CA  == CA ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Sales
Manufactured   == ==  C   ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
home park
Manufacturing
& processing : == ==  ==  ==  == ==  A   A   A   == P  P   P   P    == ==  ==
Class I
Manufacturing
& processing : == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  P   ==   == ==  ==
Class II
Micro brewery  == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   C   C   == C  ==  ==  C    == ==  ==
Micro          == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   C   C   == C  ==  ==  C    == ==  ==
distillery
Mortuary,      == ==  ==  ==  == ==  P   P   ==  C  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
funeral home
Multiple
occupancy      == ==  ==  ==  C  C   C   C   C   C  C  C   C   C    == ==  ==
building
Nursery        C  C   C   C   == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Nursing home
and assisted   C  C   C   C   == ==  D   ==  ==  C  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
living
Office         == ==  ==  ==  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P   P   P    == ==  ==
Pawn shop      == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == P   ==
Personal       == ==  ==  ==  C  A   P   P   P   C  P  ==  ==  A    == ==  ==
services
Public use     C  C   C   C   C  C   C   C   C   C  C  C   C   C    == ==  ==
Research and
development    == ==  ==  ==  C  P   C   C   C   == P  P   P   P    C  C   ==
facility
Research       == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   ==  ==  == == C   C   ==   == ==  ==
animals
Residence
Hall,          == ==  ==  C   == C   D   ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
dormitory
Residential
facility,
state          P  P   P   P   P  ==  P   ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
licensed,
serving 1- 6
Residential
facility,
state          C  C   C   C   C  ==  C   ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
licensed,
serving 7- 16
Restaurant and
restaurant-    == ==  ==  ==  C  A   P   P   P   C  P  C   C   ==   == ==  ==
fast food
Retail,        == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  C   == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Cannabis Sales
Retail sales & == ==  ==  ==  P  A   P   P   P   C  A  A   A   A    == ==  ==
service
School,
general        C  C   C   C   == ==  ==  ==  ==  C  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
education
School,
specialized    == ==  ==  ==  == C   C   C   C   C  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
education
Service        == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   C   ==  == C  C   C   ==   == ==  ==
station
Solar Energy   A  A   A   ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  ==  ==   C  ==  ==
System
Storage,       == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == ==  CA  ==   == ==  ==
exterior
Studio         == ==  ==  ==  C  C   P   P   P   C  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Theater,       == ==  ==  ==     A   C   P   ==  C  == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
indoor
Thrift Store,  == ==  ==  ==  == ==  P   P   P   == == ==  ==  P    == ==  ==
Class I
Thrift Store,  == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   ==  C   == == ==  ==  C    == ==  ==
Class II
Utility
distribution   P  P   P   P   P  P   P   P   P   == P  P   P   P    A  P   ==
line
Utility        == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == == C   C   ==   == ==  ==
substation
Utility        C  C   C   C   C  C   C   C   C   == C  C   C   C    C  C   ==
transmission
Vehicle -
motorized,     == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   C   ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
leasing and
rentals
Vehicle -
motorized,     == ==  ==  ==  == ==  C   C   ==  == == ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
service
Warehousing    == ==  ==  ==  == A   A   A   A   == C  P   P   C    == ==  ==
Wholesaling,   == ==  ==  ==  == ==  ==  ==  ==  == C  ==  ==  ==   == ==  ==
Cannabis
"P" = Permitted; "D" = Planned Unit; "== " = Not Permitted;
"C" = Conditional Use Permit; "A" = Accessory; "CA"= Conditional Accessory Use
Permit, "I" = Interim Use Permit"
 
1320.06   District Requirements Chart
(revised 10/25/21)
Note: To view 1320.06 District Requirements Chart in PDF, click HERE
 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 NB B-1 B-2 *B-3 *B-4 CC *G-B I-1 I-2 I-FLEX CD POS INST
            R-1    R-2    R-3    R-4    NB     B-1    B-2    *B-3   *B-4 CC     *G-B I-1    I-2    I-FLEX CD  POS INST
1. Minimum
Lot Area
(SF per                                                                                            
Dwelling
Unit)
Single      14,000 11,000 11,000 11,000 ==     ==     ==     ==     ==   ==     ==   ==     ==     ==     ==  ==  ==
Family
Two Family  14,000 8,000  8,000  8,000  ==     ==     ==     ==     ==   ==     ==   ==     ==     ==     ==  ==  ==
Multiple    ==     ==     5,450  3,630  ==     ==     2,178  ==     ==   ==     ==   ==     ==     ==     ==  ==  ==
Family PUD
2. Minimum
Lot Area                                                                                           
(SF)
Non-
Residential 14,000 11,000 11,000 11,000 13,000 13,000 13,000 13,000 ==   20,000 5 AC 30,000 24,000 24,000 ==  ==  13,000
Uses
Mixed Use                                 ==                                                        
Project or
Multiple                                                                        20
Occupancy   ==     ==     ==     ==     ==           13,000 ==     5 AC ==     AC   ==     ==     ==     ==  ==  ==
Center
Single Use
Project or                                                                      10
Free        ==     ==     ==     ==     ==     ==     13,000 ==     2 AC ==     AC   ==     ==     ==     ==  ==  ==
standing
Building
3. Minimum
Lot Size                                                                                           
(ft)
Width/Depth                                                                                        
Non-        ==     ==     ==     ==     100/   100/   100/   100/   100/ 100/   100/ 100/   100/   100/   ==  ==  100/
residential                             130    130    130    130    130  100    130  130    130    130            130
Single      95/130 85/120 85/120 85/120 ==     ==     ==     ==     ==   ==     ==   ==     ==     ==     ==  ==  ==
Family
Two Family  95/130 85/120 85/120 85/120 ==     ==     ==     ==     ==   ==     ==   ==     ==     ==     ==  ==  ==
4. Height   35     35     35     35     35     35     50     35     35   35     35   35     45     45     35  35  35
(ft.)
5. Floor
Area Ratio  0.3    0.3    0.3    0.3    0.7    0.7    0.8    0.8    0.3  0.8    ==   0.6    0.8    0.8    0.3 0.3 0.7
(F.A.R.)
6. Lot
Covered by  25%    25%    25%    25%    35%    35%    45%    40%    25%  40%    ==   30%    40%    40%    25% 25% 35%
Structure
7. Min.
Landscape   65%    65%    65%    65%    35%    25%    20%    25%    25%  20%    35%  35%    25%    25%    65% 65% 26%
Lot Area
8. Minimum
Building                                                                                           
Setbacks
(ft)
Front yard  40     40     40     40     20     50     50     50     50   20     50   55     50     50     40  40  50
Rear Yard
(Principle  30     30     30     30     20     20     20     20     20   20     20   20     20     20     30  30  20
)
Rear Yard   10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10   10     10   10     10     10     10  10  10
(Accessory)
Side Yard
Interior -
Principal   10/2 5 5/15   5/15   5/15   5/15   20/40  10-20  20/40  20/  10-20  20/  ** 20/ 20/40  20/40  10/ 10/ 20/40
(Min /total                                                         40          40   40                   20  20
both yards
on lot)
Side Yard
Interior -  10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10     10   10     10   10     10     10     10  10  10
Accessory
Side Yard   40     40     40     40     20     50     20     50     50   20     50   50     50     50     40  40  50
Corner
Other                                                           60                      
Setbacks
Lakeshore -
High Water
Mark ***                                                                                                  ==  ==  100
Abutting    ==     ==     ==     ==     30     100    ==     100    100  100    100  100    100    100
Residential
Zoning
District
9. PUD &
SUP
Maximum
Dwelling    3      5.5    8      12     ==     ==     20     ==     ==   20     12   ==     ==     ==     ==  ==  ==
Unit
Density Per
Net Acre
 
*   See Sections
1320.07 -
1320.14 for further requirements.
**   But in no case less than 1/2 Building Height.
***   See Section
1330.03.
****   Total housing units and building square footage will be determined based
on the capacity of the adjacent roadways and intersections as determined by the
required traffic study and may be reduced.
1320.07   Graphic Zoning Illustration
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-65.jpg]
   GRAPHIC ILLUSTRATION OF ZONING TERMS
1320.075   Special Requirements for the Single Family Residential (R1)
District.
(added 6/23/11)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. The application and the administrative and review
procedure established in Section
1355.04 Subd 3, Conditional Use Permits and in Appendix A, Procedural Manual,
shall be followed for all development that requires a Conditional Use Permit.
Conditional Use Permits are not required for permitted uses that occupy ap-
proved buildings.
   Subd. 2   Special Regulations for General Education and Higher Education,
School uses. General Education uses shall be allowed with an approved
Conditional Use Permit, and Higher Education uses shall be allowed with an
approved Planned Unit Development. In addition to the requirements in
Section 1355 for Conditional Use Permits and Planned Unit Developments, School
uses within the R1 District shall also be required to meet the following
requirements:
      A.   Be located in a campus setting on a contiguous area of land no less
than ten (10) acres in size;
      B.   The campus setting shall be comprised of main buildings and out
buildings that are owned or leased by the institution or school district
providing the School use, and within which are offered a mix of no fewer than
four of the following educational uses: classrooms, laboratories,
administrative and faculty offices, chapels, auditoriums, libraries, lecture
halls, student and faculty centers, athletic facilities, student housing,
dining facilities, and/or other school related uses as approved by the City
Council.
1320.08   Special Requirements for the Neighborhood Business (NB) District.
(revised 4/28/08)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. The application and the administrative and review
procedure established in Section
1355.04 Subd 3, Conditional Use Permits and in Appendix A, Procedural Manual,
shall be followed for all development that involves new building construction,
modification of a building's exterior or modification of the site. Conditional
Use Permits are not required for permitted uses that occupy approved buildings
that do not require exterior building modification or site modification. This
provision is subject to any modifications or additions set forth in this
Section. The prescribed procedure may be modified by the City to allow planning
flexibility and to encourage cooperative dialogue between the applicant and the
City.
   Subd. 2   Special Regulations for Permitted Uses in the NB District.
Permitted uses are allowed as specified in the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, for the NB District. However, this Code specifies additional
requirements for Clinics; Financial Institutions & Service; and Retail Sales &
Service. These uses can, if unrestricted, place unacceptable levels of traffic
on these sites and streets that would negatively impact adjacent residential
uses outside the neighborhood business district.
      A.   Clinics shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) gross square feet.
      B.   Financial Institutions & Service shall not exceed five thousand
(5,000) gross square feet, nor include a drive thru facility, nor include an
outdoor or detached automated kiosk.
      C.   Retail Sales & Service shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) gross
square feet. These uses shall only include: antiques, art and school supplies,
bakeries, bicycles (not motorized), books, stationery, candy, camera and
photographic supplies, carpets and rugs, china and glassware, clothing and
costume rental, convenience store, custom dressmaking, drugs, dry goods,
florist, garden supplies (year-round operation only), gifts, grocery, hardware,
hats, hobby shops, household appliance repair, interior decorating (no retail
furniture sales), jewelry, locksmith shops, musical instruments, paint and
wallpaper, shoes, sporting goods, tobacco, toys, and wearing apparel, and
similar type uses. Automobile related business, liquor stores, and restaurants,
exceeding forty (40) percent in gross liquor receipts of the total food and
liquor receipts, would not be allowed in the Neighborhood Business District.
   Subd. 3   Special Regulations for Conditional Uses in the NB District.
Conditional Uses are allowed as specified in the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, for the NB District. However, this Code specifies additional
requirements for restaurants and multiple family and two-family dwellings
units. These uses can, if unrestricted, place unacceptable levels of traffic on
these sites and streets that would negatively impact adjacent residential uses
outside the neighborhood business district.
      A.   Restaurants shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) gross square
feet. Exterior seating will be considered based on its impact on adjacent
residential uses outside the neighborhood business district.
      B.   Dwelling Units may be located within a mixed use development
including non-residential structures.
   Subd. 4   District Requirements: (The district requirements in Section
1320.06 for the NB District will apply). To further accomplish the stated
purpose of the NB District, developers are encouraged to plan their sites in
the spirit of the purpose and intent of the Planned Unit Development provision
in Section
1320.14. At the time of submittal for the Conditional Use Permit and Site Plan
Review, the applicant shall identify modifications to the standard zoning
requirements otherwise applicable to the site and the reasons why the
modifications would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
purpose of the district.
   The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the
proposed uses, lot sizes, height, use mix, location and relationship with other
existing and proposed uses are compatible and complementary both internally and
with adjacent uses, and meet the intent of the City as expressed in the NB
District purpose and the above criteria for allowable uses.
   Subd. 5   Building Exteriors, Site Features and Site Development.
Accomplishing the stated purpose of the NB District requires particular concern
for the design of buildings, site features (such as landscaping, lighting, and
signage) and site design. The arrangement, geometry, massing, materials and
colors shall be responsive to existing buildings, site features and site design
on adjoining sites in the district.
      A.   The City Council will make the final determination on the
compatibility and consistency with this provision.
      B.   Landscaping for the site shall comply with Section
1325.05, Subd. 1 of the Zoning Code.
      C.   Buffer yards thirty (30) feet in width shall be provide adjacent to
all residential uses outside the neighborhood business district. The buffer
yard shall be landscaped with a combination of evergreen trees and deciduous
trees such that the use is substantially screened from the adjacent residences.
The buffer yard landscaping may require landscaping in excess of the minimum
requirements.
      D.   Hours of Operation shall be prohibited between the hours of 11:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m. All deliveries and loading shall be done during normal hours
of operation.
      E.   Sloped Roofs shall be utilized on all principal and accessory
structures. Roofing materials and design shall be consistent with those found
in the adjacent residential neighborhoods outside the neighborhood business
district.
      F.   Exterior Materials shall include only face brick, stone, glass, or
natural wood products. All walls shall be treated with the same exterior
materials.
      G.   Lighting shall adhere to the requirements in Section
1325.05 Subd 3. Lighting shall not be permitted to wash the building, except
for accent lighting to delineate the main entryway into the building. Security
and parking lot lighting shall be on pedestals not to exceed fourteen (14) feet
in height.
      H.   Trash shall be fully screened in a masonry enclosure or shall be
stored within the principal structure.
      I.   Vending Machines shall be located on the interior of the principal
structure.
      J.   Bicycle Racks shall be provided in an area that is convenient to the
main entryway into the building.
      K.   Sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to all public rights-of-way.
      L.   Gateways, where applicable, should be incorporated into the layout
of the site. The 1985 Parkway System Feasibility Study and the Comprehensive
Plan provide additional guidance on the incorporation of gateways.
1320.085   Special Requirements for the B-2 General Business District.
   The B-2 General Business District encompasses a primary gateway into the
City. The aesthetic and transportation impacts from new developments and
redevelopments must be evaluated to help ensure the long-term viability and
success of the B-2 District. Accomplishing the purpose of the B 2 District
requires particular concern for the design of buildings, site features (such as
landscaping, lighting, and signage), site layout, building materials, site
design, and other related design elements. To that end, new development and
redevelopment shall conform to the standards in this and related zoning
requirements. The "Guiding Plan for the B2 District" shall act as a guide for
development but is not part of the Zoning Code. In reviewing and approving land
use applications, the City Council shall make the final determination on the
compatibility and consistency with all provisions in this and related sections
of the Zoning Ordinance. (revised 12/3/08)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. To further accomplish the stated purpose of the B2
District, the following procedures shall be used:
      A.   Proposals for new construction, redevelopment of a site, and
significant modifications to existing sites shall use the Planned Unit
Development (PUD) process. The PUD proposal shall identify any requested
modifications from the applicable zoning requirements and from the "Guiding
Plan for the B2 District" as well as the reasons why the modifications would be
in the public interest and would be consistent with the purpose of the B-
2 District. Modifications to these requirements may be granted by the City
without a variance through the PUD process. Conditional use permits may also be
required for uses list in Section
1320.05.
      B.   Conditional Use Permits, Site Plans, and other development
agreements that were approved for development sites before November 24, 2008,
shall remain in effect but shall use the Planned Unit Development Process for
future site amendments.
      C.   The following items shall not be considered significant
modifications to an existing site and shall be exempt from the PUD process but
shall be subject to administrative review and approval:
         1.   Internal alterations to buildings that do not result in a change
to the building height, roof line, or footprint unless the changes will have a
notable increase in traffic and/or parking needs as determined by the Community
Development Director or their designee;
         2.   Replacement, maintenance, or repair of existing materials,
including exterior finishes, signage, landscaping, and parking lots;
         3.   Minor modifications to the exterior of a building or a site that
substantially conforms to the design standards in
Section 1325 and has no discernable impact on traffic as determined by the
Community Development Director or their designee;
      D.   The provisions in this Section may be modified by the City Council
to allow planning flexibility without the need for a variance to encourage
cooperative dialogue between the applicant and the City. Minor improvements to
existing uses should be encouraged without costly upgrades or complete changes
to a site.
   Subd. 2   Uses.
      A.   Permitted uses (as specified in the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, for the B-2 District) that occupy existing buildings do not require a
conditional use permit prior to occupancy. Other city permits may be required.
      B.   Conditional uses (as specified in the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, for the B-2 District) require an approved conditional use permit prior
to occupancy. Other city permits may be required.
      C.   The following land uses are not compatible with the stated purpose
of the B-2 District and shall be prohibited:
         1.   Individual retail businesses larger than 50,000 square feet
except for Sports and Fitness Clubs.
         2.   Open sales, rental or storage lots, including but not limited to
cars, buses, trucks, motorcycles, bicycles, recreational vehicles, trailers,
boats, mobile homes, machinery, lumber, building materials, and similar items.
Approved open air garden centers shall be exempt.
         3.   Mini storage facilities;
         4.   Tattoo parlors;
         5.   Consumer Small Loan establishments;
         6.   Outdoor bulk storage buildings, including but not limited to,
forest, metal, concrete, agricultural and petroleum products, chemicals and
similar products; and,
         7.   Manufacturing or processing that generates hazardous waste
without a valid Hazardous Waste Generator's license from the Ramsey County
Public Health Department.
   Subd. 3   Special Regulations for Drive-up Windows. Section
1325.04 of the Zoning Ordinance specifies additional requirements for drive-up
windows and automobile service stations. In accordance with Section 1320.085,
Subd. 1, the City Council as part of the land use application review shall
require the following conditions to be met in determining site suitability for
drive-up windows: (revised 6/27/2022)
      A.   The architectural treatment, circulation plan, and signage system of
such businesses shall be designed to visually and functionally integrate the
building and the site on which it is located.
      B.   The applicant shall submit a circulation plan that demonstrates that
the use will not interfere or reduce the safety of non-motorized movements,
specifically pedestrian and bicyclists.
      C.   Requested modifications to the provisions in section
1325.04 shall be stated in writing along with an explanation of why the
modifications would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
purpose of the B-2 District.
   Subd. 4   Hotel/Motel Additional Conditional Use Permit Criteria. In
addition to meeting the requirements of
Section 1345 and
1355.04 Subd 3, hotel/motels shall conform to the following:
      A.   Meet building code requirements;
      B.   Entrance to each room shall be from an indoor corridor;
      C.   Landscaping shall be brought into conformance with section
1325.05 Subd 1.
   Subd. 5   Assisted Living Additional Planned Unit Development Criteria.
(revised 1/25/2021)
      A.   In addition to meeting the requirements of Section
1325, multi-family assisted living residential projects may incorporate memory
care units meeting the following:
         1.   Each unit consists of private bedrooms with bathrooms;
         2.   Each unit is open to a shared central dining and living areas;
         3.   Units may be less than 550 square feet;
         4.   Memory care units shall be considered to be equivalent to .5
dwelling units.
      B.   In addition to meeting the requirements of Section
1325, an existing hotel-motel use may be used for assisted living upon approval
of a Master Planned Unit Development provided that all of the following
requirements are met:
         1.   The building to be used for assisted living meets applicable
building and fire codes as determined by the Fire Marshal and Building
Official;
         2.   Each room that has occupants on an overnight basis shall have
bathroom facilities within the room;
         3.   The capacity of the building shall not be exceeded
   Subd. 6   Event Center Additional Conditional Use Permit Criteria. (added 7/
22/24)
      A.   In addition to meeting the requirements of Section
1325 and
1355.04 Subd 4, event centers shall conform to the following:
         1.   The occupancy of the building must never exceed the occupancy
load posted based on the Fire Marshal’s determination.
         2.   The serving of alcohol shall be subject to Minnesota State
Statute and Chapter 5 - Alcoholic Beverages of the Arden Hills City Code
requirements and is permitted only in conjunction with a private event that is
not open to the public.
         3.   Licensing information from the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Office may
be requested by City. City could at its discretion request licensing
information from the County Sheriff's Office.
         4.   A security plan shall be submitted and approved by the City;
         5.   A noise mitigation strategy shall be submitted and approved by
the City.
      B.   In addition to meeting the requirements of Section
1325 and
1355.04 Subd 4, the City may:
         1.   Prohibit access from a predominantly residential street;
         2.   Restrict the hours of operation for loading docks;
         3.   Require greater than minimum setbacks for structures and
driveways;
         4.   Require opaque screening to eliminate headlight glare;
         5.   Impose any other restriction it deems to be in the public
interest.
1320.09   Special Requirements for the B-3 Service Business District.
   The aesthetic and transportation impacts from new developments and
redevelopments must be evaluated to help ensure the long-term viability and
success of the B-3 District. Accomplishing the purpose of the B 3 District
requires particular concern for the design of buildings, site features (such as
landscaping, lighting, and signage), site layout, building materials, site
design, and other related design elements. To that end, new development and
redevelopment shall conform to the standards in this and related zoning
requirements. In reviewing and approving land use applications, the City
Council shall make the final determination on the compatibility and consistency
with all provisions in this and related sections of the Zoning Ordinance.
(revised 12/17/ 08)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. To further accomplish the stated purpose of the B3
District, the following procedures shall be used:
      A.   Proposals for new construction, redevelopment of a site, and
significant modifications to existing sites shall use the Planned Unit
Development (PUD) process. The PUD proposal shall identify any requested
modifications from the applicable zoning requirements as well as the reasons
why the modifications would be in the public interest and would be consistent
with the purpose of the B-3 District. Modifications to these requirements may
be granted by the City without a variance through the PUD process. Conditional
use permits may also be required for uses listed in Section
1320.05.
      B.   Conditional Use Permits, Site Plans, and other development
agreements that were approved for development sites before December 8, 2008,
shall remain in effect but shall use the Planned Unit Development Process for
future site amendments.
      C.   The following items shall not be considered significant
modifications to an existing site and shall be exempt from the PUD process but
shall be subject to administrative review and approval:
         1.   Internal alterations to buildings that do not result in a change
to the building height, roof line, or footprint unless the changes will have a
notable increase in traffic and/or parking needs as determined by the Community
Development Director or their designee;
         2.   Replacement, maintenance, or repair of existing materials,
including exterior finishes, signage, landscaping, and parking lots;
         3.   Minor modifications to the exterior of a building or a site that
substantially conforms to the design standards in
Section 1325 and has no discernable impact on traffic as determined by the
Community Development Director or their designee;
      D.   The provisions in this Section may be modified by the City Council
to allow planning flexibility without the need for a variance to encourage
cooperative dialogue between the applicant and the City. Minor improvements to
existing uses should be encouraged without costly upgrades or complete changes
to a site.
   Subd. 2   Uses.
      A.   Permitted uses (as specified in the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, for the B-3 District) that occupy existing buildings do not require a
conditional use permit prior to occupancy. Other city permits may be required.
      B.   Conditional uses (as specified in the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, for the B-3 District) require an approved conditional use permit prior
to occupancy. Other city permits may be required.
   Subd. 3   Special Regulations for Drive-Up Windows in the B-3 District.
Section
1325.04 of this Code, specifies additional requirements for drive-up windows
and automobile service stations. In accordance with Section 1320.09 Subd. 1,
the City Council as part of the land use application review shall require the
following conditions to be met in determining site suitability for a drive-up
windows and automobile service stations: (revised 6/27/2022)
      A.   The operation consists of one or more drive-up windows and is an
integral part of a building containing one or more other allowed uses, or the
operation is part of an architecturally unified complex containing two or more
businesses using drive-up windows
      B.   Shared access drives and shared parking are utilized by all such
businesses using drive-up windows in said building or complex.
      C.   Only one building or architecturally unified complex containing two
or more businesses using drive-up windows will be allowed in addition to one
freestanding business using a drive-up window.
      D.   The architecture and the site, grading, circulation, landscaping,
screening and signage plans shall unify the appearance and function of the
complex or building.
      E.   An architecturally unified complex may consist of one or more
buildings on one or more parcels if the intent of providing a unified
appearance and function is not compromised.
      F.   The applicant shall submit a circulation plan that demonstrates that
the use will not interfere or reduce the safety of non-motorized movements,
specifically pedestrian and bicyclists.
   Subd. 4   Design Standards. The standards in
section 1325 shall apply.
1320.10   Special Requirements for the B-4 Retail Center District.
(revised 12/17/08)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. To further accomplish the stated purpose of the B-
4 District, the following procedures shall be used:
      A.   Proposals for new construction, redevelopment of a site, and
significant modifications to existing sites shall use the Planned Unit
Development (PUD) or the Conditional Use Permit (CUP) process. The proposal
shall identify any requested modifications from the applicable zoning
requirements as well as the reasons why the modifications would be in the
public interest and would be consistent with the purpose of the B-4 District.
Modifications to these requirements may be granted by the City without a
variance through the PUD process. Conditional use permits may also be required
for uses listed in Section
1320.05.
      B.   Conditional Use Permits, Site Plans, and other development
agreements that were approved for development sites before December 8, 2008,
shall remain in effect.
      C.   The following items shall not be considered significant
modifications to an existing site and shall be exempt from the PUD or CUP
process but shall be subject to administrative review and approval:
         1.   Internal alterations to buildings that do not result in a change
to the building height, roof line, or footprint unless the changes will have a
notable increase in traffic and/or parking needs as determined by the Community
Development Director or their designee;
         2.   Replacement, maintenance, or repair of existing materials,
including exterior finishes, signage, landscaping, and parking lots;
         3.   Minor modifications to the exterior of a building or a site that
conforms to applicable zoning regulations and has no discernable impact on
traffic as determined by the Community Development Director or their designee;
      D.   The provisions in this Section may be modified by the City Council
to allow planning flexibility without the need for a variance to encourage
cooperative dialogue between the applicant and the City. Minor improvements to
existing uses should be encouraged without costly upgrades or complete changes
to a site.
   Subd. 2   Permitted Uses. Due to the replacement, reuse or redevelopment
nature of potential development in this district, the list of I 2 permitted
uses as of April 1991, that are not permitted in the B 4 District, will be
allowed in buildings existing in April 1991 as permitted uses until
redevelopment or replacement of the building or buildings housing such uses
occurs. Such uses will not be allowed in buildings constructed after April
1991. The permitted uses on the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, in the B 4 District will be permitted either as replacement uses in
buildings existing as of April 1991 or as uses in replaced or redeveloped
buildings.
   Subd. 3   Uses Allowed by Conditional Use Permit. Due to the replacement,
reuse or redevelopment nature of potential development in this district, the
existing I 2 uses allowed by conditional use permit as of April 1991 will be
allowed to continue as conditional uses until redevelopment or replacement of
the building or buildings housing such uses occurs. No new I 2 uses by
conditional use permit will be allowed unless those uses are permitted or
allowed by conditional use permit in the B 4 District. The uses allowed by
Conditional Use Permit on the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, in the B 4 District will be allowed by conditional use permit either
as replacement uses in buildings existing as of April 1991 or as uses in
replaced, redeveloped or new buildings.
   Subd. 4   Special Regulations for Drive-Up Windows in the B-4 District.
Section
1325.04 of this Code, specifies additional requirements for drive-up windows
and automobile service stations. In accordance with Section 1320.10 Subd. 1,
the City Council as part of the land use application review shall require the
following conditions to be met in determining site suitability for drive-up
windows: (revised 6/27/2022)
      A.   The architectural treatment, circulation plan, and signage system of
such businesses shall be designed to visually and functionally integrate the
building and the site on which it is located.
      B.   The applicant shall submit a circulation plan that demonstrates that
the use will not interfere or reduce the safety of non-motorized movements,
specifically pedestrian and bicyclists.
      C.   Requested modifications to the provisions in section
1325.04 shall be stated in writing along with an explanation of why the
modifications would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
purpose of the B-4 District.
   Subd. 5   District Requirements. The requirements below are established for
development of individual "lots" and for the overall development of "planned
projects". "Lots" are individual parcels on which may be placed a single
building (either single or multiple occupancy). "Planned projects" are sites on
which may be placed (a) A single or multi occupancy retail center; (b) Two or
more free¬ standing, single or multiple¬ occu-pancy buildings; or (c) A
combination of (a) and (b).
   A "retail center" is a single building housing either several retail outlets
or a single retail outlet with several departments. In a "planned project"
individual lots may be created for separate buildings or parts of buildings but
separate buildings are not required to be located on separate lots. To allow
maximum development creativity and flexibility, regulations such as lot area,
side and rear yard building and parking setbacks, Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.),
number of parking spaces, percent of landscape area, etc., may be modified for
individual parcels and interior lot lines within a project. However, the
regulations for these same items must be met for the total project area and
exterior project lot lines.
      A.   Minimum Lot Area Requirements:
         1.   Multiple occupancy retail center: 5 acres
         2.   Free standing, single or multiple occupancy building: 2 Acres
      B.   Maximum Bulk Requirements:
         1.   Height: 35 feet
         2.   Floor area ratio (F.A.R.): .30
         3.   Lot coverage by structure: 25%
      C.   Minimum Landscaped Area: 25%
      D.   Minimum Building Setbacks:
         1.   Front yard and exterior project lines: 50 ft
         2.   Side yard: 20 feet
         3.   Rear yard: 20 feet
   Subd. 6   Building Exteriors, Site Features and Site Development.
Accomplishing the stated purpose of the B 4 District requires particular
concern for the design of buildings, site features (such as landscaping,
lighting and signage) and site design. The arrangement, geometry, massing,
materials and colors shall be responsive to existing buildings. The City
Council will make the final determination on the compatibility and consistency
with this provision.
      A.   Landscaping (Section
1325.05, Subd 1, shall apply)
      B.   Parking (GB District regulations, Section
1320.13, shall apply)
      C.   Signs (GB District regulations, Section
1320.13, shall apply)
      D.   Lighting (GB District regulations, Section
1320.13,) shall apply)
      E.   Pedestrian Circulation: All development within the B 4 District
shall incorporate pedestrian improvements, which may include more specific City
requirements that become apparent in the plan review process.
      F.   Drainage /Water Management Plan: A plan must be submitted with each
project or lot development in the B 4 District. The plan must be approved by
the Rice Creek Watershed District, other agencies as required, and by the City
Engineer. On site ponding is encouraged as a visual and functional amenity. Two
or more lots or projects may coordinate their plans for their mutual benefit.
1320.11   Special Requirements for the Civic Center (CC) District.
(revised 4/28/08)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. The application and the administrative and review
procedure established in Section
1355.04 Subd 3, Conditional Use Permits, and Appendix A, Procedural Manual,
shall be followed for all development that involves new building construction,
modification of a building's exterior, or modification of the site. This
provision is subject to any modifications or additions set forth in this
Section. The prescribed procedure may be modified by the City to allow planning
flexibility and to encourage cooperative dialogue between the applicant and the
City.
   Subd. 2   Allowable Uses. Development within the CC District will include
uses that are permitted and conditional uses on the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, under the CC District. These uses must be consistent with the stated
purposes of this district and the following development criteria:
      A.   Uses. Uses as shown on Land Use Chart Section
1320.05, under the CC District as permitted and conditional uses are allowed.
Uses not expressly stated on the chart are not allowed, unless determined by
the City Council that the use is similar to the allowed uses and that the use
is in the best interest of the City and the CC District. In this case, the
applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the proposed
uses, lot sizes, height, use mix, location and relationship with other existing
and proposed uses are compatible and complementary both internally and with
adjacent uses, and meet the intent of the CC District purposes and the criteria
for allowable uses.
      B.   Staging Area. With the exception of during a new construction
period, staging areas shall be free of such materials, equipment or vehicles at
the close of each business day. Overnight, weekend or holiday storage is not
permitted. Materials transfer is permitted only for such activities necessary
during the normal day-to-day business operation between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
      C.   Hazardous Materials. All hazardous materials used or stored on site
are subject to the regulation of the State Fire and Building Code and the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
      D.   Internal Traffic Control. All buildings shall be accessible to and
from nearby public streets. City design review will include pedestrian,
bicycle, transit and automotive circulation patterns and needs.
   Subd. 3   Prohibited Uses. Some land uses are specifically not compatible
with the stated purpose of the CC District. The following uses are therefore
prohibited:
      A.   Outdoor storage of equipment, vehicles, and materials. Any type of
storage associated with use must be fully contained within primary or accessory
building. Materials used in "staging areas" must not remain on ground for more
than twenty-four (24) hours.
      B.   Towers for telecommunications. Only antennas that are flush,
parallel, unobtrusive and painted the same color as building will be allowed.
      C.   Open sales, rental or storage lots, including but not limited to
cars, buses, trucks, motorcycles, bicycles, recreational vehicles, trailers,
boats, mobile homes, machinery, lumber, building materials, landscape
materials, and similar items.
      D.   Fast food establishments.
      E.   Drive-in businesses.
      F.   Single and two-family housing.
      G.   Gasoline service stations.
      H.   Casino.
      I.   Uses that the City may determine are incompatible with its
objectives or with development as it may occur, thereby imposing or
establishing new or unforeseen standards.
   Subd. 4   Development Standards.
      A.   All district standards specified in Section
1320.06 must be met.
      B.   Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The total FAR shall not exceed 0.8.
      C.   Building Height and Setback. To accomplish the intensity and scale
of development consistent with the defined purpose of the CC District, multi
story buildings will be allowed.
         1.   State Highways or County Roads: Minimum building setback is 60
feet. Building setbacks from State Highways or County Roads are measured from
roadway easement line.
         2.   Parking setbacks. Parking areas shall be set back twenty (20)
feet from all roadways. The side yard setback requirement for parking is five
(5) feet.
         3.   Parking between the front of the building and the roadway is not
permitted. Parking lots must be setback to be placed either even with or behind
the primary structure.
         4.   Thirty-five (35) feet is the maximum height allowed.
         5.   The use of stepped building heights is encouraged to provide
visual transition. This applies to both multi building complexes and single
buildings.
         6.   The location of buildings relative to their heights will consider
views and relationship from within the CC District and from public and private
areas off the site.
      D.   Landscaping and screening. Appropriate and unified landscaping is
essential to effectively meet the defined purpose of the CC District.
         1.   A landscape plan shall be submitted as required in Section
1325.05, Subd 1 of the Zoning Code.
         2.   Fences. If fences are used for landscape screening, they must
conform to the following:
            a)   No higher than six (6) feet in rear yards only;
            b)   No barbed wire, razor wire, or spikes allowed.
            c)   Fences must blend into the landscape and minimize corrosion.
Wood, brick, stone or wrought iron is encouraged. If chain link is allowed by
the City Council, it must have black or dark green vinyl coating.
            d)   All other requirements of Section
1325.05 Subd 4 must be followed.
         3.   Special attention to screening from roadways must be given.
Screening along Highway 96 must be consistent in appearance and materials.
         4.   Overhead garage doors, large parking lots, mechanical utilities
and other such items must be properly screened.
         5.   Special attention must be given to the Gateway entrances at
Highway 96 and Hamline Avenue and at Highway 96 and Lexington Avenue as
specified in the community gateway study.
      E.   Building Exteriors. The appearance of buildings is the most
important component in land development. Accomplishing the stated purpose of
the CC District requires particular concern for building design.
         1.   The arrangement, geometry and massing of individual buildings
shall be responsive to the arrangement of the whole CC District.
         2.   Exterior building materials shall be of brick, stone, glass or
any combination thereof, except trim and accessories may be metal. Materials
and colors selected for any individual building shall be compatible with other
buildings in the CC District.
         3.   Exterior characteristics and building materials shall utilize
consistent motifs in design, size and scope to create unity in the CC District.
All building elevations shall be considered "fronts."
         4.   All service entrance areas, mechanical equipment and trash
handling devices shall be fully screened.
      F.   Parking. Parking requirements contained in Section
1325.06 shall apply. However, these requirements may be adjusted by the City in
the project review process if the changes will more effectively accomplish the
stated purpose of the CC District.
      G.   Traffic Impact Study. The City may determine if a use will impose
limitations on traffic.
      H.   Generated within the CC District. In order to maintain the
functional capacity of the area road system, a traffic study prepared by a
traffic engineer may be required.
      I.   Signs. Signs are regulated by the Arden Hills Sign Code subject to
any modifications or additions contained herein.
      J.   Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided for the safety and
convenience of occupants and visitors.
         1.   A lighting plan shall be submitted that shows location, type of
illumination and design.
         2.   Exterior lighting shall be consistent in type, design, and scale
to create unity in the CC District.
         3.   The source of illumination shall be hooded, concealed or
controlled in a manner so as not to be visible from adjoining lots, streets or
highways or residential areas south of Highway 96.
         4.   Light washing of buildings is prohibited. Wall packs are allowed
at entrances only. Accent lighting of buildings and sites may be permitted by
the City. A photometric analysis of site and building shall be submitted for
City approval.
      K.   Pedestrian Circulation. All development within the District shall
install pedestrian improvements in accordance with the City of Arden Hills
Comprehensive Plan. Other pedestrian sidewalks and trails may be required by
the City.
         1.   Site design shall facilitate pedestrian connections and mobility
within and between building, sites, and uses by providing clear visual
indicators through door placement, signage, and integrating landscaping
components.
         2.   The city may require bike racks; racks must be placed to not
impede pedestrian circulation.
         3.   Internal sidewalk systems shall connect with adjacent planned or
developed public sidewalks or trails.
      L.   Drainage, Wetlands and Flood Plain. A water management plan must be
submitted for each project in the CC District. The plan must be approved by the
Rice Creek Watershed District, other agencies as required, and the City
Engineer.
         1.   Regional ponding is encouraged as a visual and functional
amenity; two or more sites may coordinate their water management plans for
their mutual benefit.
         2.   Utility Lines. Underground utility lines shall be required in all
develop-ment within the CC District. Except for temporary measures by special
permit, there shall be no utilities located overhead.
1320.12   Special Requirements for the I Flex District.
(revised 12/17/08)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. To further accomplish the stated purpose of the I-Flex
District, the following procedures shall be used:
      A.   Proposals for new construction, redevelopment of a site, and
significant modifications to existing sites shall use the Planned Unit
Development (PUD) or the Conditional use Permit (CUP) process. The proposal
shall identify any requested modifications from the applicable zoning
requirements as well as the reasons why the modifications would be in the
public interest and would be consistent with the purpose of the I-Flex
District. Modifications to these requirements may be granted by the City
without a variance through the PUD process. Conditional use permits may also be
required for uses list in Section
1320.05.
      B.   Conditional Use Permits, Site Plans, and other development
agreements that were approved for development sites before December 8, 2008,
shall remain in effect.
      C.   The following items shall not be considered significant
modifications to an existing site and shall be exempt from the PUD or CUP
process but shall be subject to administrative review and approval:
         1.   Internal alterations to buildings that do not result in a change
to the building height, roof line, or footprint unless the changes will have a
notable increase in traffic and/or parking needs as determined by the Community
Development Director or their designee;
         2.   Replacement, maintenance, or repair of existing materials,
including exterior finishes, signage, landscaping, and parking lots;
         3.   Minor modifications to the exterior of a building or a site that
conforms to the applicable zoning regulations and has no discernable impact on
traffic as determined by the Community Development Director or their designee;
      D.   The provisions in this Section may be modified by the City Council
to allow planning flexibility without the need for a variance to encourage
cooperative dialogue between the applicant and the City. Minor improvements to
existing uses should be encouraged without costly upgrades or complete changes
to a site.
   Subd. 2   Permitted Uses. Permitted uses are allowed as specified on the
Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, for the I Flex District.
   Subd. 3   Uses allowed by Conditional Use Permit.
      A.   Used allowed by Conditional Use Permit as specified on the Land Use
Chart, Section
1320.05, for the I Flex District.
      B.   Wholesaling and warehousing if such use is wholly contained within a
building and occupies not more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area
of the building in which it is located.
      C.   Wholesaling, warehousing and related accessory uses which were in
existence in April 1991 issued a Conditional Use Permit, which will allow such
uses to continue on the site, or within any existing or expanded facilities or
improvements thereon, provided that the ratios of conditional uses to the gross
floor area of the building do not exceed the ratios existing as of the date
hereof. The Conditional Use Permit shall define the scope and ratios of
existing uses and may be amended in compliance with the procedural requirements
of Section
1355.04 Subd 3 relative to Conditional Use Permits.
      D.   Manufacturing or processing that generates hazardous waste with a
valid hazardous waste generators license from the Ramsey County Public Health
Department or other licensing agencies having jurisdiction.
   Subd. 4   Prohibited Uses. Some land uses are not compatible with the stated
purpose of this district and will not be allowed. The following uses are
prohibited:
      A.   Residential uses, except those required for safety and security
reasons in relation to the principal use.
      B.   Open sales, rental or storage uses or lots.
      C.   Vehicular sales, lease, rental or repair.
      D.   Truck terminals, freight terminals and freight forwarding services.
      E.   Bulk storage buildings, yards and terminals, including but not
limited to forest, metal, concrete, agricultural and petroleum products;
chemicals and similar products.
      F.   Manufacturing or processing that generates hazardous waste without a
valid hazardous waste generator license from the Ramsey County Public Health
Department or other licensing agencies having jurisdiction.
   Subd. 5   Building Exteriors, Site Features and Site Development.
Accomplishing the stated purpose of the I-Flex District requires particular
concern for the design of buildings, site features (such as landscaping,
lighting, and signage) and site design. The arrangement, geometry, massing,
materials and colors shall be responsive to existing buildings, site features
and site design on adjoining sites in the district. The City Council will make
the final determination on the compatibility and consistency with this
provision.
1320.13   Special Requirements for the Gateway Business (GB) District.
(revised 4/28/08)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. The application and the administrative and review
procedure established in Section
1355.04 Subd 3, Conditional Use Permits, and Appendix A, Procedural Manual,
shall be followed for all development that involves new building construction,
modification of a building's exterior, or modification of the site. This
provision is subject to any modifications or additions set forth in this
Section. The prescribed procedure may be modified by the City to allow planning
flexibility and to encourage cooperative dialogue between the applicant and the
City.
   Subd. 2   Definitions of Terms Used Herein.
      A.   Gateway Business (GB) District. A district established specifically
to provide a flexible framework for the development of the area of the city
generally located in the northeast quadrant of the interchange at I 694 and I
35W.
      B.   Mixed Use Project. A segment of the GB District that is controlled
by a single developer entity, containing more than one type of use, and planned
as a single development but may be developed in more than a single stage.
      C.   Single Use Project. A segment of the GB District that is controlled
by a single developer entity and containing a single type of use, planned as a
single development and encompassing one or more parcels but may be developed in
more than a single stage.
   Subd. 3   Allowable Uses. Development within the GB District will include
uses that are specified on the Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, and shall comply with the following development criteria:
      A.   Office uses occupying not less than twenty-five (25) percent nor
more than fifty (50) percent of a project's total floor area.
      B.   The mix, relationship and intensity of uses and buildings will be
compatible and complementary both internally and with adjacent uses.
      C.   Retail or service businesses offering goods, merchandise or personal
services for sale primarily to those employed in the GB District will be
allowed to occupy no more than fifteen (15) percent of the total floor area of
the building in which they are located. Service stations with retail services
and with a car wash shall be exempt from this restriction.
      D.   Multi family residential use is limited to that area adjoining the
public area surrounding Round Lake and shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of
the total land area in the GB District exclusive of Parcels 2, 3, 4 and 5 as
identified in the NE I 694/I 35W Plan. Densities shall not exceed those allowed
in an R 4 Residential District.
      E.   Licensed day care facilities will be allowed either in a building
containing other uses or in a freestanding building. Freestanding day care
facilities are not required to meet minimum floor area or minimum lot area
requirements otherwise required in the GB District.
      F.   The use is in the best interest of the City and the GB District. The
applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the proposed
uses, lot sizes, height, use mix, location and relationship with other existing
and proposed uses are compatible and complementary both internally and with
adjacent uses, and meet the intent of the City as expressed in the GB District
purpose and the above criteria for allowable uses.
   Subd. 4   Uses Allowed by Conditional Use Permit. Service stations with
retail sales and services and with a car wash are allowed by Conditional Use
Permit. Such uses shall offer retail, gasoline, and car wash services and shall
not contain vehicle repair bays or offer vehicle repair services; minor
repairs; incidental body and fender work; minor painting and upholstering;
replacement parts and motor services to passenger automobiles and trucks not
exceeding one and one-half tons capacity; major general repair; rebuilding and
reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers collision service,
including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; or overall painting
or paint job.
   Subd. 5   Prohibited Uses. Some land uses are not compatible with the stated
purpose of the GB District. The following uses are therefore prohibited:
      A.   Single family or two family residences
      B.   Open sales, rental or storage lots, including but not limited to
cars, buses, trucks, motorcycles, bicycles, recreational vehicles, trailers,
boats, mobile homes, machinery, lumber, building materials, landscape
materials, and similar items.
      C.   Vehicular sales, lease rental or repair, including but not limited
to the items listed in (b) above.
      D.   Truck terminals, freight terminals and freight forwarding services.
      E.   Building supply stores and yards.
      F.   Outside storage.
      G.   Warehousing and wholesaling exceeding seventy-five (75) percent of
the building in which it is located.
      H.   Mini storage facilities.
      I.   Bulk storage buildings, yards and terminals, including but not
limited to, forest, metal, concrete, agricultural and petroleum products,
chemicals and similar products.
      J.   Manufacturing that requires outdoor storage of bulk, raw or finished
materials used in or resulting from the manufacturing process.
      K.   Manufacturing or processing that generates hazardous waste without a
valid Hazardous Waste Generator's license from the Ramsey County Public Health
Department.
      L.   Uses that the City may determine are incompatible with its
objectives or with development as it may occur, thereby imposing or
establishing new or unforeseen standards.
   Subd. 6   Development Standards.
      A.   Minimum project and lot size.
         1.   Except as otherwise specifically set forth in this Section, a
mixed-use project within a GB District shall contain a minimum of twenty (20)
acres. The proposed land uses in such a project and their mix, intensity and
relationship may require varying lot sizes within said project, none of which
lots shall be less than five (5) acres in size except as otherwise permitted
herein.
         2.   Lots of less than five (5) acres within a mixed use project may
be permitted only when the applicant has demonstrated satisfactorily that:
            a)   The lot will be the site of a use that will be compatible with
and will complement and enhance existing and planned businesses.
            b)   The primary business of the proposed complementary use will
serve business activities within the GB District.
         3.   Single use projects, excluding service stations with retail sales
and services and with a car wash, shall contain a minimum area of ten (10)
acres.
         4.   Interior lot lines within a mixed or single use project may be
located to allow individual ownership of specific buildings. To allow maximum
development creativity and flexibility, regulations such as side and rear yard
building and parking setbacks, F.A.R., number of parking spaces, percent of
landscape area, etc., may be modified for individual parcels and interior lot
lines. However, the regulations for these same items must be met for the total
mixed use or single use project area and exterior project lot lines.
            a)   Minimum Building Size. To accomplish a scale of development
consistent with the defined purpose of the GB District, the minimum ground
floor area of a building other than residential uses, and for service stations
with retail sales and services and with a car wash, shall be twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet, except as otherwise regulated herein.
            b)   Maximum Floor Area Ratios (F.A.R.). The total F.A.R. of a
Mixed-Use project shall not exceed 0.5. In order to achieve the open space
objectives of the GB District, mixed use projects shall conform with the
following relationships, F.A.R., building height, and landscape lot area.
 
Minimum Building Height In Maximum Project F.A.R. Minimum Landscape Lot Area
Stories
3                          0.5                    35%
2                          0.4                    35%
1                          0.3                    35%
 
   Proj. F.A.R. = F.A. Bldg. 1 + F.A. Bldg. Bldg. 2 + F.A. Bldg. n
               A
      Where: F.A.    = Total Floor Area in Square Feet
                n   = Total Number of Buildings
                A    = Project Area in Square Feet
      B.   Building Height and Setback. To accomplish the intensity and scale
of development consistent with the defined purpose of the GB District, multi
story buildings will be encouraged.
         1.   Building height will be regulated only as it affects the safety
of occupants, compatibility with other uses and buildings, and other City and
District requirements.
         2.   The use of stepped building heights is encouraged to provide
visual transition. This applies to both multi building complexes and single
buildings.
         3.   The location of buildings relative to their heights will consider
views and relationship from within the GB District and from public and private
areas off the site.
         4.   Minimum building setback requirements are fifty (50) feet from
all streets and exterior project property lines and twenty (20) from all
interior property lines, except that interior lot line setback requirements may
be modified by the city in the project review process if specific conditions of
the project plan justify modification.
      C.   Landscaping. Appropriate and unified landscaping is essential to
effectively meet the defined purpose of the GB District.
         1.   A landscape plan shall be submitted as required in Section
1325.05, Subd 1, of the Zoning Code.
         2.   Special landscape enhancement of views from I 694 and I 35W will
be required.
      D.   Building Exteriors. The appearance of buildings is the most
important component in land development. Accomplishing the stated purpose of
the GB District requires particular concern for building design.
         1.   The arrangement, geometry and massing of individual buildings
shall be responsive to the arrangement, geometry and massing of the whole of
the GB District.
         2.   Exterior building treatment (wall surfaces) shall be of brick,
stone, glass or any combination thereof, except trim and accessories may be
metal.
         3.   Materials and colors selected for any individual building shall
be compatible with other buildings in the GB District.
         4.   All service entrance areas, mechanical equipment and trash
handling devices shall be screened from adjacent building and off site
visibility.
         5.   A "campus" plan arrangement is hereby encouraged and a
"signature" building is considered desirable.
      E.   Parking. Parking requirements contained in Section
1325.06 shall apply. However, these requirements may be adjusted by the City in
the project review process if the changes will more effectively accomplish the
stated purpose of the GB District.
   Surface parking shall maintain a fifty (50) foot landscape setback from all
public streets and a twenty (20) foot landscaped area from exterior project
property lines, except for access drives that may cross the setback area. Since
the intent of this parking setback is to provide visual separation for large
scale developments service stations with retail sales and services and with a
car wash shall be exempt for this particular requirement and instead shall be
required to meet the general parking setback requirements (a twenty (20) foot
parking setback from any public street or right-of-way and a five (5) foot
parking setback from any side or rear property lines) as stated in Section
1325.06.
      F.   Traffic Impact Study. The City has determined that the traffic
capacity of the interchange at I 35W and State Highway 96 will impose
limitations on traffic generated within the GB District. In order to maintain
the functional capacity of the area road system, both internal and external
traffic and parking plans and traffic generation studies prepared by registered
traffic engineers will be required for all project within the GB District.
      G.   Signs. Signs will be regulated by the Arden Hills Sign Code subject
to any modifications or additions contained herein. To promote the purpose of
the GB District:
         1.   A sign plan shall be submitted in connection with the site plan
or PUD Master Plan that shows the location, type, size and design of the
individual signs.
         2.   Deviation from the standard regulations shall be allowed only
after the applicant demonstrates, and the City concurs, that the deviation is
essential to further the purpose of the GB District
         3.   Any billboard located in the GB District may be expanded,
altered, relocated or otherwise modified solely upon written approval of the
City, provided the expansion, alteration, relocation or modification is
authored by the City of Arden Hills in connection with a transaction which will
result in a net reduction in the number of billboards or in the aggregate sign
face area of the billboards, located within the GB District.
      H.   Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided for the safety and
convenience of occupants and visitors.
         1.   The source of illumination shall be hooded, concealed or
controlled in a manner so as not to be visible from adjoining lots, streets or
highways or residential areas east and south of Round Lake.
         2.   Accent lighting of buildings and sites may be permitted by the
City.
         3.   A lighting plan shall be submitted that shows location, type of
illumination and design.
      I.   Pedestrian Circulation. All development within the District shall
install pedestrian improvements in accordance with the NE I 694/I 35W Plan
approved by the City. Other pedestrian sidewalks and trails may be required by
the City.
      J.   Drainage, Wetlands and Flood Plain. A water management plan must be
submitted for each project in the GB District. The plan must be approved by the
Rice Creek Watershed District, other agencies as required and by the City
Engineer.
         1.   On site ponding is encouraged as a visual and functional amenity.
         2.   Two or more projects may coordinate their water management plans
for their mutual benefit.
      K.   Utility Lines. Provision for underground utility lines shall be
required in all development within the GB District.
1320.14   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District.
   Subd. 1   General Purpose. The Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
promotes the development of land in a unified manner by treating the entire
development as a single entity and relaxing the strict application of standard
zoning and subdivision requirements, in exchange for a project that better
forwards the goals and purpose of the City's Comprehensive Plan. The purpose of
the PUD process is to achieve a higher quality, better project than would
otherwise be possible if the strict application of the zoning and subdivision
requirements were met. While PUD's may be allowed in any district, they are
required for some types of development in certain districts.
   Subd. 2   Applicability. The PUD District is an overlay zoning technique,
whereby the basic underlying zoning district establishes the basic allowable
uses and the general standards for development and the approved PUD plan
establishes the specific regulations for development and shall govern and take
precedence over the underlying Zoning District regulations. If a zoning change
is required to accommodate the uses or general intensity of development in the
PUD, an application for a Zoning District change shall be made concurrently
with the PUD application and, if approved, the Zoning Map shall be changed both
as to the underlying zoning district and designation as a PUD district.
   Subd. 3   General Procedure.
      A.   Applicant shall meet with City Staff to clarify and determine PUD
requirements and discuss applicant's development concept.
      B.   Applicant shall submit PUD Concept Plan to the City (Optional).
      C.   Applicant is encouraged to have community meetings where appropriate
(Optional).
      D.   Applicant shall submit PUD Master Plan to City.
      E.   Planning Commission conducts public hearing(s) on the PUD Master
Plan and make a recommendation to the City Council.
      F.   City Council may conduct additional hearings and take action on the
PUD Master Plan.
      G.   The PUD Master Plan, as approved, including all applicable
documents, is adopted as the governing development plan for the PUD property.
      H.   Applicant submits Final PUD Plan for elements that are to be
developed imminently. A Final PUD Plan will be submitted for each stage of
development and construction.
      I.   Planning Commission reviews Final PUD Plan and recommends action to
the City Council.
      J.   City Council reviews and takes action on the Final PUD Plan.
      K.   Applicant applies for all necessary permits to begin construction.
   Subd. 4   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Concept Plan Review (Optional).
      A.   Purpose. A PUD Concept Plan Review is an informal discussion process
that allows the applicant to present preliminary ideas about a contemplated
development project, and, in turn, the City may offer suggestions and concerns
regarding the concept.
      B.   Application, Documentation and Administrative Procedure. The
applicant shall complete and submit to the zoning administrator an application
on forms provided by the administrator, together with the required fee and
escrow.
      C.   City Procedure. The City will prepare a summary of the proposed
Concept Plan in terms of City plans and regulations and transmit this
information and the information submitted by the applicant to the Planning
Commission and City Council to assist their review of the proposal. Applicants
are encouraged to have informal consultations with City Staff prior to the
filing of an application for Concept Plan Review, provided no statement or
representation made by said staff shall be binding upon the City of Arden
Hills.
      D.   Procedure for City Review. The Planning Commission will offer
comments and suggestions regarding the Concept Plan to the applicant. These
comments and suggestions will be transmitted to the City Council. The City
Council will offer comments and suggestions regarding the Concept Plan to the
applicant. A public hearing is not required for this stage, and the City will
take no formal action at this stage. No suggestions made by the Planning
Commission or Council on the proposed Concept Plan are binding on the City for
subsequent stages.
   Subd. 5   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Master Plan.
      A.   Procedure. The first step in the PUD review process is the submittal
and approval of a PUD Master Plan. Upon approval, the applicant proceeds to the
PUD Final Plan for each stage of development, or may apply for both the Master
Plan and Final Plan concurrently.
      B.   Application and Documentation. The applicant shall complete and
submit to the City a PUD Master Plan application on forms provided by the
zoning administrator, together with the required fee and escrow. The applicant
shall submit documentation as required in Appendix A, Procedure Manual, and
Paragraph G of this Section below.
      C.   Procedure for Council Action. The procedure for Council action in
Chapter
1355.04 Subd 6 shall apply.
      D.   Other Requirements Applicable to a PUD Master Plan Approval. In
making its decision as to whether to approve the applicant's PUD Master Plan
the City Council shall be guided by the provisions of Section
1355.04 Subd 3.B. Council action on the PUD shall follow the provision of
Section
1355.05.
      E.   Documentation for Larger Complex Areas. Additional documentation
required for a Master Plan for larger complex areas (development tracts five
(5) or more acres in size or of such complexity that more detailed and complete
plans are warranted):
         1.   Land Use and Design Component. A land use component shall consist
of a map or maps setting forth the distribution, location and extent of the
area of land devoted to each category of land use existing and proposed as part
of the Master Plan, including, but not limited to, the existing and proposed
coverage of area by buildings, streets, trees and landscaping, and parking.
Said map or maps shall encompass not only that portion of the development tract
located within the City but also any portion thereof located in an adjacent
municipality. Said component shall also contain a descriptive statement of
objective, principles and standards used in its formulations. The land use and
design component shall also contain a descriptive statement of the standards of
population density and building intensity for the various proposed land uses,
including estimates for future population characteristics and change within the
planned community correlated with the other components of the Master Plan. The
supporting data shall include, but not be limited to, dwelling (housing) units
per acre for the various residential uses proposed; and square footage by type
for the various nonresidential facilities, including sufficient data to
calculate traffic generation, parking requirements, water consumption, sewage
needs and the necessary capacity of related utilities and services
traditionally rendered by public and private organizations for a population of
such size as is projected for the completed, planned development.
         2.   Transportation and Parking Component. The transportation and
parking component shall consist of a map or maps setting forth the general
location and extent of all traffic circulation, pedestrian and bicycle
circulation, and parking facilities, existing and proposed, as part of the
Master Plan of the entire development tract, including any portion thereof
located in an adjacent municipality. In addition, it shall include, among other
things, documentation, data or expert testimony in sufficient detail to show
the impact of traffic expected to be generated by the proposed development over
the course of its growth and expansion upon the current and projected traffic
in surrounding streets; to demonstrate the adequacy of parking facilities in
light of existing and projected population of the development; and to show the
adequacy of streets providing access to and from proposed and existing parking
facilities. The City may require a traffic study. Said component shall also
contain a descriptive statement of objectives, principles and standards for its
formulation.
         3.   Utilities and Grading Component. A utilities and grading
component shall contain a map(s) setting forth the general location and extent
of any and all existing and proposed systems for sewage, domestic water supply
and distribution, refuse disposal, drainage, local utilities and rights-of-way,
easements, facilities and appurtenances necessary therefore. In addition, it
shall include a grading plan showing in sufficient detail the amount and type
of fill or excavation to be used to accomplish the grading of the development
tract, or portion thereof, the contours of the areas to be graded, and
provisions made for storm water drainage so that the City can assess the impact
of such grading upon the remainder of the development tract and the surrounding
neighborhoods. Said component shall also contain a descriptive statement
setting forth objectives, principles and standards used for its formulation, as
well as a detailed statement describing the proposed ownership, method of
operation and maintenance of each such service and facility.
         4.   Contractual Component. The City shall prepare the necessary
development agreement or contracts for the PUD Master Plan. The applicant shall
submit agreements or contracts affecting the owner or owners of individual
units or of the entire project proposed under the PUD Master Plan, such as
homeowners' agreements, business improvement areas, and covenants.
         5.   Construction Staging Component. A construction staging plan shall
include a map or maps setting forth the proposed chronological order of
construction relating each proposed use and structure to the construction of
the various services and facilities as specified in the master plan. The
staging plan shall include estimated completion dates and shall specify the
proposed order of request for utility release or authority to occupy completed
structures so as to provide a basis for determining the adequacy of the related
services and facilities for each separate construction stage.
         6.   Subdivision Component. In the event the development tract is to
be subdivided, the developer shall submit a subdivision plan. A subdivision
plan shall contain a descriptive statement of the principles governing the
proposed subdivision of land, including lot design for various proposed land
uses. A subdivision request shall include all of the documentation necessary
for preliminary plat approval as found in the Subdivision Ordinance of the City
of Arden Hills. This component shall be in sufficient detail so that it can
serve as the basis for determining the conformity of any PUD Final Plan to the
PUD Master Plan.
         7.   Additional Components. The Master Plan may include as additional
components, a recreation component; a public building component, providing for
consideration of administrative and public safety quarters; and such other
components indicated by the nature of the particular proposed development.
   Subd. 6   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Final Plan.
      A.   Purpose. The purpose of the PUD Final Plan is to implement and
ensure conformity with the PUD Master Plan. Each stage of the PUD Master Plan
shall require a PUD Final Plan before development.
      B.   Procedures. The applicant for a PUD Final Plan approval of a
specific stage of the PUD Master Plan shall complete and submit to the zoning
administrator an application on forms provided by the administrator, including
all application fees and escrows. Other applications such as preliminary plat,
final plat, and conditional use permit may also be required. The applicant
shall provide the following:
         1.   A written statement describing the proposed development in the
PUD Final Plan application.
         2.   The proposed starting and completion dates for the construction.
         3.   The applicant shall submit documentation demonstrating that the
PUD Final Plan is in conformance with the PUD Master Plan.
      C.   Development Agreement and Bonding.
         1.    A development agreement and corporate surety may be required at
the time of PUD Final Plan approval by the City Council to assure that all
improvements to be constructed as part of the approved PUD Final Plan are
completed in accordance with the terms and conditions of such plan, or each
stage thereof as outlined in the construction staging component. The bond shall
guarantee in a penal sum equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the
cost of such improvements as estimated by the City. The development agreement
and bond shall be filed with the administrator no later than sixty (60) days
after PUD Final Plan approval.
         2.    The development agreement may provide for several bonds covering
separate aspects of the PUD, the aggregate of which shall total one hundred
twenty-five (125) percent of all the improvements to be constructed and
completed by the applicant pursuant to the approved PUD Final Plan. In this
case, each bond required by the development agreement shall be filed no later
than sixty (60) days after PUD Final Plan approval. It may also require
guarantee bonds in the penal sum of one hundred (100) percent of the cost of
completed improvements, as estimated by the City Engineer to guarantee such
improvements for whatever lengths of time are specified therein. The release of
any bond or any portion thereof shall either be governed by the terms and
provisions of the development agreement or shall be based upon the
recommendation of the City Engineer or City Planner and approval by the City
Council.
         3.    If the applicant fails to enter into a development agreement and
to file the corporate surety bond with the administrator by the expiration of
the sixty day period, the PUD Permit, Final Plat (if any) and approved PUD
Final Plan shall be deemed void, nullified and revoked unless an extension is
requested in writing by the applicant and for good cause granted by the City
Council.
      D.   Park and Open Space Dedications and Covenants.
         1.   To ensure that any park, open space, recreational areas, common
areas and the like that are proposed to be owned and maintained by a
homeowners' association, business improvement district, or other similar
association are properly maintained for their approved uses, the City Council
may require that the applicant execute and grant to the City easements and
covenants over such areas within sixty (60) days after the City Council has
made such requirements.
         2.    If the applicant fails to execute the open space easements and
covenants and to file the same with the administrator by the expiration of the
sixty (60) day period, the PUD Permit, Final Plat, if any and Final Plan shall
be deemed to be void, nullified and revoked unless an extension has been
required in writing by the permittee and for good cause granted by the City
Council.
1320.145   Special Requirements for the Parks and Open Space District.
(added 11/25/13)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. The application and the administrative and review
procedure established in Section 1355.04, Subd. 3, Conditional Use Permits,
shall be followed for all development that requires a Conditional Use Permit.
This provision is subject to any modifications or additions set forth in this
Section.
   Subd. 2   Conditional Uses. In addition to the evaluation criteria
established in Section 1355.04, Subd. 3, applications for conditional uses
within the POS District will be evaluated by the City Council based on the
following consideration:
      A.   The compatibility of the proposed use with the natural features and
recreational amenities of the Parks and Open Space District area.
   Subd. 3   Development Standards. If the City determines in its review of
site and building plans for developments within the District that the
protection of natural features requires certain performance standards, the City
may require additional development standards to protect those features.
1320.15   Special Requirements for the Conservation District.
(added 11/25/13; revised 04/10/2023)
   Subd. 1   Procedure. The application and the administrative and review
procedure established in Section
1355.04, Subd. 3, Conditional Use Permits, shall be followed for all
development that requires a Conditional Use Permit.
   Subd. 2   Permitted Uses. Permitted uses are allowed as specified on the
Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05. The following uses are also permitted:
      A.   Any facility, building, or structure controlled by either the
Minnesota National Guard or Army Reserve located on the Arden Hills Army
Training Site.
      B.   Any use or activity carried out by either the Minnesota National
Guard or the Army Reserve on the Arden Hills Army Training Site.
   Subd. 3   Conditional Uses. Conditional Uses are allowed as specified in the
Land Use Chart, Section
1320.05, for the CD District. However, this Code specifies additional
requirements for a solar energy system.
      A.   Solar Energy Systems shall be evaluated as part of the Conditional
Use Permit review for development consistent with the District Requirements as
outlined in Section
1320.03 and the City Council through the CUP may allow flexibility to design
standards including but not limited to setbacks, lot coverage, height, access,
size, screening, and fencing based upon site suitability and abutting
properties and area.
Section 1325 - General Regulations
1325.01   Accessory Structures.
(revised 1/31/11)
   Subd. 1   Time of Construction. No accessory structure shall be constructed
on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal structure to
which it is accessory.
   Subd. 2   Height.
      A.   R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts. Accessory structures in the R-1, R-2,
and R-3 Districts shall not exceed fifteen feet in height or the height of the
principal structure to which it is accessory, whichever is lower.
      B.   All Other Districts. Accessory structures in all other Zoning
Districts shall not exceed the height of the principal structure to which it is
accessory.
   Subd. 3   Location. (revised 7/7/11)
      A.   Accessory structures in the R-1, R-2, or R-3 Districts shall not be
located nearer the front lot line than the front yard setback line for the
principal structure to which it is accessory. Accessory structures as permitted
and regulated in this Code may be located within the rear yard of the principal
structure in the R-1 and R-2 Districts.
      B.   Detached accessory garages may be located in the front yard (between
dwelling and street) of a lakeshore property provided all of the following are
met:
         1.    Detached garages shall not be located within the minimum front
yard setback.
         2.    Color and roof material of detached garages shall match or
complement the existing primary residential structure, and shall conform to all
other requirements for the zoning district.
   Subd. 4   Size. (revised 2/9/11)
      A.   R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts.
         1.    Accessory structures associated with residential uses shall not
exceed seven hundred and twenty-eight (728) square feet in floor area.
Accessory structures associated with non-residential uses shall not exceed two
thousand one hundred eighty-four (2,184) square feet in floor area; and,
         2.    The total floor area of accessory structures located in the rear
of a principal structure, the total floor area of all such accessory structures
shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum required rear yard
area for the principal structure; and,
         3.    No more than two (2) accessory structures shall be permitted on
a lot primarily used for residential uses.
      B.   All Districts. Accessory structures in all zoning districts shall
not cause the property to exceed any of the regulations of the underlying
Zoning District in
Section 1320.
   Subd. 5   Permanent Accessory Structures.
      A.   Site Plan Review. Permanent accessory structures in any district,
except residential uses in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Zoning Districts, and on
through lots in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Zoning District, shall be subject to Site
Plan Review and Council approval.
      B.   Exterior Finish. The exterior finish of accessory structures shall
be compatible in appearance and material used with the principal structure
served by the accessory structure except as provided for in Chapter 1325.01
Subd 5.C of this code.
      C.   Membrane Structures. Membrane Structures (as that term is defined in
the International Building Code) may be permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, N-
B, I-1, I-2, and I-Flex Districts subject to Site Plan Review and City Council
approval.
   Subd. 6   Temporary Accessory Structures. A temporary accessory structure,
including membrane structures (as that term is defined in the International
Building Code), may be permitted subject to the following provisions:
      A.   Temporary accessory structures may be in place for up to six (6)
months in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, NB, GB, CC, I-1, I-2, and I-Flex Districts
with an approved permit from the Building Official. The Building Official may
deny a permit for a temporary accessory structure or limit the size, time,
place, or other feature(s) of the accessory structure if the Building Official
finds that the accessory structure would create a negative impact on the
property on which it is placed or other properties in the City.
      B.   Temporary accessory structures are allowed for up to two (2) days in
a given thirty (30) day period without a permit in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, B-1,
B-2, B-3, B-4, NB, GB, CC, I-1, I-2, and I-Flex Districts subject to all of the
following provisions:
         1.   The temporary structures shall not be permanently attached to the
ground;
         2.   The temporary structure shall not be attached to other permanent
structures.
         3.   The temporary structure shall only be used for non-commercial
purposes.
   Subd. 7   Accessory Structures in Exceptional and Unusual Circumstances in
all Zoning Districts (revised 2/9/11). Deviations from these requirements may
be permitted after Planning Commission review and City Council approval of a
site plan in accordance with Section
1355.04 Subd 5 and with documentation showing the unusual circumstances
justifying the proposed deviation and plans for the proposed accessory
structure. Under no circumstances shall the total floor area of an accessory
structure associated with a residential use in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts
exceed one thousand four hundred and fifty-eight (1,458) square feet without an
approved variance that meets the requirements of Section
1355.04 Subd 4. Under no circumstances shall the total floor area of an
accessory structure associated with a non-residential us in the R-1, R-2, and
R-3 districts exceed two thousand one hundred eighty-four (2,184) square feet
without an approved variance that meets the requirements of Section
1355.04 Subd. 4.
   Subd. 8.   Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings. Pursuant to authority
granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City opts-
out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates
Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings. (added 8/8/16)
1325.02   Accessory Uses.
   Subd. 1   Accessory Retail Sales, Processing, and Storage. Accessory retail
sales shall be permitted in industrial districts, and accessory processing,
assembly, repair, and storage of materials shall be permitted in business
districts when such uses are directly associated with the principal use, and
when such accessory uses are clearly incidental.
   Subd. 2   Day Care Facilities for Houses of Worship and Schools. Day care
facilities for over ten (10) persons shall be considered as accessory uses for
houses of worship and schools within all residential districts if located in
the principal building.
   Subd. 3   Home Occupations. Home occupations are allowed as either accessory
uses or conditional uses depending on the characteristics of the operation.
      A.   All home occupations shall comply with the following conditions:
         1.    It shall not result in traffic, parking, noise, light, fumes and
odors to such an extent that it is noticeable that the property is being used
for non-residential purposes.
         2.    It shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling.
         3.    There is no exterior evidence of the home occupation.
         4.    It does not require any special entrances to the dwelling.
      B.   Class I Accessory Home Occupations.
         1.    Home Occupations will be permitted as accessory uses if they
meet the conditions stipulated in the home occupation definition and following
conditions:
            a)   The business is engaged only by the occupants of the premis-
es;
            b)   The business activity does not occupy more than twenty-five
(25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling;
            c)   There will be no patrons visiting the premises;
            d)   It requires no delivery of products other than those delivered
by private passenger vehicle.
         2.    Applicants for Class I Accessory Home Occupations shall be
required to obtain an Accessory Home Occupation Permit from the City prior to
engaging the activity. Review by the Planning Commission and City Council is
not required. Application forms as prescribed by the Administrator shall be
accompanied by the following information:
            a)   A photograph of the residence;
            b)   A floor plan indicating the floor area to be used by the home
occupation along with a tabulation of the total floor area and the floor area
to be used for the home occupation;
            c)   A statement describing the home occupation and the compliance
with the required conditions; and,
            d)   A copy of the state or county license or permit if such a
license or permit is required by the state or county for the proposed home
occupation.
      C.   Class II Conditional Accessory Home Occupations.
         1.    Home occupations may be allowed by Conditional Use Permit as
regulated in Section
1355.04 Subd 3 if they meet the conditions stipulated above for all Home
Occupations and the following conditions:
            a)   The primary business activity shall be conducted by an
occupant of the residence;
            b)   One person not residing in the residence may be employed to
assist in the business activity;
            c)   It does not occupy more than thirty-three (33) percent of the
floor area of the dwelling;
            d)   It has a limited number of patrons visiting the premises;
            e)   Off-street parking for no more than two (2) additional
vehicles other than those required by the occupants shall be permitted. On-
street parking shall not be used to satisfy required parking; and,
            f)   It requires delivery of products to the premises no more than
once per day.
         2.    Applicants for Class II Conditional Accessory Home Occupations
shall follow the procedures prescribed in the Conditional Use Permit section of
Appendix A, Procedure Manual. The application shall be accompanied by the
information required for Class I Home Occupations in Section
1325.02 above and a site plan showing any additional parking or other
modifications to the site required to accommodate the home occupation. A copy
of any required State or County license or permit as discussed in Class I Home
Occupations shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit, however, evidence that the proposed Home Occupation meets all the
requirements for State or County licenses or permits shall be submitted with
the Conditional Use Permit application.
         3.    In reviewing applications for Class II Conditional Accessory Use
Permits for Home Occupations the City shall consider criteria which affect the
appropriateness of a particular use in the location proposed, as discussed in
Section
1355.04 Subd 3 and Appendix A, Procedural Manual.
   Subd. 4    Accessory Outdoor Display and Sales.
      A.   Outdoor display and sales shall only be permitted as an accessory
use on a property where the principal use is either Retail Sales and Services
or Service Station.
      B.   Outdoor display and sales shall only be permitted in the following
Zoning Districts: B-2, B-3, B-4, NB, and GB.
      C.   An Administrative Permit shall be required from the Community
Development Department to allow outdoor display and sales of goods. The
Community Development Department shall review a site plan and specifics of the
proposed outdoor display and sales area and may issue the permit, subject to,
but not limited to, the following requirements:
         1.    The total display and sales area shall be determined based on
the following formula:
            a.    For properties with a principal building of 15,000 square
feet or less in size, the permitted display and sales area shall be a maximum
of 300 square feet.
            b.    For properties with a principal building greater than 15,000
square feet in size, the permitted display and sales area shall be two percent
of the base area of the principal building, but not to exceed 1,000 square
feet.
         2.    Merchandise shall be stacked and/or arranged neatly on a hard
surface and may be up to six feet in height.
         3.    The display and sales area shall be located adjacent to the
principal building and on the side of the principal building with the main
entrance. No merchandise shall be permitted to be displayed on Service Station
islands.
         4.    The display and sales area shall not obstruct pedestrian access
on the site, whether from parking areas to the building entrance or from the
public street to the building entrance.
         5.    The display and sales area shall not occupy or obstruct on-site
parking spaces.
         6.    The type of merchandise displayed shall be limited to items
which require an outdoor location, such as plants or fuel, and any items which
because of large volume or weight are housed outdoors, such as vending
machines, salt, or landscaping materials.
         7.    Outdoor display and sales areas shall be screened when located
within 200 feet of a residentially zoned property. (added 3/28/16)
   Subd. 5   Accessory Commercial Recreation - Outdoor.
      A.   Commercial Recreation - Outdoor shall only be permitted in the B-
2 General Business District.
      B.   An Administrative Permit shall be required from the Community
Development Department to allow outdoor recreational activities. The Community
Development Department shall review a site plan and specifics of the proposed
outdoor recreation area and may issue the permit, subject to, but not limited
to, the following requirements:
         1.   The Subject Property shall not be located immediately adjacent to
a residentially zoned property.
         2.   All commercial recreation - outdoor related activity must cease
by 10 PM on weekdays and weekends.
         3.   The location of the outdoor commercial recreation area needs to
be contiguous to the principal building and shall be a contained space with a
defined perimeter of either decorative fencing, retaining walls, and/or
plantings.
         4.   The permitted commercial recreation - outdoor area shall not
exceed 1,500 square feet. (added 4/24/2023)
   Subd. 6   Lower-Potency Hemp Edible Sales.
      A.   Lower-Potency Hemp Edible Sales shall be a Conditional Accessory use
only permitted in the B-2 General Business, B-3 Service Business, B-4 Retail
Business, NB Neighborhood Business and GB Gateway Business Zoning Districts
where the principal use is Retail Sales & Service, Restaurant, or Service
Station, the business has a liquor or tobacco license issued by the City, and
when such accessory use is clearly incidental to the principal use..
      B.   Applicants for Conditional Accessory Lower-Potency Hemp Edible Sales
shall follow the conditional use permit procedures prescribed in Section
1355.04, subd. 3, and Appendix A, Procedure Manual. The City shall review a
site plan and specifics of the proposed lower-potency hemp edibles business.
(added 8/28/2023)
   Subd. 7   Solar Energy Systems
      A.   Solar energy systems are an accessory use in the R-1, R-2, and R-
3 Zoning Districts subject to the following requirements:
         1.   Height. Solar energy systems must meet the following height
requirements:
            a.   Roof- mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the
maximum allowed building height in any zoning district.
            b.   Ground- or pole-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed
15 feet in height or the height of the principal structure to which it is
accessory, whichever is lower, when oriented at maximum tilt.
         2.   Setback. Solar energy systems must meet the accessory structure
setback for the zoning district in which the system is located.
            a.   Roof-mounted systems: Consistent with the required building
setback, the collector surface and mounting devices for roof-mounted solar
systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the building on which
the system is mounted or built. Exterior piping for solar hot water systems
shall be allowed to extend beyond the perimeter of the building on a side yard
exposure.
            b.   Ground- or pole-mounted solar energy systems are permitted in
rear and side yards and may not extend into the required rear or side yard
accessory structure setback when oriented at minimum design tilt.
         3.   Visibility.
            a.   Solar energy systems with mounting devices.
               i.   Roof-mounted systems on pitched roofs shall not have a
highest finished pitch steeper than the roof pitch on which the system is
mounted, and shall be no higher than 12 inches above the roof.
               ii.   Roof-mounted systems on flat roofs shall be no higher than
five feet above the finished roof.
            b.   Solar energy systems using a reflector to enhance solar
production shall be prohibited.
         4.   Coverage. Solar energy systems are subject to lot coverage and
impervious surface requirements of the underlying zoning district.
            a.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be subject to the
Building Code to ensure the system meets the wind load standards for the roof
and to ensure ready roof access in the event of a fire or other safety
occurrence whereby roof access is needed.
            b.   The surface area of ground- or pole- mounted systems shall be
factored as part of the maximum lot coverage by structure and shall not exceed
the regulations of the underlying zoning district.
            c.   The surface area of ground- or pole- mounted systems shall be
treated as impervious coverage as regulated for each zoning district. If the
soil under the panel array(s) contains vegetative ground cover, the Zoning
Administrator may consider allowing additional impervious coverage. Allowed
impervious coverage may be increased by up to ten percent above maximum lot
coverage for the zoning district provided 100 percent of the excess is
accounted for by an approved ground- or pole-mounted solar energy system.
            d.   Ground- or pole-mounted systems shall be counted as an
accessory structure.
         5.   Plan Approvals. All solar energy systems shall require the
issuance of a building permit.
            a.   Applications that meet the requirements of this policy shall
be granted zoning approval by the Zoning Administrator. Plan approval by the
Zoning Department does not indicate compliance with Building Code or Electric
Code.
            b.   A building permit application for a solar energy system shall
be accompanied by scaled horizontal and vertical elevation drawings. The
drawings must show the location of the system on the building, or on the
property for a ground- or pole-mounted system, including the property lines.
               1.   For all roof-mounted systems other than a flat roof the
elevation drawings shall show the highest finished slope of the solar collector
and the slope of the finished roof surface on which it is mounted.
               2.   For flat-roof applications a drawing shall be submitted
showing the distance to the roof edge and any parapets on the building and
shall identify the height of the building on the street frontage side, the
shortest distance of the system from the street frontage edge of the building,
and the highest finished height of the solar collector above the finished
surface of the roof.
            c.   All solar energy systems shall meet approval of local building
code officials, consistent with the State of Minnesota Building Code, and solar
thermal systems shall comply with HVAC-related requirements of the Energy Code.
            d.   All solar energy systems shall comply with the Minnesota State
Electric Code. (added 2/12/24)
1325.03   Exceptions to the Minimum Requirements for All Districts.
   Subd. 1   Setbacks.
      A.   Front Setbacks. Where existing principal buildings have a greater
setback than the minimum setback required herein, the front setback of a new
principal structure shall not be less than the prevailing setback in the
immediate vicinity. The administrator shall determine the necessary minimum
front setback in such cases. However, in no case shall a residential building
be required to set back more than sixty (60) feet.
      B.   Side and Rear Setbacks. Buildings may be exempted from side and rear
setback requirements provided party walls are used and if the adjacent
buildings are constructed as an integral unit, or if residential buildings are
to be constructed utilizing the "zero lot line" concept. Townhouse, shopping
center, cluster developments and components of institutional facilities are
examples of where this provision would apply.
      C.   Through Lots. The administrator may determine that one of the front
yards may be deemed a rear yard and shall determine appropriate rear yard
setback regulations. Factors to be considered shall include topography,
location of structures on the lot, location of structures on adjacent lots, and
the type of streets or thoroughfares abutting the lot.
      D.   Lakeshore Setbacks. Minimum lakeshore setbacks are established by
the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (MNDNR) for all development
abutting lakes. No building shall be located within the minimum lakeshore
setbacks as set in Section
1330.03.
   Subd. 2   Permitted Encroachments.
      A.   Parts of the Principal Structure. In all zoning districts except R-
2 and R-3, features which are part of a principal structure, including but not
limited to eaves, cantilevered areas, cornices, canopies, awnings, balconies,
fire escapes and chimneys, may extend three (3) feet into the required front,
side, and rear setbacks but in no case shall these encroachments be less than
six (6) feet from any lot line. Decks, uncovered porches, ramps, and steps may
extend six (6) feet into the required front, side, and rear setbacks but in no
case shall these encroachments be less than six (6) feet from any lot line. In
R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, the encroachments listed in this Part A shall not
be less than three (3) feet away from any lot line. Required steps per the
International Codes shall be permitted encroachments in all districts. (adopted
12/20/07)
      B.   Equipment Attached to the Ground or Other Structure. Recreational
equipment, gym sets, picnic tables, patios, barbecue grills, and clotheslines
which are more or less permanently attached to the ground or are attached to
some other structure having a location on the ground may be located in side or
rear yards provided these are not less than two (2) feet from any lot line.
      C.   Intersection Visibility. On a corner lot, nothing shall be placed in
the clear vision area, and nothing shall be allowed to grow in such a manner as
to materially impede vision now or in the future between a height of two and
one-half (2-1/2) and ten (10) feet in the clear vision area. (revised 3/18/09)
      D.   Single and Two-Family Nonconforming Dwellings. For already developed
lots on which a principal structure exists, but is nonconforming for reasons of
setbacks or lot dimension, the principal structure may be expanded provided
that all of the following provisions are met (revised 2/23/12):
         1.    The proposed addition extends no closer to a property line than
the pre-existing nonconforming structure;
         2.    If the addition expands the footprint of the structure, then the
proposed addition extends no closer than thirty (30) feet from the front
property line or five feet from a side property line;
         3.    The exterior materials of the proposed addition are consistent
or complementary in color, texture and quality with those visible on the
existing structure;
         4.    The roof of the proposed addition is integrated into, and
consistent with, the existing roof of the structure;
         5.    The addition does not adversely affect drainage on the lot or
neighboring properties;
         6.    The addition does not extend within a drainage and utility
easement, and meets all requirements of the Building and Fire Code;
         7.    The addition does not expand the nonconforming height of a
structure;
         8.    The addition does not further increase nonconforming lot
coverage;
         9.    The addition does not create any new nonconforming conditions.
      E.   Covered Porches for Single-Family Detached Dwellings.
         1.   For already developed lots on which a principal structure existed
prior to May 1, 2006, the Covered Porch shall not be closer to the front lot
line and side yard corner as determined by the following provisions:
         a)   The Covered Porch shall be set back from the front lot line and
side yard corner at least the number of feet calculated by the following
formula:
            Current principal structure setback in feet multiplied by .75 =
Covered Porch setback from the front lot line and side yard corner in feet
            (For example, if the principal structure is thirty-two (32) feet
from the front lot line, then:
            32 feet * .75 = 24 foot setback from the front lot line and side
yard corner for the Covered Porch. In this case, the Covered Porch may extend
up to eight (8) feet from the principal structure into the front setback)
   For this subsection, the principal structure setback is defined as: The
setback from the front lot line to the front of the principal structure, not
including overhangs, awnings, eaves, garages, stoops, sidewalks, bay windows,
cantilevered areas, accessory structures, attached garages encroaching on the
front setback, existing porches, or other extensions or projections not deemed
part of the principal structure.
            b)   A Covered Porch on a principal structure that is set back
fifty (50) feet or more from the front lot line shall be set back at least
forty (40) foot front lot line.
            c)   No Covered Porch shall be constructed closer than twenty (20)
feet to the front lot line without review and approval through the variance
process.
            d)   Required steps per the International Building Code shall be
excluded when calculating the dimensions of the Covered Porch.
         2.   For vacant lots where a principal structure is constructed after
May 1, 2006, the Covered Porch shall not be closer than thirty (30) feet to the
front lot line or the side yard corner.
         3.   For already developed lots on which a new principal structure is
developed after May 1, 2006, and the new principal structure exceeds the
footprint of the original structure, the Covered Porch shall not be closer than
thirty (30) feet to the front lot line or side yard corner.
         4.   For already developed lots on which a new principal structure is
developed after May 1, 2006, and the new principal structure does not exceed
the footprint of the original structure, the Covered Porch may be set back from
the front lot line and side yard corner a distance as calculated in Section
1325.03 Subd. 2.D.1.a.
         5.   Building Permits shall be required before the construction of a
Covered Porch. The Community Development Director or Development Director's
designee must make the following findings prior to the approval of a building
permit for a Covered Porch:
            a)   The Covered Porch shall comply with the front and side yard
corner setbacks determined by Section
1325.03 Subd 2.D.1.a-d.
            b)   The Covered Porch shall comply with all other aspects of the
underlying zone, including the side yard interior setbacks and impervious
coverage limits.
            c)   The design of the Covered Porch shall comply with the Covered
Front Porch Design Guidelines in the Zoning Ordinance Procedure Manual.
            d)   The exterior materials of the proposed Covered Porch shall be
consistent or complementary in color, texture, and quality with those visible
at the front of the principal structure;
            e)   The roof of the proposed Covered Porch shall be properly
proportioned to and integrated with the roof of the principal structure and
have no less than a 3/12 slope;
            f)   The base of the Covered Porch shall not be open; the base
shall be either a masonry perimeter foundation (note: frost footings will be
required for a building permit), or be screened by a solid fascia consistent
with the front of the principal structure or lattice with openings no larger
than two (2) inches by two (2) inches and painted to be consistent with the
front of the principal structure.
            g)   At least sixty-five (65) percent of the exposed Covered Porch
façade (excluding the foundation) shall be open or occupied by screens and/or
screen doors; and the façade constitutes the area from the floor level of the
Covered Porch to the Covered Porch ceiling; up to thirty-five (35) percent of
the façade may be solid and may only be occupied by columns, spindles, and
railings; solid walls and glass (even partial) are prohibited.
            h)   A Covered Porch within the forty foot front yard setback shall
not be converted to a four season porch.
   Subd. 3   Height.
      A.   Exceptions. Height limitations shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas and domes; chimneys and smokestacks; public monuments and
flagpoles; public and private utility facilities; electronic transmission
towers; roof-mounted television and radio antennae and parapet walls extending
not more than four (4) feet above the maximum permitted height of the building,
except as hereinafter provided.
      B.   Roof-mounted Mechanical Equipment. Such equipment, whether screened
or completely enclosed, shall be excepted from the height limitations if the
enclosure (or enclosures) does not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the
roof area and does not extend more than twelve (12) feet above the roof upon
which it is located.
1325.04   Additional Minimum Requirements for Drive-In Businesses, Drive-up
Windows, Fast Food Restaurants and Automobile Service Stations.
(revised 6/27/22)
   Because drive-in businesses, drive-up windows, fast food restaurants and
automobile service stations present certain unusual problems, they are hereby
required to meet the following requirements in addition to the general
requirements applicable to them in the zoning district in which they are to be
located, unless otherwise regulated in this Code:
   Subd. 1   Location.
      A.   Proximity to Schools, Churches, Public Recreational Areas and
Residential Lots. No drive-in business, drive-up window, or fast food
restaurant shall be located on a site that is within four hundred (400) feet of
a public, private or parochial school, a church, a public recreation area, or
any residentially zoned property.
      B.   Proximity to Other Establishments. In any Business Zoning District,
no drive-in business, drive-up window, or fast food restaurant shall be located
on a site that the proximity of the boundaries of another one is determined by
the City Council through the PUD process to be incompatible with the area in
which it the proposed use is to be located. A drive-in business, drive-up
window, fast food restaurant, and automobile service station may be limited in
proximity as deemed appropriate by the City Council so as not to unreasonably
interfere with adjacent and nearby uses.
      C.   Unreasonable Traffic Volume. No drive-in business, drive-up window,
or fast food restaurant shall be located on a site if the probable result of
such location would be to unreasonably increase traffic volume on nearby
streets.
      D.   Size of Lot. No drive-in business, drive-up window, or fast food
restaurant shall be located on a lot of less than twenty-four thousand (24,000)
square feet.
   Subd. 2   Site Development Standards
      A.   Landscaping. A lot to be used for drive-in business, drive-up
window, fast food restaurant or automobile service station purposes shall be
landscaped at least to the following depths from each lot line:
         1.   Twenty (20) feet from the front lot line, except for approved
access drive.
         2.    Ten (10) feet from each side lot line.
         3.   Fifteen (15) feet from rear lot line.
      B.   Electronic Devices. Electronic devices such as loudspeakers or
devices, and similar instruments, shall not be located within fifty (50) feet
of any adjacent lot regardless of use or zoning district.
      C.   Snow Storage. Adequate area shall be designed for snow storage such
that clear visibility shall be afforded from the property to any public street.
      D.   Screening. A suitable screening fence shall be erected along all
property lines except those which are also public right-of-way lines. Said
fence shall be of a type and design approved by the Council. Planting of a type
approved by the Council may also be required in addition to or in lieu of
fencing.
      E.   Design. The design of all structures shall be compatible with other
structures in the surrounding area.
      F.   Signs. No permanent or temporary signs visible from a public street
shall be erected without approval from the Council.
      G.   Traffic Circulation. No site plan shall be approved which will in
any way constitute a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian circulation.
      H.   Access. Access shall be to public streets from at least two (2)
points on the subject premises. A divided entry with a center island may meet
the requirements of this provision.
      I.   Rules and Regulations of State Fire Marshal. With respect to
automobile service stations, any building proposed to be used as a service
station shall be constructed and maintained as required by the rules and
regulations of the state fire marshal governing the handling, storage and
transportation of flammable liquids. Every facility, whether underground or
above ground and whether indoors or out-of-doors, for the handling, storage and
movement of flammable liquids, shall likewise be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Fire Marshal and the
Pollution Control Agency (PCA).
1325.045   Multi-family Dwelling Units Additional Conditional Use Permit
Criteria.
   Subd. 1   Minimum Unit Size. Efficiency units shall be a minimum of five
hundred and fifty (550) square feet; one-bedroom units shall be a minimum of
seven hundred (700) square feet; two-bedroom units shall be a minimum of nine
hundred and fifty (950) square feet; and three-bedroom units shall be a minimum
of twelve hundred (1,200) square feet. For each additional bedroom, an
additional one hundred and fifty (150) square feet is required. Garages,
breezeways, common hallways, balconies, and porch floor spaces shall not be
credited in determining the required floor area of units. (revised 3/31/14)
   Subd. 2   Security Plan Component. A complete security plan shall be
submitted at the time of the development proposal, subject to the approval of
the Ramsey County Sheriff's Department
   Subd. 3   Lighting Plan Component. A complete photometric plan shall be
submitted in compliance with the recommendations of the Ramsey County Sheriff's
Department. Compliance with this requirement shall be in addition to any
maximum lighting requirements, as described elsewhere in the City's Zoning
Code.
   Subd. 4   Parking. A minimum of one enclosed parking stall shall be provided
per dwelling unit. Enclosed parking structures shall be attached to at least
one of the principal structures to which parking is being provided.
   Subd. 5   Common Area. Common area devoted to recreation or leisure
activities shall be provided. Common area must include a combination of both
indoor and outdoor space.
   Subd. 6   Efficiency Apartments. The number of efficiency units in a
multiple dwelling shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total number of
apartments.
   Subd. 7   Bicycle Parking. Enclosed bicycle parking shall be provided at a
rate of .5 spaces for every dwelling unit.
   Subd. 8   Window coverings. All windows which are visible to the outside
shall be provided with window treatments. Window treatments shall be consistent
throughout each multi-family dwelling structure or development.
1325.046 Thrift Store Additional Criteria.
   Subd. 1 Thrift Stores. Thrift stores are allowed as either principal uses or
conditional uses depending on the characteristics of the operations.
      A.   All thrift stores shall comply with the following conditions:
         a.   All merchandise receiving, transfer, sorting, processing, and
storage shall occur within a completely enclosed principal structure.
         b.   No exterior storage or the use of exterior storage containers or
semi-trailers for storage shall be allowed upon the site.
         c.   Waste and recycling receptacles and equipment shall be completely
contained within a principal or accessory structure.
      B.   Thrift Store, Class I
         a.   Thrift store, Class I may be permitted as a principal use if they
meet the conditions stipulated above for all thrift stores, conditions
stipulated in the thrift store, Class I definition and the following
conditions.
            i.   A drive-through shall not be allowed.
            ii.   There shall be no outdoor collection/donation area or
receiving and transferring of goods exterior of the business. All receipt and
transfer of goods shall take place interior of the business. The receiving of
used goods which are of either a large quantity or size shall be transported to
the thrift store by the Business Owner in order to limit circulation impacts
and traffic management to the neighboring multi-tenant businesses.
      C.   Thrift Store, Class II
         a.   Thrift store, Class II may be allowed by Conditional Use Permit
as regulated in Section
1355.04 Subd. 3 if they meet the conditions stipulated above for all thrift
stores, the conditions stipulated in the thrift store, Class II definition and
the following conditions:
            i.   All merchandise receiving and transfer shall occur within a
completely enclosed principal structure.
            ii.   At least one (1) accessory drive-through service lane shall
be provided.
            iii.   Accessory drive-through service lanes leading to and
accessing the indoor collection/donation area shall meet the following
conditions:
               1.   Drive-through service lanes shall not be permitted within
the front, side, or rear yards which abut a public street.
               2.   Drive-through lanes shall be designed in a manner that
segregates the drop-off lane from drive lanes, parking spaces, and sidewalks.
               3.   The drive-through service lane shall be a minimum of
fourteen (14) feet wide and provide up to one hundred sixty (160) linear feet
of automobile stacking space within the site.
               4.   Automobile stacking shall not interfere with on-site drive
lanes, fire lanes, parking stalls, loading areas, access to trash/recycling
dumpsters, or sidewalks
               5.   Drive-through service lanes shall not open directly onto a
public street.
               6.   Directional signage shall be provided to direct customers
to the collection/donation area.
            iv.   Thrift stores that have drive-through collection/donation
facilities shall meet the standards within Section
1325.04 Additional Minimum Requirements for Drive-in Businesses, Drive-up
Windows, Fast Food Restaurants and Automobile Service Stations. (revised 5/27/
2025)
1325.047 Cannabis Business Conditional Use Permit Criteria.
(added 11/24/24)
   Subd. 1 Applicability
   The standards within this subsection shall apply to the following uses:
      A.   Agriculture, Commercial Cannabis
      B.   Cannabis, Mezzobusiness
      C.   Cannabis, Microbusiness
      D.   Cannabis Testing Facility
      E.   Light Manufacturing, Cannabis
      F.   Light Manufacturing, Lower-Potency Hemp Edible
      G.   Retail, Cannabis Sales
      H.   Wholesaling, Cannabis
   Subd. 2 Setbacks
      A.   Any cannabis business must be setback 1,000 feet from schools as
established by Minnesota Statute Section 342.13(c)
      B.   Exceptions to distance restrictions. Cannabis business located north
of Highway 694, east of Interstate 35W and west of State Highway 10 in the
Gateway Business zoning district shall be exempt from the distance requirements
of City Code 1325.047 Subd. 2.
   Subd. 3 Development Standards
      A.   Must be licensed by the State of Minnesota and in compliance with
the standards set by Minnesota Statutes, Minnesota Rules, and the Office of
Cannabis Management.
      B.   Security.
         1.   The facility shall be secured as required by Minnesota Statutes,
Minnesota Rules, and the Office of Cannabis Management.
         2.   Any security bars, gates, or grills shall be retractable, shall
remain open and retracted when the cannabis business is open to the public or
otherwise in operation, and shall not be installed on the exterior of the
building.
      C.   Outdoor operations are prohibited.
      D.   The facility shall not produce noxious or nuisance causing odors,
subject to the following conditions:
         1.   The facility shall be ventilated so that all odors cannot be
detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the exterior of the
facility or at any adjoining use or property.
         2.   Growing cannabis must comply with all applicable laws and shall
not produce noxious or dangerous gases or odors or otherwise create a danger to
any person or entity in or near the facilities.
         3.   An odor maintenance plan must be submitted to the City and
approved by the City.
         4.   At the City Council’s discretion, the applicant may be required
to provide plans that show appropriate odor control systems so as not to
produce any noxious or dangerous gases or odors or create any dangers to any
person or entity in or near the facility.
      E.   All mechanical, odor suppression equipment, and trash enclosures
must be screened.
      F.   Outdoor storage of containers, pallets, waste/recycle containers,
etc. is prohibited.
      G.   Lighting
         1.   All site lighting must meet City Code requirements. All light
fixtures must be downward directed with cut-offs and be architecturally
designed to match the overall design of the building.
         2.   The specifications of all light fixtures must be provided to the
City with the application for a conditional use permit.
         3.   A photometric plan must be submitted to the City with the
application for a conditional use permit, indicating light measure at the
property line.
         4.   Lighting within a greenhouse is permitted between the hours of 4:
30 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Lighting at the site property lines shall not exceed 1.0
foot-candles at any time.
      H.   Water and Wastewater
         1.   Management of wastewater shall be in accordance with the Office
of Cannabis Management, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and City
Ordinances. Where multiple standards exist, the more restrictive of the
standards shall apply.
         2.   Water use within the site shall be designed to maximize the
amount of water reuse possible.
      I.   Signs
         1.   Signs shall be in compliance with the Office of Cannabis
Management and the City Code. Whenever a more restrictive standard exists, the
more restrictive standard shall apply.
         2.   Exterior wall, window, and monument signage shall not depict a
cannabis flower, cannabis product, hemp edibles, hemp derived edible consumer
product, or the like. Additionally, a business logo containing the above
depictions shall not be displayed as part of any exterior signage. No products,
interior signage, advertisements, or like attention-getting items shall be
placed or displayed that may be visible from the exterior of the Cannabis or
Hemp Business
   J.   Sale of Cannabinoid
      Cannabis businesses are limited to retail sale of cannabis, cannabis
flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Monday through
Sundays.
1325.05   Design Standards.
   The standards established in this section are designed to encourage a high
standard of development by providing assurances that neighboring land uses and
neighboring properties will be compatible. The standards shall also apply to
all future development and shall apply to existing development where so stated.
Before any applications for development or construction under the City Code are
approved, it shall be determined that the proposal will be in conformance with
these standards unless a deviation has been granted. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate such conformance. (revised 4/28/
08)
   Subd. 1   Landscaping.
      A.   Purpose and Findings. The City declares that it is desirable and
essential to the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the City to protect
certain existing plants and trees, to require new and additional plants and
trees, to prohibit the planting of certain species, to require the maintenance
of plants and trees as set forth in this subdivision, and that appropriate and
unified landscaping is essential to meet the community objectives established
in the Comprehensive Plan.
      B.   Scope. The provisions of this subdivision shall apply only to
privately owned property. Property within public rights-of-way shall be
maintained in accordance with
Chapter 7 of the City Code.
      C.   General Landscaping Requirements
         1.    Minimum Requirements. In all districts, all developed uses shall
provide and maintain a landscaped area according to the minimum requirements in
Section
1320.06, the district requirements chart.
         2.    All land area not occupied by marshes, ponds, wetlands,
buildings, parking, driveways, sidewalks, or other hard surface shall be
sodded, seeded, mulched or landscaped with appropriate perennials, shrubbery
and/or trees.
         3.    Landscaped Area Along Streets. In all districts all developed
uses shall provide and maintain a landscaped area along streets. This area
shall be kept clear of all structures, storage, and off-street parking. Except
for driveways, the area shall extend along the entire frontage of the lot and
along both streets in the case of a corner lot.
         4.    Maintenance of Green Space. The property owner shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all green space and landscaped areas in
accordance with Section 600.02 of the City Code.
         5.    Green Roofs. Green roofs may be counted towards the minimum
landscaping requirements of a parcel, as determined by Staff, based on the
absorption rate and quality of the green roof.
         6.    Screening. All developments shall be in conformance with Section
1325.05 Subd. 4.
         7.    Tree Preservation. Clear cutting of an entire stand of trees is
prohibited on all parcels. All developments shall be in conformance with
Section
1325.055. and subject to an approved Tree Mitigation Plan as outlined in
Section
1325.055, Subd. 6. (Revised 11/28/2022)
      D.   Landscaping Plan.
         1.   Scope. In cases where a landscaping plan is required by this Code
or by an approval granted by the City, the applicant for the building or
grading permit shall submit a landscape plan prepared in accordance with the
provisions of Appendix A of the Zoning Code. A landscape plan shall be approved
by the City and implemented by the property owner:
            a)   For any new development or new building construction in any
business, industrial, Institutional, R-3, R-4, or I-FLEX zoning district, and
planned unit developments, except as otherwise provided by specific development
agreements.
            b)   For any existing commercial, industrial, or institutional
building or parking lot to be expanded by at least ten (10) percent, or at
least 5,000 square feet, where an approved landscape plan is not on file with
the city. In the case where a plan is required under this subparagraph, the
property owner may submit a plan implementation schedule that would allow the
plan to be implemented over a period of three years.
            c)   No building permit for any construction described in items (a)
and (b) of this subparagraph shall be issued unless a landscape plan required
hereunder is approved by the city.
         2.   Landscaping Plan Standards.
            a)   If the City determines, at its sole discretion, that
landscaping to be planted in satisfaction of the ordinance exceeds that which
can be accommodated practically on-site, a landscaping fee may be collected at
the sole discretion of the City in lieu of on-site planting. The landscaping
fee amount shall be the cost of materials and installation of landscaping, plus
ten (10) percent, and shall be provided by the applicant and approved by the
City. All funds shall be expended exclusively towards landscaping, as defined
by the ordinance, for implementation of the goals listed in Subd. 1.A of this
section and Section
1325.055, Subd. 1. (Revised 11/28/2022)
      E.   Performance Guarantee.
         1.    A landscape performance bond or other acceptable financial
surety is required for all screening or landscaping required in this Code to
insure completion and maintenance of all landscaping in accordance with the
approved landscape plan required hereunder.
         2.    The amount of the bond or surety shall be 125% of the cost of
materials and installation.
         3.    The bond or surety shall be provided prior to the issuance of
any building or grading permits and shall be valid for, two full years, from
the date of installation, or three years in the case of an extended timeline.
         4.    For any landscaping or screening that is not in accordance with
the approved landscaping plan at the end of two growing seasons, the applicant
shall replace the material to the satisfaction of the city before the guarantee
is released. Where this is not done, the city, at its sole discretion, may use
the proceeds of the performance guarantee to accomplish performance.
      F.   Minimum Landscape Requirements.
         1.   Caliper Inches. The minimum caliper inches required per building
site shall relate to the gross square footage of all floors of a building and
the building height. A single story building in excess of thirty (30) feet in
height shall be considered a two-story building for the purposes of determining
gross square footage. Minimum total caliper inches =
      Gross Square Footage of all Floors of Building
              320
         2.   Tree Ratio. The minimum total caliper inches shall contain the
following minimum percentages of trees in various size ranges:
 
Building Height In Stories Percentage of Trees of Various Caliper Inches
                          2.0" - 3.0" 3.5" - 4.0" 4.5" - 6.0"
1-2                        50 %        30 %        20 %
3-4                        50 %        30 %        20 %
5 and over                 30 %        50 %        20 %
 
         3.   Coniferous Tree Measurement. Coniferous trees may be considered
equivalent to the sizes shown by dividing the height of the coniferous tree in
feet by 2.4.
         4.   Minimum size at time of planting.
            a)   Two and one-half (2.5) caliper inches for deciduous trees.
            b)   Six (6) feet in height for coniferous trees.
         5.   Trees Along Street Frontage. A minimum of one tree shall be
provided along the right of way for every fifty (50) feet of public street
frontage.
         6.   Perennials and Shrubberies. At least ten (10) percent of the
total landscaped area shall be covered with perennials and/or shrubbery and be
planted within the perimeter of private parking, building, and driveway areas.
         7.   Planting Islands. Planting islands shall be required to visually
break up expanses of hard-surface parking areas, to provide safe and efficient
traffic movement, and to define rows of parking. Planting islands shall occupy
at least ten (10) percent of the parking area. Planting islands shall be edged
with concrete curbs. Parking lot planting islands shall be a minimum of 150
square feet in area, be of appropriate width and length, and include at least
one tree meeting the requirements of this ordinance.
      G.   Landscape Design Specifications. All landscape plans and landscaping
under this subdivision shall follow and be in compliance with the following
requirements, together with all other Code regulations:
         1.   Diverse Selection. The landscape plan shall include a full
complement of over story, ornamental and evergreen trees, shrubbery, and ground
covers that are hardy and appropriate for the locations in which they are
planted, and which provide year-round color and interest.
         2.   Existing Plant Credit. Plant materials existing on a site at the
time of development, may be used as a credit against the requirements of these
landscape regulations; the City Council shall determine the extent of credit
allowed, based on the evaluation of species, size, location, quality of
existing plant materials and the consistency with the intent of these
regulations.
         3.   Plant Selection. The City maintains a list of trees that may not
be used to satisfy the landscaping requirement of this section.
         4.   Method of Installation. All deciduous and coniferous trees shall
be planted in accordance with American Standards for Nursery Stock relating to
quality of stock and appropriate sizing of the root ball for balled and
burlapped and spade-moved trees.
         5.   Slopes and Berms. Final slopes greater than the ratio of 3:1 will
not be permitted without special approval or treatment, such as special seed
mixtures or reforestation, terracing, or retaining walls. Berming used to
provide required screening of parking lots and other open areas shall not have
slopes in excess of 3:1.
         6.   Landscape Plan Maintenance. Quantity and character of
landscaping, as originally approved, shall be maintained in perpetuity by the
property owner unless the City approves a change to the landscaping plan.
Maintenance shall include removal of litter, dead plant materials, unhealthy or
diseased trees, and necessary pruning. Natural watercourses within a buffer
shall be maintained as free flowing and free of debris.
         7.   Erosion Control. All areas of any site shall be restored and
maintained in accordance with provisions of the city erosion control standards,
and other requirements of the Code.
         8.   Placement of Trees and Shrubs. No trees or shrubs shall be
planted within any drainage/utility easements, road right-of-way, or where it
would now or in the future materially impede the clear vision area or other
driveway between a height of two and one-half (2-1/2) and ten (10) feet in the
clear vision area.  (revised 3/18/09)
         9.   Completion Deadline. All plants required for screening purposes
shall be planted to completion within six months from date of issuance of a
building permit unless otherwise approved by the city due to the time of the
year or if an alternative schedule is set in a development agreement. In no
case shall the period exceed six months from issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
   Subd. 2   Drainage Wetlands and Flood Plain.
      A.   Water Management Plan. A water management plan must be submitted
for:
         1.    Development of individual sites of two and one half (2.5) acres
or greater for single-family homes.
         2.    Additions to existing buildings on sites two and one half (2.5)
acres or greater.
         3.    Development on any individual site within:
            a)   One hundred (100) year flood plain.
            b)   One thousand (1,000) feet of a public water or protected
wetland.
            c)   Three hundred (300) feet of Rice Creek, a major tributary to
Rice Creek or a county or judicial ditch.
      B.   Exceptions to Exemption for Single Family Detached Dwellings.
Construction of a single family detached dwelling on an isolated lot will not
require permit approval unless one of the above listed conditions exists. The
plan must be approved by the Rice Creek Watershed District, other agencies as
required and by the City Engineer.
         1.    On-site ponding is encouraged as a visual and functional
amenity.
         2.    Two or more projects may coordinate their water management plans
for their mutual benefit.
      C.   Submission Requirements. Drainage plan requirements are specified in
Appendix A, Procedure Manual.
   Subd. 3   Lighting.
      A.   Direction. In all districts lighting shall be so arranged as to
direct light away from adjoining lots and public streets. Direct or sky-
reflected glare, from floodlights or high temperature processes such as
combustion or welding, shall not be directed at any adjoining lots or public
streets.
      B.   Concealment or Hooding of Source. The source of illuminate shall be
hooded, concealed or controlled in a manner so as to direct the lighting
pattern only on the site to which the lighting is intended.
      C.   Intensity. Any light or combination of lights shall not cast light
that exceeds a meter reading of one foot candle on the travel lanes of
adjoining public streets or 0.4 foot candles on adjoining residential property.
      D.   Exterior Lighting of Building Facade. For non-residential uses,
visible from residentially zoned property, a maximum of twenty-five (25)
percent of the facade visible from such residential property may be illuminated
by direct lighting from spot lights or flood lights.
   Subd. 4   Screening.
      A.   Definition and Purpose. Screens and buffers are designated units of
yard or open area where setbacks, landscaping, berming, walls, and fencing help
minimize adverse impacts of public nuisances, such as: noise, glare, activity,
or dust, which are often times associated with parking, storage, signs or
buildings.
      B.   Types of Screening. The screening required in this section shall
consist of a fence, wall or landscaping, subject to the approval of the
Council. Landscaping may include a combination of any of the following: berms,
shrubs, deciduous or coniferous trees or hedge materials. The height and depth
of the screening shall be consistent with the height and size of the area to be
screened. When natural materials, such as trees or hedges, are used to meet the
screening requirements, density and species of planting shall be such as to
achieve 60 percent opacity year round at maturity.
      C.   General Screening Requirements
         1.   Screening in Proximity to Residential Lots. Screening shall be
required where:
            a)   Any business or industrial use is adjacent to any zoned
residential or along the boundary of any such residential lot;
            b)   Any business, parking lot or industrial use is across the
street from a residential district, but not on that side of a business or
industrial use considered to be the front.
            c)   Any non-residential use in residential districts by
Conditional Use Permit or PUD, such as schools, houses of worship, day care
facilities over ten (10), residential facilities over six (6), or public uses
other than parks, adjoins or is located across the street from any single or
two family residential lot.
            d)   The driveway to a parking area of more than six (6) parking
spaces, within a residential district, is within fifteen (15) feet of an
adjoining lot.
         2.   All parking, loading service, utility, and outdoor storage areas
shall be screened and buffered from all public streets and adjacent differing
land use.
         3.   Screening of Mechanical Operating Equipment. On non-residential
properties, screening shall also be provided where mechanical operating
equipment is located on the ground or on the roof of the premises, such
screening shall be constructed and located so as to completely screen from view
of adjacent streets and differing land uses. Mechanical operating equipment
shall include all exterior devices used to service the building or its
occupants, including but not limited to electrical, HVAC, plumbing,
communications (including telephone and dish antennae) and storage tanks.
         4.   Exception to requirements. Screen and buffer requirements may be
waived or modified by the city where the intent is otherwise satisfied by
significant change in elevation, an existing screening, significant distance or
similar circumstances.
         5.   Intersection Visibility. On all lots, nothing shall be placed in
the clear vision area, and nothing shall be allowed to grow in such a manner as
to materially impede vision now or in the future between a height of two and
one-half (2-1/2) and ten (10) feet in the clear vision area. (revised 3/18/09)
         6.   Responsibility for Screening. The owner or occupant of the
premises containing the use or features to be screened shall provide the
required screening and maintenance.
      D.   Fence Regulations.
         1.   Height of Fences in Side and Rear Yards. Fences in side or rear
yards may not exceed six (6) feet in height in all residential districts.
Fences may be up to six (6) feet in height if placed in the secondary front
yard of corner lots in residential districts provided that the fence does not
exceed three (3) feet in height within the structure setback of the primary
front yard and the fence does not encroach on the clear vision area. (revised
3/18/09)
         2.   Height of Fences, Solid Walls and Hedges in Front Yards. Fences,
solid walls and hedges in excess of three (3) feet in height in the minimum
front yard building setback area are prohibited in all R-1 and R-2 Residential
Districts.
         3.   Fences in residential districts shall be comprised of chain-link,
aluminum, wood, vinyl, composite, or other material as approved by the Zoning
Administrator. Alternate fencing materials may be allowed in business and
industrial zoning districts subject to conformance with Section 1325.05.
         4.   Height of Fences in Business and Industrial Districts. Fences may
be up to eight (8) feet in height in the side and rear yards up to the front
building line of the principal structure. Fences abutting residential districts
shall conform to those regulations applicable to the residential district.
Fences, solid walls and hedges in the minimum front yard setback may be allowed
through Site Plan Review or as part of a Planned Unit Development as determined
appropriate by the City Council based on site suitability to allow for
additional screening and/or as a buffer for noise reduction.
         5.   Electric Fences and Barbs or Spikes on Fences. No above grade
fence shall have barbs or spikes or be of metal construction, which is charged
or connected with electrical current within any district of the City. These
fencing types shall only be permitted through a Conditional Use Permit.
         6.   Placement of Fences Along Lot Lines. Fences may be placed along
lot lines provided no damage of any kind results to the abutting property.
         7.   Direction of Fence Facing. That side of the fence considered to
be the face (facing as applied to fence posts) shall face toward adjoining
property.
         8.   Fences in Public Rights-of-way. No fence, wall or hedge may be
placed in a public right-of-way.
         9.   Fences in Non-Residential Situations and Exceptional and Unusual
Circumstances in Residential Districts. Deviation from these require-ments for
fences, walls and landscape screening may be permitted after Planning
Commission review and Council approval of a site plan with documentation
showing the unusual circumstances justifying the proposed deviation and plans
for the proposed fence, wall, or landscape screening. This provision is
intended to allow flexibility in meeting the purpose and intent of this
subdivision without the necessity of proving a hardship as is required in the
variance procedure. The objective of this provision is to improve the
livability, appearance, and security of properties and their relationships to
one another.
         10.   Fences which are temporary in nature shall be allowed seasonally
for the purpose of protecting gardens or lawns from natural elements. Temporary
fences that are 48 inches or less shall be allowed without a zoning permit and
temporary fences over 48 inches are prohibited. Other purposes for temporary
fencing may be permitted on a case-by-case review subject to the approval of
the Zoning Administrator. Temporary fencing may be installed for a duration not
to exceed 150 days with snow fencing to be removed no later than April 1st each
year. Examples of temporary fencing materials allowed are snow or safety fence
(i.e. plastic), silt fence (i.e. fabric), or wire fence. Temporary fencing
shall be subject to all other fence regulations listed within the ordinance.
Silt fencing or fencing utilized at a construction site associated with an
active grading and erosion control or building permit issued by the City is
allowed as an exception to this provision for duration and height. Temporary
fencing installed in conjunction with a City permit is subject to removal prior
to the final inspection.  (revised 8/28/2023)
   Subd. 5   Restrictions on Nonresidential Uses Located in Residential
Districts. In the granting of Conditional Use Permit or Planned Unit
Development permits for nonresidential uses other than detached single family
homes (i.e. uses such as houses of worship, day care facilities (over 10),
residential facility (over 6), public uses, schools of any kind, multiple
family dwellings, boarding houses and dormitories to be located in a
residential district on a site of one (1) acre or more), the Council shall not
permit access from that site to a cul-de-sac or local street and also shall not
permit any structure or hard surface area to be constructed on said site closer
than seventy-five (75) feet from any adjacent residential lot.
   Subd. 6   Aesthetics.
      A.   Evaluation of Impact. The proposed design, scale, massing,
materials, height and other aspects of the subject matter of any permit
requested hereunder shall be evaluated by the Planning Commission and the
Council with respect to structures and properties in the surrounding area. To
this end, the Planning Commission and the Council shall consider, prior to the
issuance of any permit hereunder, whether the appearance of the subject matter
is so at variance with the structures and properties in the surrounding area as
to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values in the surrounding
area or to unreasonable detract from the appearance of the area or the city as
a whole.
      B.   Applicability. The foregoing considerations shall be applicable to
any permit applications other than detached dwelling units.
   Subd. 7   Design Standards for Principal Structures in Residential Zoning
Districts.
      A.   Minimum Width. All principal structures in residential zoning
districts, except mobile homes in approved mobile home parks, shall have a
minimum width of twenty (20) feet measured from face to face of principal
exterior walls.
      B.   Foundation. All principal structures in residential districts,
except manufactured home in approved manufactured home parks, shall be placed
on permanent foundations that comply with the requirements of the State
Building Code and are continuous and solid for the entire perimeter of the
structure.
      C.   Permitted encroachments in Section
1325.03 Subd 2 shall be exempt from subparts 1 and 2 above.
   Subd. 8   Additional Design Standards for New Development, Redevelopment,
and Modifications to Existing Sites in the B2 and B3 Districts. (revised  04/
27/15) Unless preempted by the standards in this section, all other zoning
provisions shall apply:
      A.   Purpose and Intent. The purpose of these additional design standards
is to promote a high level of architectural, landscaping, and site design in
the business districts of Arden Hills. The City seeks to create a unified,
harmonious, and high-quality environment to foster a distinct, positive, and
successful image for the City. The criteria by which new development,
redevelopment, and site modifications in the Districts shall be judged are as
follows:
         1.   Consistency with provisions of the comprehensive plan and other
guiding plans as amended from time to time; provisions of the zoning ordinance
and subdivision ordinance; and all other applicable regulations.
         2.   Use of appropriate materials, lighting, textures, colors, and
architectural and landscape forms to create a unified, high-quality design
concept for each site that is compatible with adjacent and neighboring
structures and functions.
         3.   Creation of unified site designs, each with a sense of internal
order, that provide desirable environments for site users and visitors and the
community as a whole and that consider all site elements.
         4.   Provision of safe and adequate access from public streets to
sites giving ample consideration to the location and number of access points,
the safety and convenience of merging and turning movements, and traffic
management and mitigation.
         5.   Provision of on-site vehicular, bicycling, and pedestrian
circulation by way of interior drives, parking areas, pathways, and walkways
adequate to handle anticipated needs and to safety buffer pedestrians and
cyclists from motor vehicles. Ample consideration shall be given to the width
of interior drives, internal traffic movement and flow, separation of
pedestrian, cycling, automobile; and delivery traffic, and the safe,
convenient, and practical arrangement of parking spaces.
      B.   Application. The standards in this Section should apply only to the
building or site elements being developed or altered (i.e. a proposal for
changes to a building would be required to meet only those standards that
pertain to buildings while changes to a parking area would be required to meet
the standards for parking areas but not for buildings). The design standards
shall be applied proportionately to the degree of change proposed. Upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council may waive
specific design standards based on the scale of the project. The City Council
shall make the final determination on the compatibility and consistency with
the design standards.
      C.   Architectural Style and Building Character. Evaluation of a project
shall be based on the quality of its design and on its relationship to its
surroundings. Site characteristics to be evaluated for this purpose include,
but are not limited to, building and landscaping materials, colors, textures,
shapes, massing, building components, height, roof-line, and setback. Monotony
of design, both within projects and between projects and its surrounding, is
prohibited. Variation in detail, form, and arrangement shall provide visual
interest. (revised 11/25/13)
      D.   Buildings shall be constructed of materials that are enduring,
timeless, and well-detailed. Other new materials of equal or better quality to
those listed may be approved by the Community Development Department. (revised
11/25/13)
         1.   At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the exterior building
materials shall be of brick masonry, tile masonry, natural stone (or synthetic
equivalent), decorative concrete plank, transparent glass or any combination
thereof. (revised 11/25/13)
         2.   Trim and other accent or decorative features may be metal, wood,
split faced block, EIFS, or stucco. Metals shall have a matte finish and have
visible corner moldings and trim when used on exterior walls. EIFS shall be
located at least twelve (12) feet above the ground line. (revised 11/25/13)
         3.   Undesirable materials shall include simulated brick, vinyl or
aluminum siding, sheet or corrugated metal siding, plain concrete blocks or
panels, brightly colored metal roofing or canopies, pre-cast tilt-up walls,
mirrored or reflective glass, and materials that represent corporate colors or
logos not in conformance with approved building materials. (revised 11/25/13)
      E.   Building Design. The arrangement, massing, materials and colors
shall work to create a high quality development that is responsive to existing
buildings, site features, and site design on adjoining sites in the district.
(revised 11/25/13)
         1.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the largest building on each site
shall be constructed at the front setback line.
         2.   Façade treatment shall be carried around all sides. Architectural
elements such as, but not limited to, windows, shutters, awnings, doors,
masonry exterior veneers, cornice detailing, window casings, and other
architectural details should demonstrate consistency on all sides of the
structure that are reasonably visible to the general public. Plain flat walls
shall not be permitted when viewable from the public right-of-way or public
areas.
         3.   To avoid long unbroken expanses and to increase visual interest
from the street, buildings of more than 40 feet in width shall be divided into
smaller increments (between 20 and 40 feet) through articulation of the facades
to convey the impression of individually-constructed small storefronts or, in
the case of housing, housing units. This can be achieved through the
combination of the following techniques:
            a)   The use of windows and doors;
            b)   Façade modulation-stepping backward or forward or extending a
portion of the façade;
            c)   Vertical divisions into storefronts with separate display
windows and entrances;
            d)   Recesses and projections such as porches, dormers and bays
that create shadows and add visual interest;
            e)   Variation in the rooflines by using multiple roof and ridge
lines perpendicular to one another, offsetting single roof lines, stepped
roofs;
            f)   Providing a lighting fixture, trellis, tree, or other
landscape feature with each interval.
         4.   Awnings or overhangs shall be provided at the primary entryway
and at all entrances fronting a public street to provide protection for
pedestrians. Awnings shall be opaque so as not to create a glowing effect with
lights under the awnings. Awnings shall be constructed of durable and
protective material, and shall be properly maintained. Plastic or fiberglass
awnings shall not be permitted. (revised 11/25/13)
         5.   Any multi-level building shall distinguish the ground floor level
from the upper floors by use of any or a combination of these techniques: an
intermediate cornice line, difference in building materials or details, awnings
trellis or arcade, special window details, or brick corbels or quoins. A strong
base and top for multi-story buildings shall be established; middle layers
shall be simpler. Detail shall be an integral part of the architecture rather
than a series of applied elements.
         6.   Standardized corporate or franchise architecture identified with
a particular chain shall be discouraged unless it is compatible with
surrounding architecture and conforms to these design standards. (revised 11/
25/13)
         7.   Entrances shall have convenient access to the street frontage and
to parking serving the use. For those properties along County Road E, access to
the street frontage shall be given priority where feasible.
      F.   Window and Door Openings (revised 10/25/21)
         1.   Commercial Façade Transparency.
            a)   Fifty percent (50%) of all first level building façades that
front a public street shall be comprised of transparent windows or doors in
order to allow views of interior uses and activities.
            b)   If the building is a one story design and the first floor
elevation exceeds twelve (12) feet, then only the first twelve (12) feet shall
be included in calculating the façade area. (revised 11/30/15)
            c)   The City may consider a proportional reduction in the
transparent window and door requirement on the public street façade if
additional transparent glass is used on the remaining sides. (revised 11/30/15)
         2.   Residential Façade Transparency. Twenty percent (20%) of all
residential building façades that front a public street shall be comprised of
transparent windows or doors in order to allow views of interior uses and
activities. Transparency requirement may be waived by the City where privacy
concerns warrant. (revised 11/30/15)
         3.   Configurations. The shape, size, and placement of windows and
doors shall emphasize the intended organization and articulation of the façade.
Windows and doors shall be recessed at least one inch rather than being flush
with the building façade. (revised 11/25/13)
         4.    Materials. Acceptable materials for window trim include anodized
aluminum, steel, wood, and clad wood. Door trim shall be made of steel, wood,
or clad wood. (revised 11/25/13)
         5.   For buildings with a use or function that does not readily allow
windows (e.g. cooler or freezer areas, mechanical rooms, security areas,
storage areas) the transparent window standards may be reduced at the
discretion of the City Council. However, aesthetic interest must be provided by
the use of upper level windows or architectural detailing that provides arches,
patterning, recesses, and shadowing. Architectural detailing may include such
things as change in materials, change in color and other significant visual
relief provided in a manner or at intervals in keeping with the size, mass, and
scale of the wall. (revised 11/25/13)
      G.   Building Color. Building colors shall be muted. Recommended colors
include browns, grays, tans, beiges, and dark or muted green, blues, and reds.
Bright or brilliant colors and sharply contrasting colors may be used for only
accent purposes occupying a maximum of five percent (5%) of building façades.
(revised 11/25/13)
      H.   Fences. Fences shall blend into the landscape, be compatible with
other materials used on site, and be made of a material that minimizes
corrosion. Finished and treated wood, brick, stone or wrought iron is
encouraged.
      I.   Signs.
         1.   Business signs shall be architecturally compatible with the
style, materials, colors and details of the building. Signs shall be
incorporated into the façades of the buildings rather than extending past the
roof line and should not project more than twelve (12) inches beyond the plane
of the façades. Retail business wall signs shall be located in a position above
the front window that is located consistently among stores. (revised 11/25/13)
 
         2.   All other provisions in
Chapter 12, Sign Code, shall apply.
      J.   Site Furnishings and Seating Areas.
         1.   Site furnishings shall be provided based on the scale of the
project. The site furnishings may be spread out on the site or clustered to
provide a more formal area. Placing site furnishings near landscaped areas is
encouraged. These areas may be shared by multiple tenants on a property or
adjacent properties and may include tables, chairs, benches, plantings, and
other outdoor amenities such as a plaza. These areas shall be maintained for
year round use. Creativity is highly encouraged. These spaces shall be
connected to the sidewalk system.
         2.   Benches and decorative plantings shall be provided near the
primary entrance of all buildings on a site.
         3.   Restaurants shall include a functional outdoor seating area with
tables, chairs, plantings, and access to the restaurant.
            a)   No outdoor seating shall be permitted in any portion of the
public sidewalks where normal pedestrian traffic flow is obstructed.
            b)   The outdoor seating area shall not be used for exterior
storage when the area is not in use. (revised 11/25/13)
            c)   These areas shall be distinguished with decorative fencing
and/or plantings.
            d)   If alcoholic beverages are served, the establishment shall
take reasonable steps to insure that alcoholic beverages are consumed only by
patrons of the establishment who are of age. All other provisions related to
the license to serve alcohol shall apply.
      K.   Screening.
         1.   Trash and recycling equipment, materials, and containers shall be
fully enclosed and integrated into the architecture of the buildings.
         2.   All mechanical equipment, whether roof-mounted or ground-mounted
should be integrated into the architecture of the building. It shall be
completely screened from the ground-level view of adjacent properties and
public streets. Wood screening shall not be permitted.
         3.   Truck docks and delivery areas shall face away from the public
street and shall be integrated into the architecture of the building.
      L.   Landscaping. A minimum of one tree shall be placed along the right-
of-way every forty (40) feet. The tree shall not interfere with the roadway and
shall be on private property. (revised 11/25/13)
      M.   Parking.  (revised 10/25/21)
         1.   Sufficient parking shall be provided to accommodate the
reasonable hourly peak on a given site. Shared parking is encouraged to reduce
land devoted to parking. Hourly variations among different types of land use
may be considered when estimated parking demands.
         2.   Plantings shall be used to soften and shade parking lots and
parking structures. Parking adjacent to streets should be screened from view
with landscaping, including but not limited to trees, hedges, flowers and other
bushes and/or decorative masonry walls. Berms shall be discouraged. (revised
11/25/13)
         3.   Parking lot islands shall be used to distribute large parking
lots into separate areas. Parking lot islands shall be planted with trees or
include infiltration basins and plantings. Entry drives shall be defined by
trees and shrubs. (revised 11/25/13)
         4.   A concrete curb shall be provided around the periphery of all
parking lots and access roads, except where the City Engineer determines that a
curb would impede drainage.
         5.   Parking structures that are visible from off the site shall
display an integration of building materials, form, and colors with the
principal building. No signs other than directional signs shall be permitted on
parking ramp facades. (revised 11/25/13)
         6.   Parking structures that are visible from off the site shall
display an integration of building materials building form, textures,
architectural motif, and building colors with the principal building. No signs
other than directional signs shall be permitted on parking ramp facades.
      N.   Traffic Study. A traffic study shall be required for all new
developments, redevelopments, and significant modifications to existing sites
unless waived by the City Council.
      O.   Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided for the safety and
convenience of occupants and visitors.
         1.   A lighting plan shall be submitted that shows location, type of
illumination and design. A photometric analysis of site and building shall be
submitted for City approval with all new construction or redevelopment
projects.
         2.   Exterior lighting shall be consistent in type, design, scale, and
color to create unity in the Districts. High-pressure sodium lighting and other
similar types of lighting color may be required by the City to promote a
unified lighting color throughout the Districts. Other lighting colors may be
considered during the City review process.
         3.   Exterior lighting for parking lots and buildings shall not be
excessive and shall be directed at their intended purposes.
         4.   Lighting under a gasoline station canopy shall not be directly
visible from the street but shall be recessed into the canopy or otherwise
shielded.
         5.   Light washing of buildings and accent lighting may be permitted
through the City review process provided that it does not negatively impact
residential areas or traffic safety and is complementary to the district as a
whole.
      P.   Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation. Pedestrian and bicycle
improvements shall be installed in accordance with the City of Arden Hills
Comprehensive Plan and the local guiding plan and shall be in conformance with
the following:
         1.   Site design shall facilitate pedestrian connections and mobility
within and between buildings, sites, and uses by providing clear visual
indicators through door placement, signage, striping, raised pathways, and
integrating landscaping components.  (revised 11/25/13)
         2.   An internal sidewalk system shall link the primary entrance of
each building on site with the public sidewalk or trail network. In the event a
building is subdivided into multiple separated tenant spaces, a sidewalk must
link the primary entrance of each separated tenant space with the public
sidewalk network. (revised 11/25/13)
         3.   Where there is new building construction or renovation where the
renovation value is thirty percent (30%) or more of the pre-renovation value of
the structure, a minimum six foot concrete sidewalk adjacent to or in all
rights-of-way shall be provided. The location of the sidewalk shall be
prescribed by the Public Works Director. The new sidewalks shall connect to
sidewalks on adjacent properties if they exist. At the discretion of the City
Council, the property owner may, in lieu of constructing the sidewalk, pay the
City an amount equal to the cost of constructing the sidewalk to satisfy the
obligations of this section. Said payment shall be used by the City to further
maintain and construct the pathway system within the City. (revised 11/25/13)
   Q.   Bicycle Parking. (adopted 11/25/13)
      1.   General Requirements.
         a)   Bicycle parking may be provided using the following approaches:
bicycle racks, bicycle lockers, or bicycle parking stations.
         b)   Bicycle racks must support a bicycle frame at two locations and
enable the frame and one or both wheels to be secured. The City requires that
bicycle racks meet inverted "U", ring-and-post, or comparable design standards.
         c)   Bicycle racks or lockers must be securely anchored to a level,
concrete or pavement surface.
      2.   Location Criteria. Bicycle parking shall be located in a safe,
designated area and should be within fifty (50) feet of the primary building
entrance. Bicycle racks shall be visible either from within the building or the
public right-of-way.
      3.   Dimension Criteria.
         a)   At least two (2) feet of clearance shall be provided from the
centerline of each adjacent bicycle rack.
         b)   An access aisle of at least five (5) feet shall be provided in
each bicycle parking facility.
         c)   Bicycle racks shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches from a
wall to which they are parallel and thirty (30) inches from a wall which they
are perpendicular.
      4.   Number of Required Bicycle Parking Spaces. For commercial uses, one
bicycle parking space shall be provided for every twenty (20) automobile
parking spaces. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces is required.
   R.   Drainage/Water Management Plan. Stormwater management plans shall
comply with Rule C: Stormwater Management Plans of the Rice Creek Watershed
District Rules.
   S.   Environmental Conservation and Sustainability. The City encourages the
use of green materials and environmentally friendly construction and site
design such as the use of pervious surfaces, green rooftops, energy efficient
materials, LEED standards, and other green building techniques.
1325.055   Tree and Landscaping Preservation.
(Adopted 4/28/08; revised 11/28/2022)
   Subd. 1   Findings, Purpose and City Authority.
      A.   Findings and Purpose. The purpose of this section is to identify
trees that are to be saved when development or land disturbing activity is
occurring. It is the City's intent to protect, preserve, and enhance the
natural environment of Arden Hills and to encourage a resourceful and prudent
approach to development. The city council finds it is in the best interest of
the city to protect, preserve, and enhance the natural environment of the
community and to encourage a resourceful and prudent approach to development
and property alteration. In the interest of achieving these objectives, the
city has established the comprehensive tree preservation regulations herein to
promote the furtherance of the following:
         1.   Protect and preserve the environment and natural beauty of the
City;
         2.   Minimize tree and habitat loss during development and
construction;
         3.   Establish minimum standards for tree preservation, landscaping,
and the mitigation of environmental impacts resulting from landscape tree
removal;
         4.   Enforce tree preservation and landscaping standards to promote
and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community;
         5.   Increase and maintain property values;
         6.   Enhance energy conservation through natural insulation and
shading;
         7.   Prevent or reduce soil erosion, sedimentation and stormwater
runoff;
         8.   Protect privacy by maintaining buffers between land uses; and
         9.   Preserve the variety and extent of trees which exist in the City
and which are an integral part of this City's identity.
      B.   City Authority. To preserve protected trees, the City may:
         1.    Require and enforce a tree preservation plan as described below;
         2.    Specify trees or groups of trees for preservation;
         3.    Specify grading limits;
         4.    Require the clustering of buildings or the relocation of roads,
drives, buildings, utilities or storm water facilities when this would preserve
protected trees;
         5.    Specify time periods in which tree cutting, trimming or injury
may not occur in order to prevent the spread of disease; and
         6.    Require easements to ensure that groups of significant trees are
not destroyed after the development has been approved.
   Subd. 2   Tree Preservation Plan.
      A. Scope. A Tree Preservation Plan is required as part of an application
for:
         1.    New building construction in any zoning district;
         2.    An expansion of an existing building or hard surface by ten
percent or greater, where an approved tree preservation plan is not on file
with the city;
         3.    Any project for which a city grading permit or erosion control
permit is required
         4.    A plat or minor subdivision.
      B.    Tree Preservation Plan Submission Requirements. A Tree Preservation
Plan must include a tree survey certified by a registered land surveyor,
landscape architect, or forester. See Appendix A for details on the
requirements of a Tree Preservation Plan. Projects on residential sites of
fewer than two lots are not required to have tree surveys certified. Applicants
are encouraged to consult with city staff concerning preservation of protected
trees before developing a Tree Preservation Plan.
      C.    Review Process. The tree preservation plan shall be reviewed by the
city to assess the best possible layout to preserve significant trees and to
enhance the efforts to minimize damage to significant trees. The applicant
shall meet with city staff prior to submission of the development application
or prior to application for the grading permit, whichever is sooner, to
determine the most feasible and practical placement of buildings, parking,
driveways, streets, storage and other physical features, in order that the
fewest significant trees are destroyed or damaged.
   Subd. 3   Performance Guarantee.
      A.   Any applicant required to submit a tree preservation plan shall
provide the required performance guarantee following preliminary approval of
the tree preservation plan and prior to any construction and/or grading to
insure completion and maintenance of all landscaping and trees in accordance
with the approved tree preservation plan required hereunder.
      B.   The amount of a bond or other approved financial surety shall be
125% of the cost of materials and installation.
      C.   The bond or other financial surety shall be provided prior to the
issuance of any building or grading permits and shall be valid for two full
years, from the date of installation.
      D.   For any tree that is not in accordance with the approved tree
preservation plan at the end of two growing seasons, the applicant shall
replace the material to the satisfaction of the city before the guarantee is
released. Where this is not done, the city, at its sole discretion, may use the
proceeds of the performance guarantee to accomplish performance.
   Subd. 4   Compliance with Plan. The applicant shall implement the tree
preservation plan prior to and during any construction. The tree protection
measures shall remain in place until all grading and construction activity is
terminated.
      A.   Tree Removal Prior to Approval. No significant trees shall be
removed until a tree preservation plan is approved by the city and except in
accordance with the approved tree preservation plan.
      B.   Inspection. The city shall have the right to inspect the development
and/or building site in order to determine compliance with the approved tree
preservation plan. The city shall determine whether compliance with the tree
preservation plan has been met.
      C.   Unapproved Tree Loss. If a tree that was required to be preserved is
removed or damaged so that it is in a state of decline within two growing
seasons from date of project closure, it must be mitigated at a rate of 2:1, or
two caliper inches of trees replaced for every caliper inch of tree removed.
This provision also applies to an easement area that is disturbed during or
after development. The City may use the performance guarantee to accomplish
this.
   Subd. 5   Tree Removal and Preservation.
      A.   Tree Removal Allowance. Mitigation shall not be required for
removing, cutting, or killing trees when:
         1.   Fewer than ten (10) percent of the caliper inches of the
significant trees on the property are cut, removed, or killed
         2.   There is an existing principal use on the property and no
construction, grading, or development is to occur in the location of the
removed tree(s) within two years thereafter.
         3.   The trees to be removed, cut, or killed are identified as
diseased or nuisance trees.
      B.   Reduced Requirements. Mitigation requirements can be reduced as
determined by the City Council when there is a greater public good such as;
         1.   Allowing for LEED Certified architectural practices;
         2.   Providing affordable housing;
         3.   Allowing for a public road or trail; or
         4.   Providing for a public utility service.
      C.   Planned Unit Developments. A PUD plan for a new subdivision will be
approved only if it demonstrates that the new subdivision has a reasonable
number of lots or units and has lot lines and building pads that minimize tree
loss. Mitigation must be provided for any removal of significant trees.
      D.   Diseased and Nuisance Trees. Prior to grading, all diseased and
nuisance trees on the subject property shall be removed from the property at
the time of grading and prior to the commencement of building construction.
Diseased and nuisance trees shall not count toward calculation of significant
tree inventory.
      E.   Removal of Trees Prior to Application Submittal. A tree that was
removed or otherwise destroyed by unnatural causes within two years before a
development application will be regarded as if it were present at the time of
construction or a development application.
   Subd. 6   Approved Tree Mitigation.
      A.   Mitigation Standards. Mitigation for tree removal of significant
trees must meet the following specific standards;
         1.   Mitigation Rate. Significant live trees lost or reasonably
anticipated to be lost as a result of building, construction, or grading
immediately or in the future, shall be replaced by the property owner by
planting that number of caliper inches of trees ("replacement trees")
determined at a rate of 1:2 or one inch replaced for every two inches lost. The
trees required to be replaced pursuant to this Section shall be in addition to
any other trees required to be planted pursuant to any other provision of the
Code.
         2.   Mitigation Species. Replacement trees shall be of a species
similar to the trees which are lost or removed and shall include those species
pre-approved in writing by the City. The City maintains a list of trees
provided for guidance in selection of trees and shrubs.
         3.   General Mitigation Standards.
            a)   All replacement trees shall meet the American Standards for
Nursery Stock relating to quality of stock and appropriate sizing of the root
ball for balled and burlapped and spade-moved trees.
            b)   Trees planted in accordance with mitigation requirements shall
not be comprised of more than 25 percent of the same species or size unless
approved by the city.
            c)   Replacement trees shall be planted on the same property from
which the trees were removed. If the City determines, at its sole discretion,
that the number of replacement trees to be planted exceeds the number of trees
that can be accommodated practically on-site, off-site planting may occur at
locations to be determined by the City, or a landscaping fee in lieu of off-
site planting may be required as provided in paragraph d below.
            d)   Where tree replacement on-site in satisfaction of Subd. 6.A
above is not practical and a suitable off-site location cannot be determined by
the City, a landscaping fee in lieu thereof may be assessed for the replacement
required. The landscaping fee amount shall be the cost of materials and
installation of tree(s), plus ten (10) percent, and shall be provided by the
applicant and approved by the City. All landscaping funds collected shall be
expended exclusively towards landscaping, as defined by the ordinance, for
implementation of the goals listed in Subd. 1 of this section and Section
1325.05, Subd. 1.A.
            e)    Development that is subject to the landscape requirements in
Section
1325.05 of the Zoning Code may count preserved trees towards the required
landscaping plan. The planting of trees for mitigation shall be in addition to
the landscape requirements of Section
1325.05 and shall be replaced in accordance with paragraph c and/or d above.
            f)   The required mitigation trees shall be replaced by the
property owner or original developer if they have died or have severely
declined after the second full growing season following installation. A tree
shall be considered to be severely declined if more than 25 percent of the
crown has died.
   Subd. 7   General Tree Protection Standards.
      A.   Prior to Construction. Before construction, grading or land clearing
begins; trees or tree areas that are to be preserved shall be visibly marked
and the city-approved tree protection fencing or other method shall be
installed and maintained at the critical root zones of the trees to be
protected. The location of the fencing shall be in conformance with the
approved tree preservation plan. This fencing shall be inspected by city staff
before site work begins.
      B.   During Construction. The following activities shall be prohibited
within the critical root zone areas of trees to be protected.
         1.   Trenching;
         2.   Temporary storage of any construction materials or chemicals; and
         3.   The routing or parking of heavy equipment, including cars,
trucks, bulldozers and construction trailers.
         4.   Sediment and erosion control. All sediment and erosion-control
silt fencing or straw bales shall be placed at the limits of grading or where
needed to minimize the deposition of sediment within the drip line of the
protected tree(s).
         5.    Attaching protective devices, signs, etc., to trees is
prohibited. No protective devices, signs, utility poles or lines, or other
objects shall be nailed or attached to any trees that are to be preserved.
         6.   Other actions prohibited. Any other action within the drip line
of the protected tree(s) that may result in the severing of roots or compaction
of soil, or that may impede the free access of air and water to tree roots,
shall be prohibited.
      C.   Ponding. Water retention ponding may not be located where there are
significant trees, unless approved by the city. The water retention ponding
must be created in a manner that prevents erosion into any nearby water
resource.
      D.   Amendments to Plan. An amendment to the tree preservation plan shall
be required prior to the removal of trees that were designated for preservation
on the original tree preservation plan. The amendment shall be subject to City
approval prior to implementation.
1325.06   Requirements for Parking, Loading and Circulation. (revised 4/28/08)
(revised 7/22/24)
   Subd. 1   Off-Public Street Parking.
      A.   Area and Dimensions of Each Parking Space. For the purpose of this
Code, a parking space shall be not less than three hundred (300) square feet
per vehicle of standing and maneuvering area. Individual spaces shall be at
least nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length.
      B.   Access. All off-street parking spaces shall have access driveways
and access directly to public streets or alleys. Curb cuts for uses other than
single family homes shall require approval from the Council. The number of curb
cuts along arterial and collector roads shall be held to a minimum whenever
possible. Any residential lot, which has frontage on both a local street and a
collector street or a major or minor arterial (as defined by the Comprehensive
Plan of Arden Hills) shall gain access only from the local street.
      C.   Construction Standards. These standards shall apply to all
development:
         1.   Surfacing. Off-street parking areas and drives shall be improved
with a paved surface. Such areas shall be so graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area as required by the
City and the Rice Creek Watershed District.
         2.   Curbs. A concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed for all
developments according to the requirements of the City Engineer except
driveways for single and two-family residences.
      D.   Location. All off-street parking spaces herein required shall be
located according to the following:
         1.   Spaces required for one and two family dwellings shall be on the
same lot as the principal structure.
         2.   Spaces required for multiple-family dwellings shall be on the
same lot as the principal structure served or within two hundred (200) feet of
the main entrance if not located on the same lot.
         3.   Spaces required for business and industrial uses should be within
eight hundred (800) feet of the main entrance to the principal building served.
         4.   No off-street parking space, with the exception of the driveways,
shall be within twenty (20) feet of the right-of-way line of any public street,
except in the GB District where the setback shall be fifty (50) feet.
         5.   In no case shall off-street parking areas containing four (4) or
more parking spaces be closer than five (5) feet from any side or rear lot
lines, except in the GB District where no such parking shall be closer than
twenty (20) feet to any exterior project lot lines other than for joint
facilities as permitted herein, or as otherwise permitted in this Code.
         6.   If required parking is located on a site other than the site on
which the principal building or use is located, a properly drawn legal
instrument, executed by the parties involved, must be executed and filed with
the City and the proper county office, if deemed necessary by the City
Attorney, which provides for such parking and which shall not be terminated
without approval by the City Council.
      E.   Joint Facilities. The required off-street parking spaces for two (2)
or more uses may be located jointly on the same lot, adjoining lot, or in the
same structure when
         1.   The number of spaces provided is equal to or greater than the sum
of the separate requirements for each use; and
         2.   The joint facility is reasonably related to the destination of
the user; and
         3.   It can be demonstrated that there will be no substantial conflict
in the principal operating hours of the uses to be served; and
         4.   Setbacks for such joint parking facilities meet the minimum
parking setback requirement from any lot lines other than the common lot lines
between the lots involved in the joint parking where setback requirements may
be waived; and
         5.   A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties
involved, is filed with the City and the proper county office, if deemed
necessary by the City Attorney, which provides for such mutual parking
agreement which shall be terminated without the approval of the Council.
      F.   Reduction in Number of Required Spaces. The number of spaces
required for a specific use may be reduced if the owner or occupant provides
documentation that a lesser number of spaces will actually be needed than
normally required by this Code and the City Council authorizes such lesser
number after recommendation by the Planning Commission. The difference in the
number of spaces provided and those required shall be shown on the approved
site plan as "proof-of-parking" and shall be constructed if and when the need
for such additional spaces arises.
      G.   Conversion or Alteration of Approved Uses. Commercial or industrial
buildings for a use, or uses, which is proposed to be converted, remodeled, or
modified to accommodate another allowable use, or uses, which has a greater
off-street parking requirement shall be required to apply for Site Plan Review
and approval to assure the adequacy of off-street parking.
      H.   Parking Structures. The minimum setbacks of parking structures shall
be the same as for principal buildings in the district and the exterior finish
shall be compatible with the principal building served by the parking
structure.
      I.   Loading Areas and Maneuvering Space. Such areas shall not be used to
satisfy the parking requirements in this Section.
      J.   Off Street Parking Spaces Required:
Use                                    Required No. of Spaces
Bingo Halls                            1 for each 1.5 max. seating capacity
Bowling Alleys                         5 for each lane plus spaces for related
                                       uses
Business & Professional Office         1 for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor
                                       area
Call Center                            1 for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor
                                       area
Churches, Theaters, Auditoriums,       1 for every 3 seats (based on design
Mortuaries, and Other Places of        capacity)
Assembly
                                       1 for each doctor or dentist plus 1 for
Clinics                                each nurse, technician, or professional
                                       and 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of gross
                                       floor area
Daycare, Nursery, and Pre-School       1 for each teacher or employee plus 1
Facility                               for each 5 individuals receiving care
                                       (design capacity)
Dwelling, single and two-family        2 for each dwelling unit
                                       1.1 per efficiency and 1 bedroom
Dwelling, multiple family              dwelling units; 2 for each 2+ bedroom
                                       dwelling units
Event Center                           1 for every 4 seats (based on design
                                       capacity)
                                       1 for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor
Inside Motor vehicle Leasing or Sales  area used for showrooms, sales, and
                                       offices
Motels/Hotels                          1 for each employee plus 1 for each unit
Multiple Occupancy Structure           1 for each space required for each
                                       separate use
                                       1 for each employee on major shift plus
Other Business and Industry            1 for each vehicle used in conducting
                                       the business or 1 for each 1,000 sq. ft.
                                       of floor area, whichever is greater
Recreation Facility                    1 for each 1.5 persons at design
                                       capacity
                                       1 for every 4 residents plus 1 for each
Residential Facility or Group Home     employee on major shift plus 1 for each
                                       on-call medical professional
Restaurants, Bars                      1 for every 2 seats
Restaurant, Fast Food                  15 stacking spaces for each customer
                                       pickup window plus 1 for each 2 seats
Retail Sales                           1 for each 150 sq. ft. of gross retail
                                       sales floor space
Schools, Elementary, and Middle School 1 for each staff member plus 3 per
                                       classroom
Schools, Secondary                     1 for each school employee plus one
                                       space per 4 students
Service Station                        3 for each enclosed bay plus 1 for each
                                       employee on peak work shift
Uses Not Specifically Noted Including  As determined by City Council after
Public Uses                            recommendation by Planning Commission.
 
      K.   Parking Capacity to be Maintained.
         1.   Surfacing and striping of parking lots shall be maintained in a
manner that will assure that the designated parking capacity is met.
         2.   Snow storage areas shall be provided so that the number of
parking spaces is not reduced below the minimum required. The City may initiate
proceedings to require that snow be hauled off the site if parking and
circulation problems related to inadequate snow-removal occur.
         3.   Required parking, loading or maneuvering space shall not be used
for the sales, storage, display or leasing of vehicles, boats or products,
except for temporary use by special permit.
      L.   Building Permit and Site Plan Approval Required. A building permit
shall be required in such case where a commercial, industrial, public or semi-
public land use is intending to construct on-site parking containing a site
aggregate of more than four (4) spaces or a loading facility that is not a part
of, or has prior approval as part of a site plan for which a building permit
has been issued.
      M.   Inoperable and Unlicensed Vehicles. Passenger vehicles, recreational
vehicles, trucks and watercraft that are in an inoperable condition or are
unlicensed or in storage shall not be parked outdoors in the City for a period
exceeding seven (7) days. "Inoperable" shall mean incapable of movement under
its own power or in need of repair or disposal in a junkyard.
   Subd. 2   Off-Street Loading. Off-street loading space shall be provided in
connection with any use which requires the receipt or distribution of materials
by truck. Where noise from such loading space is audible in a residential
district, the activity shall terminate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
   Subd. 3   Traffic and Circulation.
      A.   Accessibility to Public Streets. All commercial and industrial
buildings or structures and their accessory uses shall be accessible to and
from nearby public streets.
      B.   Traffic Control Measures. Vehicular traffic generated by a
commercial or industrial use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that
will avoid congestion on the public streets, traffic hazards, and excessive
traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic. The adequacy of
any proposed traffic circulation system to accomplish these objectives shall be
determined by the city which may require such additional measures for traffic
control as deemed necessary, including, but not limited to the following:
Directional signalization, channelization, standby turn lanes, illumination,
snow storage area and distribution facilities within the commercial site to
prevent backup of vehicles on public streets. Internal site traffic shall be
designed to separate perimeter traffic and parking areas. Parking stalls shall
be oriented so as to accommodate pedestrian traffic in a safe manner such as,
but not limited to, orienting parking aisles toward the principal building
entrances.
      C.   Driveways.
         1.    Driveway widths. The permitted width of accesses to County or
State streets or roads is subject to County or State regulations. The following
are the required driveway widths for driveways accessing the following types of
streets or roads, the measurements being between the edges of the driveway at
right angles thereto.
 
Types              Residential                   Commercial
                   Minimum (feet) Maximum (feet) Minimum (feet) Maximum (feet)
(a) Minor Streets  10             22             22             32
(b) City Collector 12             22             26             32
Streets
 
      2.    Minimum Driveway Angle to Public Street: Thirty (30) degrees when
the public street is one-way or divided, otherwise sixth (60) degrees.
      3.    Minimum Distance of Driveway from Street Intersections: Distance
shall be measured along street right-of-way line between the nearest driveway
edge and the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
If the driveway enters a and the intersecting       and the driveway enters
street classified as a:  street is classified as a: lane approaching or leaving
                                                    intersection:
If the driveway    and the intersecting and the driveway enters lane
enters a street    street is classified approaching or leaving intersection:
classified as a:   as a:                Approach (feet) Leave* (feet)
                   Local Street,
Local Street       Collector or Minor   15              15
                   arterial
Local Street       Minor Arterial       20              15
Collector Street   Local Street         20              15
And Minor Arterial Collector, Minor     25              15
                   Arterial
                   Major Arterial       35              20
Major Arterial     Local Street         20              15
                   Collector, Minor     25              15
                   Arterial
                   Major Arterial       40              20
                   Expressway Ramp      200             100
* Note: Minimum distance to be the same as that specified for approaching
lane if left turns are permitted into or out of driveway.
 
* Note: Minimum distance to be the same as that specified for approaching lane
if left turns are permitted into or out of driveway.
      4.    Proximity to lot lines. Access drives may be placed adjacent to
property lines, but in no case shall a driveway be placed nearer than five (5)
feet to an existing drive on an abutting parcel.
      5.    Proximity to residence or other principal building. No access drive
shall be closer than three (3) feet to any single- or two-family residence, nor
closer than five (5) feet to any other principal building.
      6.    Traffic Study May Be Required. Any site development that proposed
to increase the peak hour traffic on streets or highways near the development,
may be required to submit a Traffic Study prepared by a qualified traffic
engineer, that defines the impact of the development on the street and highway
system and shows techniques to mitigate potential problems.
   NOTE:   See City Code,
Chapter 8, for additional on-street parking regulations.
      7.    Access to streets. Each property which abuts one or more public
streets, shall be entitled to at least one access to a public street. Single
family uses shall be limited to one (1) access per property.
      8.    Prohibited areas. In all residential districts, parking shall be
prohibited on any area of the property except on designated driveways or
parking lots. There shall be no more than four vehicles parked on the driveway.
1325.07   Performance Standards.
(revised 9/27/21)
   Subd. 1   Maintenance.
      A.   Health and Safety. In all districts, all buildings and structures,
including fences and required landscaping, shall be maintained so as not to be
unsightly or present harmful health or safety conditions.
      B.   Snow Removal. In all districts, it shall be the responsibility of
the residential and/or business land owner to insure proper snow removal from
the sidewalks within twenty-four (24) hours after the last accumulation of two
(2) inches or more.
   Subd. 2   Refuse.
      A.   Containment. In all districts, any waste materials, debris, refuse
or garbage shall be stored and kept in accordance with the requirements of
Section
660.05 of the City Municipal Code, as the same may be amended from time to
time.
      B.   Noxious Weeds and Objectionable Plant Growth. Land shall be kept
free of noxious weeds and unsightly or objectionable plant growth of eight (8)
inches or more in height.
      C.   Home Interiors. Home interiors shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition free of any accumulation of rubbish and garbage in compliance with
State Health Regulations.
      D.   Compliance Deadline. Existing uses shall comply with these
provisions within thirty (30) days following the effective date of this Code.
   Subd. 3   Exterior Storage.
      A.   Residential Districts.
         1.   Materials and Equipment. All materials and equipment shall be
stored within a building or be fully screened so as not to be visible from
adjoining lots, except for the following: Laundry drying and recreational
equipment, construction and landscaping materials currently (within a period of
twelve (12) months) being used on the premises; agricultural materials and
equipment if these are used or intended for use on the premises; off-street
parking of passenger cars and pickup trucks.
         2.   Boats, Trailers and Utility Vehicles. Exterior storage of boats,
trailers and utility vehicles is not permitted in any residential district,
except as regulated in Section
1325.12.
      B.   Business and Industrial Districts.
         1.   Screening. All exterior storage in the business and industrial
districts shall be screened from public view, except materials and equipment
currently being used for on-site construction.
         2.   Parking. Vehicles, including but not limited to cars, trucks,
buses and RV's parked and/or stored in public view for more than a period of
seven (7) days shall be prohibited unless allowed by the permitted business or
industrial use, except as regulated in Section
1325.12.
   Subd. 4   Electrical and Radiation Emissions. No activities shall be
permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond an enclosed area. There
shall be no electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any
point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbances.
   Subd. 5   Environmental Pollution. Emission or creation of noise, odors,
vibrations, glare, dust, smoke, heat and toxic or noxious fumes shall conform
to such standards as are from time to time established by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency. None of these shall be at a level that is
objectionable to surrounding properties.
   Subd. 6   Animals. (Amd. Ord. 2024-006, passed 6-24-2024)
      A.   Location for Buildings Housing Farm Animals. Any building in which
farm animals are kept shall be located a distance of two hundred (200) feet or
more from any lot line. Any open structure in which farm animals are kept shall
be a distance of four hundred (400) feet or more from any lot line, except for
chicken coops and bee hives in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts provided the
following requirements are met:
Chicken Coops
         (1)   A coop, separate from other structures, is required to house the
chickens. Coops must be constructed and maintained to meet the following
minimum requirements:
            a.   A coop with a minimum of 20 square feet and no larger than 36
square feet is permitted as an accessory structure subject to Section
1325.01. Subd. 4 A. for Size.
            b.   Exemption to Ordinance - A residential property with a
detached garage and an accessory structure/shed will be allowed a third
accessory structure for keeping chickens. The combined square footage of all
three detached structures may not exceed 728 square feet.
            c.   Located in the rear yard. Chicken coop, pen, and
optional exercise yard are not permitted in the front or side yard.
            d.   Setbacks are subject to applicable accessory structure
setbacks of the underlying zoning district. In no instance shall the coop be
located in front of the rear building line of the principal structure.
            e.   The outer limit of the coop including pen shall be located
closer to the principal dwelling upon the property that is issued a license
than any other residential dwelling on an abutting property and shall in no
instance be located less than ten (10) feet from the property line and no
closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any public trail or walkway.
            f.   Climate control – adequate ventilation and/or insulation shall
be provided to maintain the coop temperature. Prior to issuance of a new
license, the prospective license holder must provide a plan for maintaining an
adequate temperature in the coop for safety of the fowl or poultry. The plan
must address both extreme winter and summer temperature conditions.
            g.   Rodent proof – coop construction, all grain and food, and
materials must be adequate to prevent access by rodents.
            h.   Coops shall be constructed and maintained in a workmanlike
manner.
            i.   Chickens must not be housed in a residential house or an
attached or detached garage.
         (2)   A pen is required. The pen must be constructed and maintained to
meet the following minimum standard:
            a.   The pen shall be located adjacent to the coop and fenced with
adequate coverage to keep hens in and predators out.
            b.   Minimum size per bird shall be 10 square feet of floor space.
         (3)   An exercise yard is optional. This area must be located adjacent
to the chicken coop and pen and chickens must be supervised by the licensee
while in an exercise yard.
         (4)   The licensee shall be responsible for cleaning up the chicken
keeping areas and disposing of waste in a sanitary manner. Chicken feces must
not be composted on site.
         (5)   Hens, coop, pen, and optional exercise yard shall not be kept in
such a manner as to constitute a nuisance to the occupants of adjacent
property.
         (6)   Any violation of the above conditions, (i.e. roaming chickens
outside of proper enclosure, uncontrolled odor), if not remedied within 10
days, may result in revocation of the license.
         (7)   If the license holder does not renew the chicken license, and
the coop was licensed as an allowed third accessory structure for chickens, the
coop/third structure cannot be repurposed for a storage structure, and the
homeowner shall have 60 days to remove any coop, pen, and exercise yard
associated with the keeping of chickens in its entirety. If the homeowner/
license holder fails to perform the above, the City may enter upon the subject
property, remove the coop, pen, and exercise yard from the homeowner’s
property, and charge the amount back to the homeowner as an assessment on the
property tax roll. If the coop was licensed as an allowed second accessory
structure, and the property complies with the accessory structure requirements,
the structure may be repurposed for a storage structure.
(Updated 9/22/25)
Bee Hives
         (1)   The number of hives on residential lots is not to exceed:
            i.   1 acre or larger: 8
            ii.   1 acre to 3/4 acre: 6
            iii.   3/4 acre to 1/2 acre: 4
            iv.   1/2 acre or less: 2
         (2)   The bee hive(s) may not be located in the front yard or a side
yard abutting a street.
         (3)   Bee hive(s) may be no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to an
occupied building on another lot and/or any public trail or walkway.
         (4)   The hives shall be located at least ten (10) feet from side and
rear property lines.
         (5)   Any property owner who keeps bees shall provide and maintain a
nearby, designated water source.
         (6)   Prior to installation of the bee hive(s), the property owner
shall provide written notice to the neighbors immediately adjacent of their
intent to keep bees.
      B.   Number of Animals Allowed. Up to four (4) domestic animals,
excluding birds and fish, are permitted in any dwelling unit, but without a
residential dog kennel license not more than two (2) may be dogs. Up to three
(3) dogs are allowed with a residential dog kennel license. Dog enclosures may
be located only in a rear yard in all zoning districts.
      C.   Animals for Research. Animals for research may be kept in
appropriate places by conditional use permit.
      D.   Wild Animals. Wild animals are not permitted in any district.
   Subd. 7   Site Grading.
      A.   Erosion Prevention. Earth surfaces shall be planted or stabilized to
prevent erosion.
      B.   Drainage onto Neighboring Property. Finished slopes and grades shall
not cause adverse drainage effects on adjoining properties.
1325.08   Filling and Excavation.
   Subd. 1   Permit Required. A Grading and Erosion Control permit also subject
to
Chapter 15 shall be required for any filling or excavation of up to four
hundred (400) cubic yards per parcel, or four hundred (400) cubic yards per
acre, whichever is greater. Operations of over the above-described amounts
shall be considered land reclamation or mining, and shall require a conditional
use permit in accordance with Section
1355.04, Subd. 3 of the Arden Hills Code of Ordinances.
   Subd. 2   Exceptions. The following operations are excepted from the
preceding permit requirements:
      A.   Excavation for construction of existing public streets and
utilities;
      B.   Filling, excavation, or movement of less than fifty (50) cubic yards
of earth for landscaping purposes on a lot already occupied by a residential
structure;
      C.   Minor agricultural or conservation operations.
   Subd. 3   Type of Fill. Fill to be placed on sites shall be subject to City
Engineer approval. Building construction materials, concrete, bituminous, and
soils containing hazardous or toxic waste, predominately organic materials,
household wastes, mechanical debris, etc., shall not be permitted.
   Subd. 4   Periodic Operations. Periodic filling or excavation of amounts
less than four hundred (400) cubic yards per parcel or per acre shall be
allowed under separate Grading and Erosion Control permits until the composite
total of such periodic operations exceeds four hundred (400) cubic yards.
Further operations will then be subject to a conditional use permit in
accordance with Section
1355.04, Subd. 3 of the Arden Hills Code of Ordinances.
   Subd. 5   Submissions. The applicant for a Grading and Erosion Control
permit shall submit the information outlined in
Chapter 15 Section 1520 – Erosion and Sediment Control Plans and Review.
   Subd. 6   Review Procedure. The Grading and Erosion Control permit
application shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and other members of the
administrative staff to determine the impact of the proposed operations upon
drainage patterns, adjacent properties, wetlands, and bodies of water. The
permit may be approved as submitted, approved with modifications, or rejected
because of specifically stated adverse impacts. If denied, the applicant may
appeal the administrative decision to the City Council within ten (10) days.
(Amended 11/27/23)
1325.09   Antennas, Dish Antennas and Towers.
(revised 8/5/09)
   Subd. 1   Purpose. In order to accommodate the communication needs of
residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the community, the City finds that these regulations are
necessary to:
      A.   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate new personal wireless service antennas in order to reduce the
number of new towers necessary to serve the community;
      B.   Ensure antennas and towers are designed, located, and constructed in
accordance with all applicable code requirements to avoid potential damage to
adjacent properties from failure of the antenna and tower through structural
standards and setback requirements;
   Subd. 2   Applicability. The regulations in this subsection shall apply to
any antenna or tower except as hereinafter provided in Subd. 3.
   Subd. 3   Exemptions.
      A.   Antennas and towers used by the City for City purposes.
      B.   Receptive dish antennas under one (1) meter in diameter and
individual receptive antennas, which are no taller than twelve (12) feet above
the roofline, regardless of the zoning district.
      C.   In all residential districts, no more than two (2) exempted antennas
and no more than one (1) antenna requiring a conditional use permit shall be
allowed on any lot or parcel.
   Subd. 4   Conditional Use Permit. (revised 5/6/10)
      A.   New Antennas, dish antennas and towers are allowed only as
conditional accessory uses or structures. They are therefore allowed only on
property containing a principal use or structure to which the antenna, dish
antenna or tower is accessory or secondary. (revised 11/30/15)
      B.   Towers that were in existence prior to April 8, 2010 are allowed as
conditional uses and may be the primary use on a property. New antennas may be
added to said towers subject to the limitations of the conditional use permit
for each tower.
      C.   Antennas, dish antennas, and towers located on property owned by the
City of Arden Hills shall not require a conditional use permit and shall not be
subject to the height regulations in Subd. 5, Height, of this section.
   Subd. 5   Height. (revised 5/6/10) The height of an antenna or tower shall
be measured from the ground at the base of the antenna, tower, or other
structure that the antenna is attached to, to the highest point of the antenna
or tower. No antenna or tower shall exceed the following height limitations:
      A.   A dish antenna shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height if
ground or pole mounted and shall not extend more than twelve (12) feet above
the roof if it is roof mounted. Regardless of these height limitations, the
antenna shall be mounted as close to the ground or roof as practical.
      B.   No antenna or tower shall exceed a height of seventy-five (75) feet.
      C.   Towers constructed prior to April 8, 2010, which exceed the seventy-
five (75) foot height limit, shall not be increased in height. New antennas may
be placed on said towers provided the antennas meet the requirements of the
conditional use permit for the tower and do not exceed the height of the tower.
      D.   No antenna or tower shall exceed a height equal to the distance from
the base of the tower to the nearest overhead electrical power line (except
individual service drops), less five (5) feet.
   Subd. 6   Location.
      A.   New antennas shall be located on City water tower sites unless the
applicant shows, to the reasonable satisfaction of the City, that none of the
City water towers can be feasibly used from an engineering standpoint.
      B.   Preferences for Antenna and Support Structure Locations. When
selecting sites for the construction of new Antenna Support Structures and/or
for the placement of new antennas, when not located on a City water tower site,
the following preferences shall be followed in order of listing:
         1.   Existing towers or on existing structures located within any
Industrial, Civic-Center, or Business District zoned property
         2.   On new towers located within any Industrial, Civic-Center, or
Business District zoned property
         3.   Any existing towers or structures located within any Residential
zoned property.
         4.   Any new towers or structures located within any Residential zoned
property.
      C.   Co-location Required. If a new antenna support structure is to be
constructed, it shall be designed structurally and electrically to accommodate
both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least one (1)
additional user. Any antenna support structure must also be designed to allow
for future re-arrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas
mounted at different heights. Other users shall include, but not be limited to,
other cellular communication companies, Personal Communication Systems
companies, local police, fire and ambulance companies.
      D.   Prohibitions. No new support structures shall be approved for
construction, unless the applicant shows, to the reasonable satisfaction of the
City, that an existing tower or structure is not feasibly available for use
from an engineering standpoint.
      E.   Antennas and towers shall be located on sites or buildings in areas
that are the least visually intrusive to nearby properties and public streets.
            ii.   With the exception of antennas placed on towers constructed
prior to April 8, 2010, antennas, dish antennas or towers shall not be allowed
(revised 5/6/10):
         1.   Nearer the street than the principal building on the lot.
         2.   Nearer the side or rear lot lines than the minimum side or rear
yard setbacks for accessory uses as established in Section
1320.06 of this Code.
         3.   Nearer to an adjoining property's buildable area than to the
principal building on the site on which the antenna or tower will be placed.
         4.   Nearer to any property line than the height of the antenna or
tower.
   Subd. 7   Screening.
      A.   Dish Antennas. Screening shall be provided so as to prevent direct
view of a dish antenna from any street or from a public or private property
within six hundred (600) feet of the dish, as follows:
         1.   Ground Mounted Dishes. Screening for ground mounted dishes shall
consist of a fence, wall, earth berm or landscaping, or a combination of these
devices.
         2.   Roof or Wall Mounted Dishes. Screening for roof- or wall-mounted
dishes shall be in accordance with Section
1325.05 Subd 4
      B.   Antennas. Antennas shall be painted the color of the structure to
which they are attached.
   Subd. 8   Special Requirements for City Water Tower Sites. The placement of
licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular,
personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services on
water tower sites will be allowed only when the City is fully satisfied that
the following requirements are met:
      A.   The applicant's access to the facility will not increase the risks
of contamination to the City's water supply;
      B.   There is sufficient room on the structure to accommodate the
applicant's equipment and all equipment (antennas, exterior cables, etc)
attached to the structure is painted to match the color of the structure;
      C.   The presence of the equipment will not increase the water tower or
reservoir maintenance costs to the City;
      D.   The presence of the equipment will not be harmful to the health of
workers maintaining the water tower or reservoir.
      E.   Antennas placed on the top of the tower shall not exceed the height
of the tallest existing antenna.
      F.   There is sufficient room on the site to accommodate all ground
equipment and the following requirements for ground equipment are met:
         1.   The base transceiver station and all other ground equipment shall
be housed in an existing on-site equipment building whenever possible. If an
existing equipment building is unavailable, a new equipment building may be
constructed. If the equipment is to be housed in a weather-proof cabinet-like
structure in lieu of a building, it shall be mounted upon a suitable concrete
pad.
         2.   If there is an equipment building constructed on site, it shall
be subject to City approval.
         3.   To the extent possible, the equipment building or cabinet shall
be located adjacent to or near existing on-site buildings.
         4.   The equipment building or cabinet shall be screened from view of
adjacent properties by suitable vegetation, except where non-vegetative
screening (e.g., a decorative wall or fencing) better reflects and complements
the character of the neighborhood.
         5.   The City shall require a suitable financial surety to ensure
future removal of the equipment building or cabinet upon termination of the
lease.
         6.   All applicants must include a signed report from a State
registered engineer showing compliance with all applicable codes, standards and
structural requirements of how the additional antennas will affect the water
tower structure. A final inspection report from a State registered engineer
showing the work completed is in compliance with previously approved plans
shall also be required.
   Subd. 9   Requirements.
      A.   A building permit shall be required for all applications except
those as stated in Section
1325.09 Subd 1.A.
      B.   The City shall require the applicant to complete a radio frequency
interference study that is carried out by an independent and qualified
professional reasonably selected by the City that is able to demonstrate that
the applicant's use will not interfere with any existing communications
facilities.
1325.10   Temporary Buildings
   Subd. 1   Dwellings. No garage, tent, trailer, vehicle or accessory building
shall at any time be used as a dwelling except mobile homes located in an
approved mobile home park, and except for structures receiving a temporary
permit from the Council. The Council may, in its discretion, grant a temporary
permit for the use of the foregoing, structures as dwellings for a period not
to exceed ninety (90) days when an emergency or hardship situation exists.
   In addition to the foregoing, the Council, may if in its discretion it
determines an emergency or hardship situation exists, grant a temporary permit
for the use as a residence of a basement under a finished single family
residence where the basement is made suitable and safe for said residential
purpose and occupancy is approved by the Building Inspector.
   Subd. 2   Public, Semi-Public and Business Buildings. No portable
structures, manufactured housing units, mobile homes, air-supported structures,
tents or trailers shall be used as classrooms, offices or any other type of
public, semi-public or business use unless such structures are accessory to
permanent principal buildings on the site and unless a temporary permit is
reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the Council. Mobile public
libraries, blood mobiles, traveling exhibits, and on-site construction offices
are exempt from this provision, however, construction offices shall receive a
temporary structure permit in conjunction with the building permit for the
principal building requiring the construction office. The City Council may
determine that a time limitation for a permit for such a temporary building is
necessary to assure that the applicant pursues a permanent solution to the
situation that required a temporary building.
1325.12   Recreational Vehicle, Utility Trailer, Riding Lawn Mower, and
Watercraft Outdoor Storage.
(adopted 2/7/08)
   The unregulated outside parking and outside storage of recreational
vehicles, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft within a
residential use district is found to create a nuisance, hazard and detrimental
influence upon the public health, safety and general welfare of the community
by obstructing the view on streets and on private property, bringing noise and
odors into residential areas, creating cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas,
preventing the full use of residential streets for residential parking,
reducing the useable open space of streets and private property and otherwise
adversely affecting residential property values and neighborhood maintenance
and improvement.
   Subd. 1   General Regulations for Recreational Vehicles (RVs), Utility
Trailers, Riding Lawn Mowers, and Watercraft in All Districts.
      A.   Storage in an Enclosed Structure. RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn
mowers, and watercraft of any height or length may be kept within an enclosed
structure provided the structure conforms to the underlying zoning requirements
of the district.
      B.   Attachment to Ground Not Permitted. RVs, utility trailers, riding
lawn mowers, and watercraft shall not be permanently affixed to the ground in a
manner that would prevent removal. RVs and watercraft not permitted to be
operated on public streets shall be placed on or in a trailer or motor vehicle.
      C.   Use. RVs, utility trailers, and watercraft shall not be used for
temporary or permanent living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes. RVs and
watercraft shall not be connected to sewer, water, or other utilities, unless
otherwise permitted in Section
1325.12 Subd. 3B.
      D.   Condition While Stored. RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers,
and watercraft shall be stored or parked in a secure, safe, orderly, and well-
maintained condition that does not inhibit emergency vehicle access to any
property. All RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft shall
be currently licensed, if applicable, and be operable at all times.
      E.   Ownership. RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft
shall be owned by the owner or occupant of the property on which they are
stored.
      F.   RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft shall not
be permitted on a vacant lot unless in conformance with Section 1325.11.
   Subd. 2   Permitted RV, Utility Trailer, Riding Lawn Mower, and Watercraft
Storage. Storing RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft
outdoors is permitted in all residential districts provided that all of the
following provisions are met:
      A.   No more than three (3) RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, or
watercraft are permitted. Not more than one (1) of the three (3) may be a motor
home, travel trailer, camper, or other similar type of RV. RVs and watercraft
on a trailer shall be considered as one.
      B.    RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft shall not
be greater than twenty-eight (28) feet in length or twelve (12) feet in height.
      C.    One (1) motor home, travel trailer, camper, or other similar type
of RV that is greater than twenty-eight (28) feet, but not larger than thirty-
four (34) feet, in length is permitted in the rear yard provided that all of
the following criteria are met:
         1.   The RV meets the requirements of Section
1325.12 Subd. 2, D, E, and F.
         2.   The rear yard is fully enclosed by a six foot privacy fence or is
substantially screened from adjacent properties as determined by the Zoning
Administrator; which may include fencing, vegetation, or both.
      D.   RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft shall not
be stored within the principal structure side yard setback as required in the
underlying zone, and shall be at least ten (10) feet from the rear property
line. If both side and rear yards are available for storage, then the location
with the least visibility from streets and neighboring property, as determined
by the Zoning Administrator, shall be used for such storage.
      E.    RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft shall not
be stored closer to the street than the principal structure or attached garage
on the lot where they are stored.
      F.    RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft shall not
be stored closer to the principal building of an adjoining lot than to the
principal building on the lot where they are stored.
      G.    RVs, utility trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft located
in the side yard and visible from the public right-of-way shall be screened
with a six foot privacy fence or landscaping of similar opacity as determined
by the Zoning Administrator, unless they are kept on an improved hard surface.
      H.   Alternative locations for storing a RV, utility trailer, riding lawn
mower, or watercraft may be determined by the Zoning Administrator with an
administrative permit for one (1) RV, utility trailer, or watercraft, when
topographic conditions or lot configuration do not allow for the normal
location regulations to be met and all of the following criteria are met:
         1.   It is at least three feet from the side or rear property line;
         2.   It shall not be stored forward of the principal structure, except
as otherwise provided for in Section
1325.12, Subd. 3.
   Graphic Storage Location Summary for Subd. 2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-67.jpg]
 
   Subd. 3   Short-Term RV, Utility Trailer, Riding Lawn Mower, and Watercraft
Parking in Residential Districts
   A.   Short-Term Parking without Permit. Licensed and operable RVs, utility
trailers, riding lawn mowers, and watercraft of any length or height may be
parked in driveways for the sole expressed purpose of loading, unloading, and
cleaning for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours, provided that they
are not within five (5) feet of the curb or, if there is no curb, the edge of
the road driving surface, and do not encroach upon a pedestrian walkway.
   B.   Short-Term Parking with Permit. Administrative permits for a period of
up to seven (7) days, renewable once during a twelve (12) month period, may be
obtained from the Zoning Administrator that would permit a licensed and
operable RV, utility trailer, riding lawn mower, or watercraft to park in the
driveway, provided it is not within five (5) feet of the curb or, if there is
no curb, the edge of the road driving surface, and does not encroach upon a
pedestrian walkway. This permit would allow a motor home or other similar
vehicle to be connected to water and electricity.
   Subd. 4   Riparian Residential Lots.
   A.   In addition to RV, utility trailer, riding lawn mower, and watercraft
storage permitted by Section
1325.12 Subd. 2, the owner or occupant of a riparian lot is permitted to store
two (2) additional watercraft.
   B.   RVs, riding lawn mowers, and utility trailers shall not be stored
within fifty (50) feet of the shoreline.
   C.   Watercraft shall not be stored within ten (10) feet of the shoreline.
   Graphic Storage Location Summary for Subd. 4.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-69.jpg]
 
Section 1330 - Shoreland Regulations
1330.01   General Provisions.
   Subd. 1   Intent. The uncontrolled use of shorelands within the City of
Arden Hills affects the public health, safety and general welfare not only by
contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax
base. Therefore, it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare to provide for the wise development of shorelands of public waters. The
Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to the municipalities of
the State to regulate the subdivision, use, and development of the shorelands
of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters,
preserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands, and
provide for the wise utilization of waters and related land resources. This
responsibility shall hereby be recognized by the City of Arden Hills.
   Subd. 2   Purpose. To achieve the policies described in the City's
Comprehensive Plan and State and Federal policies and statutes, the City
intends to determine, control and guide future development within and
surrounding those land areas which are contiguous to designated bodies of
public water and areas of as herein defined and regulated. Specifically, the
City of Arden Hills Purports to:
   A.    Regulate the placement of sanitary and storm water disposal facilities
on lots;
      B.   Regulate the area of a lot, the length of water frontage suitable
for a building site, and setbacks;
      C.   Regulate alteration of the shorelands and wetlands of public waters;
      D.   Control natural environment areas of ecological value to maintain
existing aquatic, vegetation, and wildlife conditions to the maximum extent
possible;
   E.    Promote the use of native vegetation as a means to increase stormwater
infiltration, provide natural view sheds, and screen structures and parking
areas as viewed from public waters.
      1.    Statutory Authorization. This Section is adopted pursuant to the
authorization contained in furtherance of the policies declared in Minnesota
Statutes Chapters 105 and 462 and Minnesota Regulations Parts 6120.2500-
6120.3900.
      2.    Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It shall not be intended by
this Section to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where this Section imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this Section shall prevail.
      3.    Jurisdiction. This Section shall apply to all lands located within
the boundaries of the shoreland.
1330.02   Shoreland Management Districts and Uses.
   Subd. 1   Classification of Lakes. In order to guide the wise development
and utilization of shorelands of protected waters for the preservation of water
quality, natural characteristics, economic values and general health, safety
and welfare, certain protected waters in the City have been given a shoreland
management classification. These protected waters of the City have been
classified below consistent with the criteria found in Minnesota Regulations,
Part 6120.3300, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Ramsey County,
Minnesota.
                               DNR I.D. No.
General Development Lakes:       
Josephine                       62-57
Johanna                         62-78
Karth                           62-72
Little Johanna                  62-58
Recreational Development Lakes:  
Round Lake                      62-70
Natural Environmental Lakes:     
Sunfish                         62-65
Valentine                       62-71
 
   Subd. 2   Establishment of Shoreland Management Districts; Zoning Map. The
boundaries of the Shoreland Management Districts are hereby continued as shown
on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map of Arden Hills, Minnesota," which map
shall be properly approved and filed in the office of the City Administrator.
The shoreland management districts overlay existing zoning districts of the
City also shown on the official zoning map pursuant to this Code and the City
of Arden Hills Zoning Code. As indicated in this Section, certain portions of
the shorelands in the shoreland management districts are classified general
development, recreational development, or natural environment lakes. The map
and all of the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall
have the same force and effect as if set forth in this Section at length.
   Subd. 3   Boundaries of Shoreland Management Districts. The boundaries of
the shoreland management districts shall be determined by scaling distances on
the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of a shoreland management district shown on the
official zoning map, for example where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the City Council shall make the
necessary interpretation based upon topographic elevations and other available
technical data. Persons contesting the location of the shoreland management
district boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their
case to the City Council and to submit technical evidence.
1330.03   General Provisions.
(revised 6/28/21)
   Subd. 1   District Requirements. The following standards shall apply to all
shorelands of the protected waters listed in this Section. Where the
requirements of the underlying zoning district as shown on the official zoning
map are more restrictive than those set forth in this Section, then the more
restrictive standards shall apply:
                    Natural       Recreational       General Development
                    Environmental Development Waters Waters
                    Waters
Lot Area (square    40,000        20,000             14,000
feet): Riparian Lot
                                                     14,000 (for District
Lot Area (square                                     R-1)
feet): Non-Riparian 14,000        14,000             11,000 (for
Lot                                                  Districts R-2, R-3,
                                                     R-4)
Minimum Water
Frontage and Width  125           75                 75
at Building Line
(feet)
Structure Minimum
Setback from        150*          75*                50*
Ordinary High Water
Level (feet)
Structure Minimum   40 for Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4
Setbacks from       50 for Districts B-1, B-2, I-2
Streets and         55 for District I-1
Highways (feet)
Structure Maximum   35 for District R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, I-1
Height (feet)       45 for District I-2
Maximum Lot Area    35 for District R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4
Covered by          65 for District I-1
Impervious Surface  75 for District B-1, B-2, I-2
(%)
 
*See Section
1330.03, Subd. 4 for Exceptions to the Structure Setback Requirement
   Subd. 2   Roads and Parking Areas. Roads and parking areas shall be located
to retard the runoff of surface waters and nutrients in accordance with the
following criteria:
      A.    All roads and parking areas shall meet the setback requirements
established for structures of this Section.
      B.    Natural vegetation or other natural materials shall be used to
screen parking areas when viewed from the water.
   Subd. 3   Elevation of Lowest Floor.
      A.    Structures shall be placed at an elevation consistent with the
City's flood plain management controls as set forth in
Section 1335 of this Code.
      B.    In areas not regulated by flood plain management controls, the
elevation to which the lowest floor, including basements, shall be placed shall
be determined as follows:
         1.    For lakes, ponds, and flowages, by (a) an elevation of available
flood information and consistent with "Statewide Standards and Criteria for
Management of Flood Plain Areas of Minnesota," or (b) placing the lowest floor
at a level at least three (3) feet above the highest known water level. In
those instances where sufficient data on known high water levels are not
available, the ordinary high water level shall be used.
         2.    For streams, by an evaluation of available flood information and
consistent with "Statewide Standards and Criteria for Management of Flood Plain
Areas of Minnesota."
   Subd. 4   Adjacent Lots. On any shoreland lot where the adjacent lots have
existing dwellings that exceed the minimum setback from the OHW level, the
shoreline setback for a new dwelling unit or an addition to an existing
dwelling unit shall not be less than the average of the setbacks from the OHW
level for such adjacent dwellings minus ten (10) feet subject to the following:
      A.   In no case shall the new structure or addition be within the minimum
setback from the OWH level as stated in Section
1330.03 Subd 1.
      B.   In no case shall the new structure or addition be nearer to the OHW
level than the nearest adjacent structure.
      C.   The minimum structure setback in Section
1330.03 Subd. 1 shall be used for the adjacent lot when calculating the setback
if an adjacent lot is:
         1.   Vacant;
         2.   Has a use other than single or two-family residential; or,
         3.   Has a dwelling unit that encroaches on the minimum structure
setback.
   Subd. 5   Exceptions to Structure Setback Requirements. No structure shall
be placed within the structure setback requirements of the shoreland management
district. The following are not classified as structures for the purposes of
this section:
      A.    Docks and Boatlifts. Setback requirements from the ordinary high
water level shall not apply to docks and boatlifts. Location of docks and
boatlifts shall be controlled by applicable State and local regulations.
      B.    Stairways, access lifts, and landings. Setback requirements from
the ordinary high water level shall not apply to stairways, access lifts, or
landings. Stairways and access lifts are the preferred alternative to major
topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep
slopes to shore areas. Stairways, access lifts and landings located within the
Shore Impact Zone shall meet the following design standards:
         1.    Landings for stairways and lifts shall not exceed 40 square feet
in area.
         2.    Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, access lifts,
docks, or landings.
      C.    Uncovered patios. At grade uncovered patios that have an underside
surface that is entirely in contact with and wholly supported by the ground may
be placed within the structure setback requirements from the ordinary high
water level but shall not be placed within the Shore Impact Zone. Uncovered
patios shall not be considered landscaped area when calculating lot coverage.
      D.    Fences. Chain link, or other types of fences with a transparency of
at least 75 percent, may be placed within the structure setback requirements
from the ordinary high water level but shall not be placed within the Shore
Impact Zone.
      E.   Lakeshore lots may be permitted one (1) accessory storage shed
within the required structure setback from the ordinary high water level,
provided that it complies with the following provisions:
         1.   The structure or facility is not located within the Shore Impact
Zone.
         2.   The structure or facility does not exceed 100 square feet in size
and eight (8) feet in height, measured to the highest point of the structure.
         3.   The maximum width of the structure, as viewed from the water,
does not exceed ten (10) feet.
         4.   The structure or facility is not designed or used for human
habitation and does not contain a water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
         5.   The structure or facility shall be constructed of material
architecturally similar in design, texture, and color to the principal
structure on the lot; the design shall be reviewed by the City Planner prior to
issuance of building permits.
         6.   The structure shall be screened a minimum of 50 percent by opaque
vegetation or topography on the three walls seen from the lake with
ecologically suited landscaping landward of the ordinary high water level from
the lake.
         7.   The roof shall not be used as a deck or storage area.
         8.   The structure or facility is not a boathouse or boat storage
structure as defined under Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.245.
   Subd. 6   Maintenance of shoreland. The shoreland shall be protected from
adverse conditions affecting the public. Keeping the shoreland in a natural
state and the use of native vegetation is encouraged.
      A.   Up to ten (10) percent of the shoreline of a property may be
utilized for docks, but no property shall be limited to less than four feet of
the shoreline for the utilization of a dock, subject to DNR regulations.
      B.   Docks shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from side property
lines at the point of attachment to the shoreline. This requirement may be
adjusted by the Zoning Administrator in cases where topography or lot width
significantly limits the placement of docks.
      C.   Watercraft and other water equipment shall be stored in accordance
with Section
1325.12, Recreational Vehicle, Utility Trailer, Riding Lawn Mower, and
Watercraft Outdoor Storage, and be kept in a neat and orderly manner.
      D.   Boatlifts, docks, watercraft, accessory structures, and any other
equipment that is in a state of disrepair, inoperable, or otherwise unusable
shall not be stored outdoors.
      E.   Grading or otherwise removing natural cover from the Shore Impact
Zone or cutting or filling which changes the natural shoreline shall be
prohibited without proper permits.
      F.   The accumulation of debris, the creation or maintenance of safety
hazards, and similar activities shall be prohibited.
   Subd. 7   Shoreland Alterations.
      A.    Removal of Vegetation. The removal of vegetation shall be
restricted to prevent erosion into protected waters, to consume nutrients in
the soil, and to preserve shoreland aesthetics. Removal of vegetation in the
shoreland management districts shall be subject to the following provisions:
         1.   In Shore Impact Zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of
trees and shrubs for access to the shoreline, and cutting, pruning, and
trimming of trees is allowed provided that a minimum of seventy-five (75)
percent of the Shore Impact Zone be left in its natural state.
         2.   The minimal amount of vegetation shall be altered and sufficient
vegetative cover shall remain to screen cars, dwellings and other structures
when viewed from public waters.
         3.   Except for the removal of invasive species, clear cutting of
vegetation shall be prohibited.
         4.   Native vegetation shall be restored insofar as feasible after any
construction project is completed to retard surface runoff and soil erosion.
         5.   All disturbed areas are restored to prevent soil erosion.
         6.    The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees,
limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.
      B.    Grading and Filling. All land disturbance activity in the Shoreland
Management District shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 15 of the City Code, Erosion and Sediment Control.
      C.    Shoreline Alterations. Any work which shall change or diminish the
course, current or cross section of a protected water or wetland, or shall
alter the shoreline below the ordinary high water level, shall be subject to
approval by the Commissioner of Natural Resources, and the approval shall be
construed to mean the issuance by the Commissioner of Natural Resources of a
permit under the procedures of Minnesota Statutes.
      D.    Permeable Surface Credit. At the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator, up to five percent of a lot's required landscaped area, but not
exceeding 700 square feet, may be covered with pervious hard surfaces subject
to the approval of a Shoreland Mitigation Plan.
      E.    Shoreland Mitigation. A shoreland mitigation plan must be submitted
for residential development that requires land use approval including, but not
limited to, variances; conditional use permits; subdivisions; rezonings; or a
permeable surface credit. The plan shall be designed to mitigate the adverse
effects land development has on water quality and the lake environment. The
mitigation plan shall be signed by the property owner, approved by the Zoning
Administrator, and a Mitigation Affidavit recorded with the Register of Deeds
prior to the commencement of development activity. Furthermore, mitigation
plans shall be completed within one year of the plan's approval unless
otherwise approved by the City. An escrow fee that shall be held for a minimum
of two years shall also be submitted. The mitigation plan shall include at a
minimum two of the following practices:
         1.    Vegetation Restoration. Vegetation restoration areas may be
established which at a minimum shall include land within the shore and the
bluff impact zones or steep slopes. Land area shall be restored from lawn,
beach or other disturbances using native or natural landscaping.
            a)   Steep Slope/Bluff Restoration. Steep slopes and bluffs that
are vegetated with turf may be restored with deciduous and ornamental trees,
evergreens and shrubs that are native to the area.
            b)   Shoreline Buffer Restoration. A buffer zone of at least 25
feet from and parallel to the ordinary high water mark shall be planted or
restored and maintained with vegetation native to the area to fullest
practicable extent possible with effective erosion and sediment control.
Existing natural beaches or beaches which have been permitted by the DNR shall
be allowed to continue and be maintained. A minimum of 30 percent of the lot's
shoreline area shall be restored. This restoration area shall be contiguous
unless otherwise approved as part of the mitigation plan.
         2.    Architectural Mass. The use of natural color(s) and/or materials
on the exterior of the structure shall be used to reduce the visual impact.
Natural colors are shades of brown, gray, and green. Natural materials include
wood or stone that complement the setting of the structure.
         3.    Removal of Nonconforming Structures. The mitigation plan may
include the removal of structures that do not comply with the required
structure setbacks from the ordinary high water line or are located within a
shore impact zone or bluff impact zone.
         4.    Reduction of Impervious Surface Coverage. The mitigation plan
may include a minimum five percent reduction of the existing impervious surface
coverage. The preferable location of this reduction is within that portion of
the lot that drains to the lake.
         5.    Other Practices. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator,
other restoration or protection activities may be approved as part of a
mitigation plan provided they meet the objectives of this ordinance. Examples
include the removal of artificial sand beaches, stormwater management and
replacement of seawalls with bioengineering structures.
   Subd. 8   Subdivisions. No land shall be subdivided which shall be held
unsuitable by the City for the proposed use because of flooding, inadequate
drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development,
severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or
sewer access, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety,
or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
   Subd. 9   Planned Unit Developments. Planned Unit Developments may be
permitted in accordance with this Code and the City of Arden Hills Zoning Code,
provided that preliminary plans are approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to their approval by the City, and further provided that:
   A.    Open space is preserved through the use of restrictive deed covenants,
public dedications, or other methods.
   B.    The following factors shall be carefully evaluated to ensure the
increased density of development shall be consistent with the resource
limitations of the protected water:
         1.    Suitability of the site for the proposed use;
         2.    Physical and aesthetic impact of increased density;
         3.    Level of current development;
         4.    Amount and ownership of undeveloped shoreland;
         5.    Levels and types of water surface use and public accesses;
         6.    Possible effects on overall public use.
1330.04   Notification of the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
   Subd. 1   Variances. A copy of any request for a variance to the provisions
of this Section or plats which propose any lots which require variances to the
lot area and dimensional requirements of this Section or the notice of a public
hearing to consider a conditional use permit or planned unit development permit
shall be sent to the Commissioner of Natural Resources such that notice shall
be received by the commissioner at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing or
action on the request.
   Subd. 2   Amendments. A copy of all amendments to this Section and final
decisions granting variances or conditional uses within the shoreland
management districts shall be sent to the Commissioner of Natural Resources
within ten (10) days of the amendment or final action.
   Subd. 3   Plats. Copies of all plats within the shoreland management
districts shall be submitted to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within
ten (10) days of final approval by the City.
Section 1335 - Flood Plains
1335.01   Statutory Authorization.
   The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes Chapter
103F and Chapter 462 delegated the responsibility to local government units to
adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City
Council of the City of Arden Hills, Minnesota does ordain as follows:
1335.02   Findings of Fact.
   Subd. 1   Hazards Exist. The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to
periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   Subd. 2   Method Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. There regulations of this
Section are based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is
consistent with the standards established by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources.
   Subd. 3   National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This Ordinance is
adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59-78, as
amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
1335.03   Statement of Purpose.
   It shall be the purpose of this Section to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare and minimize those losses described in Section
1335.02 Subd 1.
1335.04   Zoning Code.
   The City of Arden Hill's Zoning Code is adopted by reference and made a part
of this Section as if set out in full.
1335.05   Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
   The Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be an elevation no lower
than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.
1335.06   Lands to Which Regulations Apply.
   These regulations of this Section shall apply to all lands within the City
as shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments thereto as being
located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood
Plain Districts.
1335.07   Establishment of Official Zoning Map.
   The Official Zoning Map together with all materials attached thereto shall
be adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Section as if set out
here in full. The attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study for
Ramsey County, Minnesota (All Jurisdictions) and Flood Insurance Rate Map
panels therein numbered 27123C0004G, 27123C0005G, 27123C0010G, 27123C0012G,
27123C0016G and 27123C0020G, all dated June 4, 2010, and prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Official Zoning Map shall be on file
in the Office of the City Administrator.
1335.08   Interpretation.
   Subd. 1   Minimum Standards. In their interpretation and application, these
regulations of this Section shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall
be liberally construed in favor of the City and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes.
   Subd. 2   Boundaries. The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be
determined by scaling distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the
district as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for example where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions
and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the Zoning Administrator, the
Board of Adjustment shall make the necessary interpretation. All decisions
shall be based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile, the
ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the City adopted its
initial floodplain ordinance or on the date of the first National Flood
Insurance Program map showing the 100-year floodplain if earlier, and other
available technical data. Any person contesting the location of the district
boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his or her case
to the Board and to submit technical evidence.
1335.09   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
   It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
1335.10   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
   This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the flood plain districts
or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the
City of Arden Hills or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision
lawfully made there under.
1335.11   Severability.
   If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
1335.12   Annexations.
   The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into Section
1335.07 above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate
boundaries of the City of Arden Hills at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of
Arden Hills after the date of adoption of this Ordinance, the newly annexed
floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance
immediately upon the date of annexation into the City of Arden Hills.
1335.13   Establishment of Zoning Districts.
   Subd. 1   Floodway District. The floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in this Section.
For lakes, wetlands and other basins, the Floodway District shall include those
areas designated as Zone AE (that do not have a floodway designated) and Zone A
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted in this Section that are below
the ordinary high water level as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section
103G.005, subdivision 14.
   Subd. 2   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include
those areas designated as floodway fringe, which shall include the areas shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, adopted in this Section, as being within Zone
AE but being located outside of the floodway. For lakes, wetlands and other
basins, the Flood Fringe District shall include those areas designated as Zone
AE (that do not have a floodway designated) and Zone A on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map panels adopted in this Section that are below the 1% annual chance
flood elevation (100-year flood elevation) but above the ordinary high water
level as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.005, subdivision 14.
   Subd. 3   General Flood Plain District. The General Flood Plain District
shall include those areas designated as Zone A and Zone AE (without a floodway
designation) on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in this Section, which are
not subject to the criteria in Subd 1 and Subd 2 above.
1335.14   Compliance with District Regulations.
   No new structure or land shall be used and no structure shall be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this Section and other applicable regulation.
Within the Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Flood Plain Districts, all uses
not listed as permitted uses or Conditional Uses shall be prohibited. In
addition, a caution shall be provided here that:
   Subd. 1   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles shall be subject to the general provisions
of this Zoning Code.
   Subd. 2   Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal
maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming
structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the
general provisions of this Section; and
   Subd. 3   As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures shall
be certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques shall be designed
and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified
in the general provisions of this Section.
1335.15   Floodway District.
   Subd. 1   Permitted Uses.
      A.   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
      B.   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport
landing strips.
      C.   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails.
      D.   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
   Subd. 2   Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses.
      A.   The use shall have low flood damage potential.
      B.   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
      C.   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations
and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
material or equipment.
   Subd. 3   Conditional Uses. Structures accessory to the uses listed as
permitted uses, and the specific uses listed below:
      A.   Structures accessory to the uses listed in Section
1335.16.
      B.   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
      C.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharfs, and water control
structures.
      D.   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and
pipelines.
      E.   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials.
      F.   Placement of fill or construction fences.
      G.   Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in
existing or new subdivisions or condominium type campgrounds, subject to the
exemptions and provisions of this Section.
      H.   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent shall be to protect
individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent shall be to protect
agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-
year frequency flood event.
   Subd. 4   Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses.
      A.   No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for
roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or
other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in
the stage of the one hundred (100) year or regional flood or cause an increase
in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected
      B.   All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and
standards contained in this Section.
      C.   The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district if one exists.
      D.   Fill.
         1.   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
         2.   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         3.   As an alternative, and consistent with Paragraph 2 above, dredge
spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, onsite
storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the
stages of the one hundred (100) year or regional flood
but only after the City has received an appropriate plan which assures the
removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time
available. The Conditional Use Permit shall be title registered with the
property in the Office of the County Recorder.
      E.   Accessory Structures.
         1.   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
         2.   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of flood waters.
            a)   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
            b)   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
         3.   Accessory structures shall be elevated or fill or structurally
dry flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing
classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed five hundred (500) square
feet in size at its largest projections, and for a detached garage, the
detached garage shall be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited
storage. All flood proofed accessory structures shall meet the following
additional standards:
            a)   The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and
            b)   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure shall be
elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or properly
flood proofed.
            c)   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at
least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no
higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using
human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy
this requirement for automatic openings.
      F.   Storage of Materials and Equipment.
         1.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life shall be prohibited.
         2.   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.
      G.   Structural works for flood control that will change the course,
current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be
subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statute, Section 103G. Community-wide
structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory
flood plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
      H.   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not
cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis
shall assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
1335.16   Flood Fringe District.
   Subd. 1   Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as Permitted Uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).
If no preexisting, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential
or non-residential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a Permitted
Use in the Flood Fringe District provided such use does not constitute a public
nuisance. All Permitted Uses shall comply with the standards for Flood Fringe
"Permitted Uses" listed in this Section and the "Standards for all Flood Fringe
Uses" listed in this Subsection.
   Subd. 2   Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses.
      A.   All structures, including accessory structures, shall be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor including any basement floor is at or above the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one (1) foot below the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation and the fill shall extend at an elevation of at least
fifteen (15) feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
      B.   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed five hundred (500)
square feet at its largest projection for the outside dimension at ground level
may be internally flood proofed in accordance with this Section.
      C.   The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of
one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowable only as a conditional use, unless the fill is specifically intended
to elevate a structure in accordance with this Section.
      D.   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill
to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
   Subd. 3   Conditional Uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or
flood proofed in accordance with this Section or any use of land that does not
comply with the standards in this Subsection shall only be allowable as a
conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the
standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in this Section.
   Subd. 4   Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Use
      A.   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be
utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts,
pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl
spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be
considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if:
         1.   The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the
structure;
         2.   It is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood
resistant materials; and
         3.   It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage.
      B.   The above-noted alternative elevation methods shall be subject to
the following additional standards:
         1.   Design and Certification. The structure's design and as-built
condition shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building
Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be at or above
the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or be designed to prevent flood water
from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.
         2.   Specific Standards for Above-Grade, Enclosed Areas. Above grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages shall be
designed to internally flood and the design plans shall stipulate:
            a)   The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be a minimum
of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade. The automatic openings
shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The
automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters without any form of human intervention; and
            b)   That the enclosed area shall be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles
or storage.
      C.   Basements, as defined by this Section, shall be subject to the
following:
         1.   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
         2.   Non-residential basements may be allowed below the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation provided the basement is structurally dry flood
proofed in accordance with this Section.
      D.   All areas of non-residential structures including basements to be
placed below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be flood proofed
in accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the
State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing shall meet the FP-1 or FP-
2 flood proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall
require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 and FP-4 classification shall
not be permitted.
      E.   When at any one time more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of
fill or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as
on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads,
dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted unless the community is enforcing
a State-approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a State-
approved shoreland ordinance, the plan shall clearly specify methods to be used
to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or
regional flood event. The plan shall be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City. The
plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from
the flood plain if adequate flood warning time exists.
      F.   Storage of Materials and Equipment.
         1.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life shall be prohibited.
         2.   Storage of other materials may be allowed if readily removable
from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance
with a plan approved by the City Council.
   Subd. 5   Standards for All Flood Fringe Uses.
      A.   All new principal structures shall have vehicular access at or above
an elevation not more than two (2) feet below the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of
Adjustment shall specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood
warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
      B.   Commercial Uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad
tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in
feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four (4)
upon occurrence of the regional flood.
      C.   Manufacturing and Industrial Uses. Measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plans operations especially along streams
having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
Paragraph B above. In considering permit applications, due consideration shall
be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be located in
flood plain areas.
      D.   Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard areas designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation - FEMA's
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. FEMA's standards
should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change
of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
      E.   Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been
specified on the Official Zoning Map.
      F.   Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in Section
1325.12.
      G.   All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame times to ground anchor. This requirement shall be in
addition to applicable state of local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
1335.17   General Flood Plain District.
   Subd. 1   Permitted Uses.
      A.   The uses listed as permitted uses for Floodway Districts, shall be
permitted uses in a General Flood Plain District.
      B.   All other uses shall be subject to the 1% annual chance flood (100-
Year Flood Elevations) and/or Floodway and Flood Fringe determinations criteria
pursuant to Subd 2 below. Section 1335.25 shall apply if the proposed use is in
the Floodway District, and Section 1335.26 shall apply is the proposed use is
in the Flood Fringe District.
   Subd. 2   Procedures for 1% annual chance (100-Year Flood Elevations) and/or
Floodway and Flood Fringe determinations for streams within the General Flood
Plain District.
      A.   Upon receipt of an application for a Conditional Use Permit for a
use within the General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be required to
furnish the following information as is deemed necessary by the City
Administrator for the determination of the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe
District.
         1.   A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional
areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water information;
and
         2.   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations; size, location, and spatial
arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site, and location
and elevations of streets.
         3.   Photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream
and downstream; and soil types; and
         4.   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream for at least five hundred (500) feet in either direction
from the proposed development.
      B.   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one (1) copy of the
above information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the Floodway
or Flood Fringe District and to determine the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations 1983, Parts
6120.5000-6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal Regulations Part 65 shall be
followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is
strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology
with the respective Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist prior to
commencing the analyst. The designated engineer or expert shall:
         1.   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
         2.   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
         3.   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser stage
increase than 0.5 foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional
State increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in
computing floodway boundaries.
      C.   The City Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert to the City Council. The City
Council shall formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended
Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the permit application.
The City Council, prior to official action, may submit the application and all
supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the
Department of Natural Resources or the Planning Commission for review and
comment. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe Boundaries have been determined,
the City Council shall refer the matter back to the City Administrator who
shall process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions
of this Section.
1335.18   Zone A Lakes.
   Procedures for determining 1% annual chance flood elevations (100-YR flood
elevations) for lakes located in Zone A:
   Subd. 1   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval
within a Zone A, the Zoning Administrator will use the 1% annual chance flood
elevation for that basin that has previously been determined in accordance with
approved FEMA methods, if available. If the 1% annual chance flood elevation
has not been previously determined, the applicant shall be required to furnish
all necessary information as deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator for
the determination for the 1% annual chance flood elevation in accordance with
approved FEMA methods.
   Subd. 2   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the Floodway
or Flood Fringe District and to determine the 1% annual chance flood elevation
(100-year flood elevation). Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations
1983, Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal Regulations Part 65
shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert
is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology
with the respective Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist prior to
commencing the analysis.
   Subd. 3   Once the 1% annual chance flood elevation (100-year flood
elevation) has been determined, the Zoning Administrator shall process the
permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of this Section.
1335.18   Subdivisions.
   Subd. 1   Review Criteria. No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable
for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage
treatment facilities. All lots within the flood plain districts shall be able
to contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and
sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this Section and
have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites
no lower than two (2) feet below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. For
all subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe boundaries,
the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and the required elevation of all
access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivisions drawings and
platting documents.
   Subd. 2   Floodway/Flood Fringe Determinations in the General Flood Plain
District. In the General Flood Plain District applicants shall provide the
information required to determine the one hundred (100) year flood elevation,
the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation for the subdivision site.
   Subd. 3   Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated
on fill above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements
incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for
multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These FEMA standards should be
investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special
flood hazard area designation will be requested.
1335.19   Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges.
   Subd. 1   All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical,
sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood
proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
   Subd. 2   Public Transportation Facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and
bridges to be located within the flood plain shall comply with this code.
Elevation to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be provided where
failure or interruption of the transportation facilities would result in danger
to the public health or safety of where such facilities are essential to the
orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be
constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of
transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
   Subd. 3   On-Site Sewage Treatment and Water Supply Systems. Where public
utilities are not provided:
      A.   On-site water supply systems shall be designated to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters in the systems; and
      B.   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject
to impairment of contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment
system designed in accordance with the State's current statewide standards for
on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with
this Section.
1335.21   Manufactured Homes.
   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in
flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only
if elevated in compliance with Section 5.0 of this Ordinance. If vehicular road
access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance
with Section 5.51, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed
until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable
to the Governing Body.
   Subd. 1   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing
manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on
subdivisions by this code.
   Subd. 2   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
1335.22   Recreational Vehicles.
   Subd. 1   Exemption. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of
this Ordinance if they are placed in any of the areas listed in Section 9.32
below and further they meet the following criteria:
      A.   Have current licenses required for highway use.
      B.   Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system,
are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used
in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the recreational vehicle has
no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
      C.   The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in
any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
   Subd. 2   Areas Exempted For Placement of Recreational Vehicles:
      A.   Individual lots or parcels of record.
      B.   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
      C.   Existing condominium type associations.
   Subd. 3   Recreational vehicles exempted in this Section lose this exemption
when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural addition
to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an accessory structure such
as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and all additions and
accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be
subject to the elevation/flood proofing requirements and the use of land
restrictions specified in Sections 1335.4.0 and 5.0 of this Ordinance. There
shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the
recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a
flood free location should flooding occur.
   Subd. 4   New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of
any existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites shall be
subject to the following:
      A.   Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said recreational vehicle and its
contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and
proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with Section 5.51
of this Ordinance. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of
this Section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood.
      B.   All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the
criteria of (a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a conditional use
if in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of 10.4 of
the Ordinance. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe
evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100 year flood. Said plan
shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall
demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation,
and shall demonstrate the provisions of Section 9.31 (a) and (b) of this
Ordinance will be met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or
replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not
be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with Section
8.3 of this Ordinance.
1335.23   Administration.
   The City Administrator or other official designated by the City Council
shall administer and enforce this Section. If the City Administrator finds a
violation of the provisions of this Section the City Administrator shall notify
the person responsible for the violation in accordance with the procedures.
   Subd. 1   Permit Required. A Permit issued by the City Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this Section shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance
and repair), or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof;
prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system; prior to
the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a
structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source;
and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of
materials or equipment within the flood plain.
   Subd. 2   Application for Permit. Application for a Permit shall be made in
duplicate to the City Administrator on forms furnished by the City
Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
   Subd. 3   State and Federal Permits. Prior to granting a Permit or
processing an application for a Conditional Use Permit or Variance, the City
Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary
State and Federal Permits.
   Subd. 4   Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or
Nonconforming Use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until
a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
   Subd. 5   Construction and use to be as provided on applications, plans,
permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Permits, conditional
use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance,
and punishable as provided by this Section of this Ordinance.
   Subd. 6   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this Section. Flood proofing
measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered
architect.
   Subd. 7   Record of First Floor Elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
flood plain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
flood proofed.
   Subd. 8   Notifications for Watercourse Alterations. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and
the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the community
authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has
applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minnesota
Statute, Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be
submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
   Subd. 9   Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease
the 100-year Flood Elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
(6) months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the
changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data.
1335.24   Board of Adjustment.
   Subd. 1   Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct
of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such Boards by
State law.
   Subd. 2   Administrative Review. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this Ordinance.
   Subd. 3   Variances. The City may authorize in specific cases such relief or
variance from the terms of this section and code in accordance with
Section 1355. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district
uses that are prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood
protection than the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation for the particular
area, or permit standards lower than those required by State law. The following
additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be
satisfied:
      A.   Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
      B.   Variances shall only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing of
good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a
determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      C.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
   Subd. 4   Conditional Uses. The City Council shall hear and decide
applications for conditional uses permissible under this Section. Applications
shall be submitted to the City Administrator who shall forward the application
to the City Council for consideration.
   Subd. 5   Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal
from a decision of the City Administrator, or an application for a variance or
conditional use permit, the Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and
give due notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board shall
submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the
application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner shall receive at least ten (10) days notice of the hearing.
   Subd. 6   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on the appeal,
variance, or conditional use permit in accordance with
Section 1355. In granting a variance or conditional use permit the City may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, which shall be in conformity
with the purposes of this Section. Violations of such conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance or
conditional use permit is granted, shall be punishable as described in Section
1335.36. A copy of all decisions granting variances or conditional use permits
shall be forwarded by mail to the Commission of Natural Resources within ten
(10) days of the action.
   Subd. 7   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board may be made, as
specified in the City's Official Controls and also Minnesota Statutes.
   Subd. 8   Flood Insurance Notice. The City Administrator shall notify the
applicant for a variance that:
      A.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and
      B.   Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property. The notification shall be maintained with
a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
   Subd. 9   Procedures to be Followed by the City Council in Passing on
Conditional Use Permit Applications within all Flood Plain Districts:
      A.   The applicant shall furnish the following information and additional
information as deemed necessary by the City Council for determining the
suitability of the particular site for the proposed used:
         1.   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and the relationship of the
above to the location of the stream channel.
         2.   Specifications for building construction and materials, flood
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
      B.   Transmit one copy of the information described above to a designated
engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance, where
necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and
velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the
plans for protection, and other technical matters.
      C.   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the City Council shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site
and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood
hazard.
   Subd. 10   Factors upon Which the Decision of the City Council shall be
based. In passing upon conditional use applications, the City Council shall
consider all relevant factors specified in this Section, and:
      A.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      B.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other
hydraulic structures.
      C.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
      D.   The susceptibility of the proposed facilities and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner.
      E.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      F.   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
      G.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      H.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      I.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for the area.
      J.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      K.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
      L.   Any other factors which shall be relevant to the purposes of this
Section.
   Subd. 11   Time for Acting on Application. The City Council shall act on an
application in the manner described above in accordance with
Section 1355.
   Subd. 12   Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. Upon
consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this Section, the
City Council shall attach such conditions to the granting of Conditional Use
Permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Section. The
conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      A.   Modifications of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
      B.   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
      C.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
      D.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory
storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
      E.   Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code
and this Section. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing measures
are consistent with the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and associated
flood factors for the particular area.
1335.35   Non-Conforming Uses.
   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of this Code but which shall not be in conformity with
the provisions of this Section shall be subject to the following. Historic
structures, as defined in Section
1305.04, Subd. 182, shall be subject to the provisions of Subds. 1 thru 5 of
this Section
   Subd. 1   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a
way that increases its nonconformity.
   Subd. 2   Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure
or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage
potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood
proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 floodproofing classifications)
allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in Subd 3
and Subd 5 below.
   Subd. 3   The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50
percent of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this
Section are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions
must include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost
placed on all manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the
structure, then the structure must meet the standards of Sections 1335.25 and
1335.26 of this Ordinance for new structures depending upon whether the
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
   Subd. 4   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for l2 consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this
Ordinance. The Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of
instances of nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of l2
months.
   Subd. 5   If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in this Ordinance, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance. The applicable provisions for
establishing new uses or new structures in Sections 1335.25, 1335.26, and
1335.27 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Flood Plain District, respectively.
   Subd. 6   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in this Ordinance,
from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the
existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other
improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building,
then the building addition and the existing nonconforming building must meet
the requirements of Sections 1335.25 and 1335.26 of this Ordinance for new
structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood
Fringe District, respectively.
1335.36   Enforcement and Penalties for Violation.
   Subd. 1   Misdemeanor. Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or
conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
defined by state law.
   Subd. 2   Other Remedies. Nothing contained shall prevent the City from
taking any other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. Such actions may include but shall not be limited to:
      A.   In responding to a suspected Code violation, the City Administrator
and City Council may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to
it, including but not limited to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-
the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National
Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the
guilty party. The City shall act in good faith to enforce these official
controls and to correct Code violations to the extent possible so as not to
jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
      B.   When a Code violation is either discovered by or brought to the
attention of the City Administrator, the City Administrator shall immediately
investigate the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably
possible, this information shall be submitted to the appropriate Department of
Natural Resources' and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office
along with the City's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree
possible.
      C.   The City Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this Section and all other Official Controls and the nature and
extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or
use is under construction or development, the City Administrator may order the
construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the City. If the construction or development is already
completed, then the City Administrator may either:
         1.   Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that shall be
made within a specified time period to bring the use of structure into
compliance with the official controls, or
         2.   Notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
      D.   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the City
Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that
lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this Section and shall be
prosecuted accordingly. The City Administrator shall also upon the lapse of the
specified response period notify the land owner to restore the land to the
condition which existed prior to the violation of this Section.
1335.37   Amendments.
   Subd. 1   Designation Removal. The flood plain designation of the Official
Zoning Map shall not be removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown
that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above
the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to
lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted
by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he or she determines that, through
other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
   Subd. 2   Agency Approval. All amendments to this Section, including
amendments to the Official Zoning Map, shall be submitted to and approved by
the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the
Official Zoning Map shall meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA)
Technical Conditions and Criteria and shall receive prior FEMA approval before
adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources shall be given ten (10) days
written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this Section and the
notice shall include a draft of the Section amendment or technical study under
consideration.
Section 1340 - Adult Uses
1340.01   Findings and Recitals.
   Subd. 1   On March 9, 1998, the City Council enacted an interim ordinance
(Ordinance #305) creating a moratorium on the establishment of adult uses
within the City and directing the City Staff to conduct a study to determine
how best to regulate such uses. The scope of the study was to include, but not
be limited to, the following:
   A.    The particular zoning districts in which adult establishments should
be allowed as either permitted or conditional uses;
   B.    The density and concentration of adult uses; and,
   C.    The effect of adult uses on other uses in the surrounding area.
   Subd. 2   Upon completion of the study, the matter was to be considered by
the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation to the City Council.
   The study has been completed and the Planning Commission has reviewed the
study and has passed its recommendation to the City Council for review. The
City Council has also reviewed the staff's study and duly considered the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   The staff's study contained copies of certain reports specifically including
a report which was prepared by the State Attorney General entitled "Report of
the Attorney General's Working Group on Regulation of Sexually Oriented
Businesses", dated June 6, 1989 (the "Report"). The Report considered evidence
from studies conducted in Minneapolis, St. Paul, and many other cities
throughout the country relating to sexually oriented businesses. The City
Staff, Planning Commission, and City Council have reviewed the Report.
   The Report, based upon the above referenced studies and the testimony and
evidence it concluded, among other things,". . . that sexually oriented
businesses are associated with high crime rates and depression of property
values. . . ." Prior to the issuance of the Report, the State Attorney
General's Working Group also heard testimony that " . . . the character of a
neighborhood can dramatically change when there is a concentration of sexually
oriented businesses adjacent to residential property." The Report found and
concluded that:
      A.   Adult uses have an impact on the neighborhoods surrounding them,
which is distinct from the impact caused by other commercial uses;
      B.   Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity to adult
theaters, bookstores and other adult uses experience increase crime rates (sex-
related crimes in particular), lowered property values, increased transiency,
and decreased stability of ownership;
      C.   The adverse impacts which adult uses have on surrounding areas
diminish as the distance from the adult uses increases;
      D.   Studies of other cities have shown that among the crimes which tend
to increase either within or in the near vicinity of adult uses are rapes,
prostitution, child molestation, indecent exposure and other lewd and
lascivious behavior;
      E.   The City of Phoenix, Arizona study confirmed that the sex crime rate
was on the average five hundred (500) percent higher in areas with sexually
oriented businesses;
      F.   Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult uses
are located as less than other areas which do not have such uses;
      G.   Studies of other cities have shown that the values of both
commercial and residential properties either are diminished or fail to
appreciate at the rate of other comparable properties when located in proximity
to adult uses; and
      H.   The Indianapolis, Indiana study established that professional real
estate appraisers believe that an adult bookstore would have a negative effect
on the value of both residential and commercial properties within a one to
three block area of the store.
   Subd. 3   The Arden Hills City Council finds the characteristics of Arden
Hills are substantially similar to those of the cities cited by the Report when
considering the affects of adult uses.
   The Arden Hills City Council finds, based upon the Report and the studies
cited therein, that adult uses may have adverse secondary effects upon certain
pre-existing land uses within the City, and that the public health, safety, and
general welfare will be promoted if the City adopts regulations regarding adult
uses.
   The Arden Hills City Council finds that the adverse secondary effects tend
to diminish if adult uses in the City are regulated by locational and licensing
requirements.
   Subd. 4   It is not the intent of the City to prohibit adult uses from
having a reasonable opportunity to locate within the City.
   The City's current zoning ordinance does not address such adult uses, which
have been found by other municipalities to cause similar adverse secondary
effects. Specifically, the City Council is concerned that the City's zoning
ordinance may be inadequate in its scope and in its restrictions to accomplish
the purpose for which it was intended.
   Subd. 5   In addition to the proper zoning classification of such uses,
there are a number of significant planning and land use issues pertaining to
the regulation of such uses, including the following:
      A.   The particular zoning districts in which such uses should be allowed
as either permitted or conditional uses.
      B.   The concentration and density of such uses in the City and its
neighborhoods.
      C.   The effect of such uses on other uses in the surrounding area.
1340.02   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall be defined as
set forth below:
   Subd. 1   Adult Establishment. Adult Establishment means:
      A.   Adult Patronage. Any business that is conducted exclusively for the
patronage of adults and that excludes minors from patronage, either by
operation of law or by the owners of the business;
      B.   Receipts; Floor Area; Types of Merchandise. Any business that (i)
derives twenty-five (25) percent or more of its gross receipts during any
calendar month from, or (ii) devotes twenty-five (25) percent or more of its
floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any
portion of the business not open to the public) to, items, merchandise, devices
or other materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas; or
      C.   Adult Usage. Any business that engages in any Adult Use.
   Subd. 2   Adult Uses, Generally. "Adult Uses" are premises, enterprises,
establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public
at, or in which, there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction
or description of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas
which are capable of being seen, heard, or smelled by members of the public.
Adult Uses include, but are not limited to, the following:
      A.   Adult Body Painting Studio. An establishment or business which
provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent
or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of "Specified Anatomical Areas."
      B.   Adult Bookstore. A building or portion of a building used for the
barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter (specifically
included, but not limited to, greeting cards), pictures, slides, records, audio
tape, videotape or motion picture film if such building or portion of a
building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of
the public excluding any minor by reason of age or if a substantial or
significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical Areas.
      C.   Adult Cabaret. A building or portion of a building used for
providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a
building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or other live
entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities
or Specified Anatomical Areas.
      D.   Adult Companionship Establishment. A companionship establishment
which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an
employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas.
      E.   Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor. A conversation/rap parlor which
excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in
or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical Areas.
      F.   Adult Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club which excludes minors
by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
      G.   Adult Hotel or Motel. Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel
from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage by reason of age and
wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
      H.   Adult Massage Parlor, Health Club. A massage parlor or health club
which restricts minors by reason of age, or which provides the services of
massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
      I.   Adult Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a building
used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by reason of age, or if such material is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical Areas for observation by patrons therein.
      J.   Adult Modeling Studio. A modeling studio which restricts minors by
reason of age, or whose major business is the provision, to customers, of
figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, or who engage in
Specified Sexual Activities or display Specified Anatomical Areas while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or
otherwise depicted by such customers.
      K.   Adult Motion Picture Arcade. Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or few persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
      L.   Adult Novelty Business. An establishment or business engaged in the
sale of novelty items which:
         1.    Restricts minors by reason of their age; or
         2.    Has as its principal activity the sale of devices and other
products which:
            a)   Stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed to
create sexual stimulation or excitement; or,
            b)   Are otherwise designed to stimulate or arouse sexual
excitement in any manner whatsoever, specifically including, but not limited
to, items such as inflatable dolls or similar devices; or,
            c)   Is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
      M.   Adult Sauna. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or
which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical Areas.
      N.   Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility. A building or portion of
building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot
air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a
building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the
steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
   Subd. 3   Specified Anatomical Areas. "Specified Anatomical Areas" are
defined as follows:
      A.   Female. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and,
      B.   Male. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   Subd. 4   Specified Sexual Activities. "Specified Sexual Activities" are
defined as follows:
      A.   General Sexually Oriented Acts. Actual or simulated:
         1.   Sexual intercourse;
         2.   Oral copulation;
         3.   Anal intercourse;
         4.   Oral-anal copulation;
         5.   Bestiality;
         6.   Direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals;
         7.   Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship;
         8.   The use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship; or,
         9.   Any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct:
anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
      B.    Genitalia. Any clear depiction of human genitals in the state of
sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
      C.   Certain Uses and Activities. Use of human or animal ejaculation,
sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
      D.   Touching. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breast; or
      E.   Nature of Clothing, or Lack Thereof. Situations involving a person
or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually
revealing costumes and who are engaged in activities involving the
flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any
such person; or
      F.   Animals. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-
oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
      G.   Irrigation. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal
irrigation.
1340.03   Regulation.
   Subd. 1   Location Restrictions. The restrictions set forth below shall
apply to the location of Adult Establishments.
      A.   No Adult Establishment shall be operated or maintained except within
the B4 zoning district pursuant to a conditional use permit more fully
described in Section
1355.04 Subd 3.; and
      B.   No Adult Establishment shall be operated or maintained within one
thousand (1000) feet of any residential district.
   The distance requirements provided for in this Section shall be measured as
set forth in
Section 1320 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   Subd. 2   Sign Requirements. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 12: Sign Regulations all businesses regulated under this chapter shall
comply with the following sign requirements:
      A.   All signs shall be wall signs.
      B.   No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the
premises shall be displayed in window areas or in any area where they can be
viewed from a public street or sidewalk in front of the building.
      C.   Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way.
      D.   No sign shall be placed in any window.
      E.   A one (1) square foot sign shall be placed on the door of the
establishment to state hours of operation and admittance is limited to adults
only.
      F.   Where any provisions of this section conflict with Sign Regulations,
the provision that is more stringent shall be applied.
   Subd. 3   Physical Layout of Business. Any Adult Establishment having
available for customers, patrons or members, a booth, room or cubicle for the
private viewing of any Specified Anatomical Areas or Specified Sexual
Activities must comply with the following requirements:
      A.   Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from
aisles and public areas of the Adult Establishment and shall be unobstructed by
any door, lock or other control type devices.
      B.   Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction
requirements:
         1.   Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms and cubicles and any non-public areas by a wall.
         2.   Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so
there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying the area.
         3.   All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from
the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, non-
absorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
         4.   The floor must be light colored, non-absorbent, smooth textured
and easily cleanable.
         5.   The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use
shall be a minimum of ten (10) foot candles at all times, as measured from the
floor.
      C.   Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any
time. No occupant of a booth, room or cubicle shall engage in any type of
sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No
individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.
   Subd. 4   License Required; Number of Licenses Available.
      A.   From and after the effective date of this Code no Adult
Establishment shall be operated or maintained in the City of Arden Hills
without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the City.
      B.   A license may be issued for only one Adult Establishment located at
a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or corporation which desires
to operate more than one (1) Adult Establishment shall have a separate license
for each such business.
      C.   No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any
person, partnership, corporation, or other entity.
      D.   Only one (1) licensed adult establishment may be operated:
         1.   Within a single building; or,
         2.   Upon a single tax parcel.
      E.   No more than three (3) licenses for an Adult Establishment may be
issued and active at any given time.
   Subd. 5   Application for License.
      A.   Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license
shall make application to the City Clerk.
      B.   The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the
City.
      C.   An applicant shall furnish the following information:
         1.   Names, addresses and dates of birth of applicant and spouse if
any.
         2.   Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of
age.
         3.   Address of the Adult Establishment to be operated by the
applicant.
         4.   The name of the City, County and State, if any, where the
applicant previously operated an Adult Establishment.
         5.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony
involving sexual conduct, the use or distribution of controlled substances or
the use or distribution of a dangerous weapon. If the answer to the last is
yes, state the jurisdiction in which the offense or offenses occurred. The
applicant may attach any explanation he or she deems appropriate.
         6.   If the applicant is a corporation (partnership/LLC/trust or other
business entity which is not a natural person), the name of the corporation,
the date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered
agent and the name and address of all share holders owning more than five (5)
percent of the stock in said corporation and all officers and directors of the
corporation.
      D.   Within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed application for a
license, the City Clerk shall submit the application to the City Council for
approval or denial.
      E.   Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relative
to the investigation of the application shall constitute grounds for denial of
the license.
   Subd. 6   Standards for Issuing Licenses.
      A.   To receive a license to operate an Adult Establishment, an applicant
must meet the following standards:
         1.   The applicant must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.
         2.   The applicant or his or her spouse has not been denied a similar
license by any other city, county or state within the preceding twelve months
or has not had such a license revoked or suspended within the preceding twelve
months.
         3.   All current real estate taxes have been paid on the licensed
premises.
         4.   The licensed premise meets all the provisions of this Section as
well as all building and fire codes.
         5.   The applicant or spouse has not been convicted of any felony
involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual
nature or involving the use or distribution of a controlled substance as
defined by Minnesota laws, or the use or distribution of a dangerous weapon.
The fact that a conviction may be under appeal shall not affect the
disqualification of the applicant.
         6.   All license and investigation fees required by this Chapter have
been paid.
      B.   For the purposes of this section the term "applicant" shall include
an individual, all persons having a financial interest in a partnership or
joint venture, and, in the case of a corporation (partnership/LLC/trust or
other business entity which is not a natural person), all officers, directors
and stockholders required to be named in the application.
      C.   All police, fire and building code investigations shall be completed
within twenty-one (21) days after the date the completed application is filed
with the City Clerk. Upon a showing of good cause and reasonable diligence on
the part of an investigator, the City Council may extend the investigation
period for a reasonable time. Any investigation not completed within the
allotted time period shall be deemed to be waived.
   Subd. 7   License Fees.
      A.   The annual license fee to operate an Adult Establishment shall be
determined by the City Council by resolution.
      B.   In addition to the annual license fee, an investigation fee in an
amount determined by the City Council by resolution shall be paid at the time
of the initial license application.
      C.   All appropriate fees shall be submitted along with the application
for a new or renewal license.
      D.   If an application is denied, the license fee, but not the
investigation fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
   Subd. 8   Display of License. The license shall be displayed in a
conspicuous public place in the Adult Establishment.
   Subd. 9   Renewal of License.
      A.   Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at 12:00
midnight on December 31st of each year unless sooner revoked by the City
Council, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year.
      B.   Applications for renewal must be submitted with the annual license
fee to the City Clerk not later than sixty (60) days before the license
expires.
      C.   Renewal of a license may be issued by the City Clerk unless the
Clerk finds cause for not renewing the license in which case the Clerk shall
submit the renewal application to the City Council prior to the expiration of
the license.
      D.   No license for which application for renewal has been timely made
shall be deemed to expire until the City Council has rendered its decision not
to renew a license. No application for renewal of a license may be denied by
the City Council until after the applicant has received ten (ten) days written
notice of a public hearing before the Council. The applicant may appear with or
without counsel at that public meeting and may present such evidence and
witnesses, as he or she deems appropriate.
   Subd. 10   Revocation of License.
      A.   The City Council shall revoke a license for any of the following
reasons:
         1.   Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given
on any initial or renewal application or material facts was omitted from any
such application.
         2.   The operator or an employee of the operator violates any
provisions of this Section or any rule or regulation adopted by the Council
pursuant to this Section, provided, however, that in the case of a first
offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee the
penalty shall not exceed a suspension of thirty days if the Council finds that
the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and
could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive
knowledge.
         3.   The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license.
         4.   Any cost or fee required to be paid by this Code is not paid.
         5.   Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or
consumed on the premises of the Adult Establishment.
      B.   The Council, before revoking or suspending any license, shall give
the operator ten (10) days written notice of the charges against him or her,
and an opportunity for a public hearing before the Council at which time the
operator may appear with or without counsel and may present such evidence and
witnesses as he or she deems appropriate.
      C.   The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall
automatically and immediately revoke the license.
      D.   Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to
receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or
premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an Adult
Establishment for six (6) months from the date of revocation of the license.
   Subd. 11   Responsibilities of Operator.
      A.   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator
if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or
approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to
supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such
act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or
caused the omission.
      B.   Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator
for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked,
suspended or renewed.
      C.   No employee of an Adult Establishment shall allow any minor to
loiter around or to frequent the Adult Establishment or to allow any minor to
view Specified Anatomical Areas or Specified Sexual Activity at the Adult
Establishment.
      D.   The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
manner at all times.
      E.   The operator shall maintain at least ten-foot candles of light in
the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times.
However, if a lessor level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to
enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle
adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such
aisles, provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one (1) foot
candle of illumination in said aisles as measured from the floor.
      F.   All business transactions shall occur within the licensed building.
      G.   No employee shall have been convicted of any felony involving moral
turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature or
involving the use or distribution of a controlled substance as defined by
Minnesota laws, or the use or distribution of a dangerous weapon. The fact that
a conviction may be under appeal shall not affect the disqualification of the
employee.
      H.   The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its
patrons with the provisions of this Chapter.
   Subd. 12   Exclusions. All public and private schools located within the
City of Arden Hills are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when
instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum.
   Subd. 13   No Minors. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be
permitted to be present in an Adult Establishment.
   Subd. 14   Hours of Operation. The hours of operation for any business
licensed under this Chapter shall be between 9:00 AM to midnight.
   Subd. 15   Penalties
      A.   Any individual, partnership or corporation (partnership/LLC/trust or
other business entity which is not a natural person) who is found to have
violated the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall also be subject to revocation of any license.
      B.   Each violation of this Code shall be considered a separate offense
and any violation continuing more than one day shall be considered a separate
offense.
   Subd. 16   Enforcement. Members of the law enforcement agency providing
service to the City, the Fire Marshal, or designee, the Building Official or
designee and the Zoning Administrator or designee, shall have authority to
enter any Adult Establishment at all reasonable times to inspect the premises
for the purposes of enforcing this Chapter and all other applicable State laws,
fire codes and building codes.
1340.04   Prohibited Uses.
   An Adult Use which is also classified as "obscene" by Minn. Stat. §617.241,
Subd. 1A and/or as an "Adult Entertainment Establishment" by Minn. Stat.
§617.242, Subd. 1 is prohibited in the City of Arden Hills.
1340.05   Means of Enforcement.
   The City may enforce any provision of this Section by mandamus, injunction,
or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
This Section may also be enforced by appropriate criminal prosecution.
1340.06   Separability.
   Every section, provision, or part of this Section is declared separable from
every other section, provision, or part of this Section. If any section,
provision, or part of this Section is adjudged to be invalid by a Court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not invalidate any other section,
provision, or part of this Section.
Section 1345 - Conditional Uses
1345.01   Purpose and Intent.
   It is recognized that certain uses, although generally compatible with the
basic use classification of a particular zoning district, should not be
permitted generally and as a matter of right to be located in every area
included within the zoning district because of hazards inherent in the use
itself or special problems which its proposed location may present. Such a use
of a particular site may, nevertheless, be conditionally permitted by means of
a conditional use permit, granted by the Council, after the procedures set
forth in this Code and the City's Policy Manual on Land Use Procedures have
been complied with, and the Council, on the basis of the guidelines and
criteria set forth in Chapter
1355.04 Subd 3, has determined that the facts and circumstances of the
particular case warrant granting the permit. The permit shall be granted solely
for the proposed use of a particular site, not for a particular person or firm.
Uses for which Conditional Use Permits may be issued are classified either as
Conditional Accessory Uses or Conditional Principal Uses and are found in
Section 1320 along with the zoning districts in which they may be located.
1345.02   General Criteria.
   In determining whether to grant a conditional use permit for the proposed
principal or accessory use of a particular site, the planning commission and
council shall follow the procedure as set forth in Appendix A, Procedure
Manual, and in
Section 1355 of this ordinance.
1345.03   Changes in Conditionally Permitted Use.
   After the conditional use permit has been granted, the use conditionally
permitted thereunder shall be established, conducted and maintained in
conformity with the terms thereof, including all conditions set forth therein.
Any structural alteration, enlargement or intensification thereof, or similar
change not specifically permitted by the permit, shall require an amended
permit and all procedures shall apply as if a new permit were being requested;
provided, however, that when such changes are deemed to be insignificant by the
zoning administrator, the requirements of a public hearing may be waived.
1345.04   Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map Consistency.
   In the granting of conditional use permits for medium- and high-density
residential uses and business or industrial uses the council shall first find
that the proposed development is in compliance with the adopted comprehensive
development plan and the Zoning Map for Arden Hills, both in terms of the
various policy statements and the site location set forth therein. If such
proposal is not in compliance with the comprehensive development plan and
zoning map, a comprehensive plan amendment and zoning map amendment application
must accompany the application for a conditional use permit.
Section 1350 - Nonconforming Uses, Buildings, and Lots
1350.01   Intent.
   Subd. 1   Nonconforming Use of Land or Buildings. A nonconforming use of
land or buildings may be continued subject to the provisions of this Section,
but it is the intent of this Code not to encourage its survival because of its
incompatibility with permitted uses in the zoning district in which it is
located.
   Subd. 2   Nonconforming Buildings. A building found to be non-conforming
because of height, setbacks or lot area, may continue to exist so long as it is
used for purposes permitted in the zoning district in which it is located and
is in conformance with Section
1350.02.
1350.02   Continuation of Nonconforming Uses and Buildings.
   Any nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or
premises shall not be expanded but may be continued, including through repair,
replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement, unless:
   Subd. 1   The nonconforming use or occupancy is discontinued or ceases to
exist for any reason for a one-year period. The building or structure
constituting or containing the nonconforming use, or the land upon which the
nonconforming use is being conducted, shall thereafter be used in conformance
with the regulations of this Code applicable to the zoning district in which it
is located.
   Subd. 2   The nonconforming use or occupancy is destroyed by fire or other
peril to the extent of greater than fifty (50) percent of its market value on
the date immediately prior to the date on which such damage or destruction
occurred as determined by the Building Official, and no building permit has
been applied for within one hundred and eighty (180) days of when the property
is damaged. In this case, the City may impose reasonable conditions upon a
building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent
property.
1350.03   Prohibited Activities: Nonconforming Use.
   Nonconforming uses shall not be changed to a different nonconforming use,
enlarged, intensified, increased, extended to occupy a greater area of the lot
on which it is located, or moved to any other part of the lot or building on
which it is located.
1350.04   Prohibited Activities: Nonconforming Building.
   Nonconforming buildings shall not be increased, enlarged, altered,
intensified, or extended to occupy a greater area or height on the lot on which
the building is located, or moved to any other part of the lot on which the
building is located in a way that augments its nonconformity.
1350.05   Unsafe Building or Structure.
   Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to prevent the restoration to a safe
condition of any building or structure, or portion thereof, constituting or
containing a nonconforming use, which has been declared unsafe by the building
inspector or other administrative officer.
1350.06   Construction Approved and Begun Prior To Effective Date.
   To avoid hardship, nothing in this Code shall be deemed to require a change
in the plans, construction or designated use of any building for which a
building permit has been issued and the construction of which has begun prior
to the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto.
Section 1355 - Administration and Procedures (revised 7/7/11)
1355.01   Procedure for Public Hearings.
   Subd. 1   Actions Requiring Public Hearings. The following land use
applications require that a public hearing be held prior to action by the City
Council:
   A.    Amendments to the Zoning Code regulations;
   B.    Rezoning of land from one district to another;
   C.    Conditional Use Permits for Conditional Principal or Conditional
Accessory Uses;
   D.    Planned Unit Developments;
   E.    Comprehensive Plan Amendments;
   F.    Interim Use Permits.
   Subd. 2   Actions Not Requiring Public Hearings. The following land use
applications do not require a public hearing unless the Zoning Administrator
determines that adjoining property owners or other residents should be advised
of a specific proposal:
      A.   Variances
      B.   Site Plan Reviews
   Subd. 3   Notice of Public Hearing.
      A.   Published Notice. A notice of the time, place, and purpose of Public
Hearing shall be published in the Official newspaper at least ten (10) days
prior to the day of the Hearing.
      B.   Mailed Notice. Rezoning of land, Conditional Use Permits, Interim
Use Permits, and Planned Unit Developments, shall also require mailed notice,
at least ten (10) days before the day of hearing, to each owner of property
situated wholly or partially within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the
boundary of the Property on which the application requiring the Public Hearing
is situated. The City Council shall be responsible for mailing the notices to
the landowners.
      C.   Referral to Others. The administrator shall also refer copies of the
application and required documentation in support thereof to other City
officials who have an interest therein in accordance with the required
administrative distribution schedule.
      D.   Record of Notice. A copy of the notice and a list of the names and
addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested to by the
administrator and shall be made a part of the records of the proceedings.
      E.   Failure of Written Notice. The failure to give mailed notice to
individual property owners shall not invalidate the proceeding, provided a bona
fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements.
   Subd. 4   Public Hearing by Planning Commission. The public hearing shall be
held before the Planning Commission. The applicant or its representative shall
be given the opportunity to appear before the Planning Commission to answer
questions or give explanations regarding the proposal. The Planning Commission
may adjourn the public hearing to its next meeting, either regular or special,
and may continue its study and consideration of the application at meetings
subsequent to the meeting at which the public hearing was initially held. Upon
completion of the public hearing and its study and consideration of the
application, the Planning Commission shall submit its written report,
containing its findings, conclusions, and recommendations as to the
application, to the City Council.
   Subd. 5   Additional Hearings by City Council. The City Council may hold
additional hearings Failure to receive a report from the Planning Commission,
as herein provided, shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the City
Council.
   Subd. 6   Action by City Council. The City Council must take action on the
application in accordance with Section
1355.05 of this Code. City Council action may include approval, denial, or
referral back to the Planning Commission. City Council action may include
approval in whole or in part, tabling for a specified period of time, or
referral back to the Planning Commission for its further consideration and
report to the Council within a specified period of time not to exceed the
timeline contained in Minnesota Statutes §15.99. The applicant shall be
notified in writing of the City Council's action.
1355.02   Procedure for Actions Not Requiring Public Hearings.
   Requests for Variances and Site Plan Reviews do not require a public hearing
unless the Zoning Administrator determines that adjoining property owners or
other residents should be invited to the Planning Commission meeting to offer
responses to the application, prior to action by the City.
   Subd. 1   Placing Request on Planning Commission Agenda. The Zoning
Administrator shall place the request on the Planning Commission Agenda.
   Subd. 2   Referral to Others. The Zoning Administrator shall also refer
copies of the application and required documentation in support thereof to
other City officials who have an interest therein in accordance with the
required administrative distribution schedule.
   Subd. 3   Planning Commission Consideration. The applicant or its
representative shall be given the opportunity to appear before the Planning
Commission to answer questions or give explanations regarding the proposal. The
Planning Commission may adjourn the discussion to its next meeting, either
regular or special, and may continue its study and consideration of the
application at meetings subsequent to the meeting at which the initial
discussion occurred. Upon completion of its study and consideration of the
application, the Planning Commission shall submit its written report,
containing its finding, conclusions, and recommendations to the City Council.
   Subd. 4   City Council Consideration. The City Council shall consider the
advice and recommendations of the Planning Commission and may approve the
application if it determines that the application complies with the city
standards. Applications may be denied by action of the City Council, and such
action shall constitute a finding and determination that the conditions
required for approval do not exist.
   Subd. 5   Action by City Council. The City Council must take action on the
application in accordance with Section
1355.05 of this Code. City Council action may include approval, denial, or
referral back to the Planning Commission.
1355.03   Application Requirements for All Land Use Procedures.
   Subd. 1   Application. The completed land use application shall be submitted
to the Zoning Administrator.
   Subd. 2   Documentation. Forms describing the required documentation for
each land use application required herein are included as Appendix A, Procedure
Manual and are available from the Zoning Administrator.
   Subd. 3   Action by City Council. The City Council shall review all land use
applications in accordance with Section
1355.05 of this Code.
1355.04   Procedural Requirements for Specific Applications.
   Subd. 1   Zoning Code Amendment.
      A.   Public Hearing. A public hearing is required before action by the
City Council.
      B.   Action to Approve. Three affirmative votes of the City Council are
required for action to amend the text of the Zoning Code. In the event an
application for amendment is approved, an appropriate amending ordinance shall
be executed and published.
   Subd. 2   Rezonings/Comprehensive Plan.
      A.   Consistency with Comprehensive Plan. If a proposed rezoning is not
consistent with the Arden Hills Comprehensive Plan, the applicant shall apply
for a Comprehensive Plan Amendment concurrently with the application for
rezoning. Written and graphic documentation shall be provided by the applicant,
showing why the proposed amendment is superior to the existing Plan and changes
that have occurred that make the Amendment appropriate.
      B.   Public Hearing. A public hearing is required for a Comprehensive
Plan Amendment and for the rezoning.
      C.   Action to Approve. Three affirmative votes of the City Council are
required to rezone property from one district to another, provided that the
rezoning of property from residential use to an industrial use shall require
approval by four affirmative votes of the City Council. Comprehensive Plan
Amendments shall require four affirmative votes of the City Council. In the
event an application for a rezoning is approved, an appropriate amending
ordinance shall be executed and published. Rezoning amendments shall describe
the property rezoned by its legal description, and shall be indicated on the
official zoning map, but it shall not be necessary to re-publish said zoning
map to effectuate the rezoning amendment.
      D.   Business and Industrial District Rezoning. Before any new area is
rezoned to a business or industrial classification, the property must be
located adjacent to an arterial or collector road as shown on the Comprehensive
Development Plan, or the rezoning will be an extension of an existing business
or industrial district and in conformance with the intent of the Comprehensive
Plan.
   Subd. 3   Conditional Use Permits.
      A.   Public Hearing. A public hearing is required.
      B.   Action to Approve. Three affirmative votes of the City council are
required to approve a conditional use permit and the action of the City Council
must include a determination that the facts and circumstances of the particular
case warrant the granting of the permit. The Council shall consider the factual
findings, conclusions and recommendations of the Planning Commission, as
contained in its report, and both shall consider the effect of the proposed use
upon the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the owners and
occupants of surrounding land, in particular, and the community as a whole, in
general, including but not limited to the following factors: existing and
anticipated traffic and parking conditions; noise, glare, odors, vibration,
smoke, dust, air pollution, heat, liquid or solid waste, and other nuisance
characteristics; drainage; population density; visual and land use
compatibility with uses and structures on surrounding land; adjoining land
values; park dedications where applicable, and the orderly development of the
neighborhood and the city within the general purpose and intent of this Zoning
Code and the Comprehensive Plan for the City.
      C.   Imposition of Conditions. In the granting of a conditional use
permit, the City Council may impose such conditions, in addition to the general
conditions and requirements of this Code to which every conditional use permit
shall be subject, as it deems necessary to serve and protect the health,
safety, convenience and general welfare of the community. Such conditions may
include, among other things, a time limit within which the conditional use or a
portion thereof, or improvements in connection therewith are to be established,
constructed, completed or commenced, and a requirement that the person or firm
to whom the conditional use permit has been granted deposit with the City
either cash or a performance bond in a sum equal to one hundred twenty five
(125%) percent of the estimated cost, as determined by the City Engineer, of
improvements to be constructed in accordance with the permit to insure
completion thereof within the time limit specified in the permit. The
conditions so imposed by the City Council shall be specifically stated in the
permit and maybe subject to periodic review as determined by the City Council.
The violation of any special or general condition set forth in a conditional
use permit shall constitute a violation of this Code.
      D.   Permit for Particular Site. A conditional use permit is granted for
a specific use at a specific site, not for a person or firm.
      E.   Designated Uses. Uses for which conditional use permits are required
and the zoning districts in which they are allowed are designated in the land
use chart as set forth in
Section 1320 hereof. No building permit shall be issued for any use in a zoning
district which requires the issuance of a conditional use permit before it can
be located in the particular district, until after the conditional use permit
has been granted by the City Council.
      F.   Discontinuance of a Conditional Use. If the use for which any
conditional use permit has been granted has ceased or has been discontinued for
a period of ninety (90) consecutive days, the permit shall automatically expire
and become void at the end of such ninety (90) day period.
   Subd. 4   Variances.
   A.    Public Hearing. A public hearing is not required but neighboring
property owners shall be notified.
   B.    Action to Approve. Three affirmative votes of the City Council are
required to approve the granting of a variance.
   C.    Criteria for Review. The following criteria shall be applied to the
City Council's review of a variance application:
         1.   Purpose and Intent. The variance request shall comply with the
purpose and intent provisions of City's Zoning Regulations and with the
policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan.
         2.   Practical Difficulties. The applicant for a variance shall
establish that there are practical difficulties in complying with the
provisions of the Arden Hills Zoning Regulations. The term "Practical
Difficulties" as used in the granting of a variance means:
            a)   Reasonable Use. The property owner proposes to use the
property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.
            b)   Unique Circumstances. The plight of property owner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner.
            c)   Character of Neighborhood. The variance, if granted, will not
alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
         3.   Economic Consideration. Economic consideration alone does not
constitute a practical difficulty.
         4.   Access to Sunlight. Inadequate access to direct sunlight for
solar energy systems shall be considered a practical difficulty.
         5.   Earth Sheltered Housing. Earth sheltered construction, as defined
in Minnesota Statutes §216(C).06, Subd. 14, shall be considered a practical
difficulty if the property is otherwise in compliance with the Arden Hills
Zoning Regulations.
         6.   Non Permitted Use. A variance shall not be granted if it would
allow a use, which is not otherwise permitted in the zoning district where the
property is located.
         7.   Temporary Double Family. A variance may be granted to allow
temporary use of a one family dwelling as a two family dwelling.
   D.    Conditions to Insure Compliance. The City Council may impose
conditions in granting a variance. A condition must be directly related to and
must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance.
   Subd. 5   Site Plan Review.
   A.    Public Hearing. A public hearing is not required but neighboring
property owners shall be notified.
   B.    Action to Approve. Three affirmative votes of the City Council are
required for approval of a site plan.
   C.    Building Permit. The issuance of a permit for a new building or
significant site modification for a permitted or established use within a
Multiple Dwelling Zoning District or any business or industrial zoning district
shall require site plan approval by the City Council according to the procedure
defined in Chapter
1355.04.
   Subd. 6   Planned Unit Development (PUD).
   A.    . The PUD application and review procedure involves a Concept Plan
(optional), a Master Plan Stage, and a Final Plan Stage.
   B.    Public Hearing. A public hearing is required at the Master Plan Stage.
The public hearing may be combined with the public hearing for a zoning
district change if a zoning district change is required and for a preliminary
plat if a preliminary plat of the PUD property is proposed.
   C.    Action to Approve. Four affirmative votes of the City Council are
required for approval of the Master Plan.
   D.    Effect of Concept Plan Review. The applicant for a PUD Concept Plan,
which has been reviewed by the City Council, has no limitation on the period of
time in which to apply for Master Plan approval.
   E.    Effect of PUD Master Plan Approval. The applicant for a PUD Master
Plan which has been approved by the City Council shall apply for a PUD Final
Plan or the first stage of the Master Plan within six (6) months, unless some
other phasing plan has been approved by the City Council or unless a written
request for a time extension has been approved by the City Council in advance
of the expiration date.
   F.    Final Plan. The applicant shall submit a Final Plan for all elements
of the Master Plan that are to be developed imminently. A PUD Final Plan shall
be submitted for each stage of development/construction. Three affirmative
votes of the City Council are required to approve a Final Plan PUD.
   G.    Final Plan Procedure. The Site Plan Review process in Appendix A,
Procedure Manual, and the Site Plan Review procedure in Chapter
1355.04 Subd 5 shall be followed.
   Subd. 7   Interim Use Permits.
   A.    Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses
is:
         1.    To allow a use that is presently acceptable, but that with
anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the future
or will be replaced by a permitted or conditional use allowed within the
respective zoning district.
         2.    To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range
change to an area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan
provided that said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding
uses and is in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of
existing uses and development.
   B.    Public Hearing. A public hearing is required.
   C.    Action to Approve. Three affirmative votes of the City Council are
required to approve an interim use permit, and the City Council must include a
determination that the facts and circumstances of the particular case warrant
granting the permit.
   D.    Permit Evaluation. When reviewing the interim use permit application,
the City Council shall consider the factual findings, ability to meet the
special requirements of the interim use, and the conclusions and
recommendations of the Planning Commission. An interim use permit may be
granted only if the City Council finds the following:
         1.    The use is allowed as an interim use in the underlying zoning
district and conforms to the zoning regulations;
         2.    Permission of the interim use will not impose additional costs
on the public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the
future;
         3.    The use will not adversely impact nearby properties through
nuisance, noise, dust, glare, or unsightliness, and will not otherwise
adversely impact the health, safety, and welfare of the community;
         4.    The use will not adversely impact traffic and parking;
         5.    The use will not adversely impact implementation of future
amendment to the City's Comprehensive Plan;
         6.    The date or event that will terminate the use is identified with
certainty;
         7.    The applicant has signed a consent agreement agreeing that the
applicant, owner, operator, tenant, and/or user has no entitlement to an
extension of the Interim Use Permit;
         8.    The user agrees to all conditions that the City Council deems
appropriate for permission of the use including the requirement of appropriate
financial surety to cover the cost of removing the interim use and any interim
structures upon expiration of the interim use permit;
         9.    There are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments,
interest, or City utility fees due upon the subject parcel;
         10.    The term of the interim use does not exceed three (3) years;
         11.    The property has not been a recipient of a previous interim use
permit. A property that has received an interim use permit for an interim use
listed in
1320.05, Land Use Chart, shall not be eligible for another interim use permit
of the same use; and,
         12.    Any special requirements in
Section 1320 for a particular interim use are met.
   E.    Imposition of Conditions. In the granting of an interim use permit,
the City Council may impose such conditions, in addition to the general
conditions and requirements of this Code to which every interim use permit
shall be subject, as it deems necessary to serve and protect the health,
safety, convenience and general welfare of the community.
   F.    Permit for Particular Site. An interim use permit is granted for a
specific use at a specific site, not for a person or firm.
   G.    Designated Uses. Uses for which an interim use permits are required
and the zoning districts in which they are allowed are designated in the land
use chart as set forth in
Section 1320 hereof. No building permit shall be issued for an interim use
until after the interim use permit has been granted by the City Council.
   H.    Termination. An interim use shall terminate on the occurrence of any
of the following events, whichever occurs first:
         1.    The date stated on the permit;
         2.    Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued;
         3.    Upon change in the City's zoning regulations which renders the
use nonconforming;
         4.    The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is
located to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the underlying
zoning district; and
         5.     If the use for which the interim use permit has been granted
has ceased or has been discontinued for a period of ninety (90) consecutive
days, the permit shall automatically expire and become void at the end of such
ninety-day period.
   I.    Suspension and Revocation. The City Council may suspend or revoke an
interim use permit upon finding that the activities allowed under the permit
adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare in ways not anticipated
during approval of the permit. A suspension or revocation of an interim use
permit shall be preceded by written notice to the permittee and a hearing. The
notice shall provide at least ten (10) days notice of the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the violation(s). The notice shall be
mailed to the permittee at the most recent address listed on the application.
1355.05   City Action on Applications for Comprehensive Plan Amendments, Zoning
Code Amendments, Rezoning, Conditional and Interim Use Permits, Planned Unit
Developments, Site Plan Reviews, and Variances.
   Subd. 1   Finding of Complete Application. The Zoning Administrator shall
find the application complete or incomplete within fifteen (15) business days
from the date the application is made. If the application is found to be
incomplete, the administrator shall notify the applicants in writing and state
what information is missing. If the application is found to be complete, the
date of submittal shall mark the beginning of the review deadline.
   Subd. 2   Action by the City Council. Within sixty (60) days following the
date of submittal of a complete application, the City Council shall act upon
the application. The City Council may extend the sixty (60) day review timeline
by an additional sixty (60) days upon providing written notification to the
applicant stating the reasons for the extension. The City Council, may only
upon written request by the applicant, extend its time for consideration and
action beyond one hundred twenty (120) days. Nothing in this paragraph shall
prohibit the City Council from holding additional hearings as it deems
necessary within the review period. In considering applications for
Comprehensive Plan amendments, Zoning Code amendments, rezoning, conditional
and interim use permits, planned unit developments, site plan reviews and
variances, the City Council shall consider the advice and recommendations of
the Planning Commission and may grant the request if it determines that the
action is permissible in accordance with the applicable standards. Requests may
be denied by motion of the City Council, and such motion shall constitute a
finding and determination that the conditions required for approval do not
exist.
   Subd. 3   Optional Actions. City Council action may include approval in
whole or in part, denial in whole or in part, tabling for a specified period of
time, or referral back to the Planning Commission for its further consideration
and report to the City Council within a specified time period. The applicant
shall be notified in writing of the City Council's action.
   Subd. 4   Denial of Application. In the event the City Council denies in
whole or in part the application, it shall furnish the applicant with a written
document advising him of the denial and specifying the factual basis and
reasoning upon which the denial was predicated. The application may be denied
for reasons relating to public health, safety, and general welfare or because
of incompatibility between the proposed use and the City's Comprehensive Plan.
   Subd. 5   Resubmission of Denied Application. No application, which has been
denied wholly or in part, shall be resubmitted for a period of six (6) months
from the date of said order of denial.
1355.06   Conditions for Approval of Conditional Use Permits, Planned Unit
Developments, Site Plans, and Variances.
   Subd. 1   Commencement and Conclusion of Work. It is contemplated that any
work involved or required by an approved application will be commenced within
one (1) year after such approval and conclude within one year of the issuance
of a building permit or commencement of work if a building permit was not
required. This requirement is not intended to limit the authority of the City
Council with respect to imposition of other or different time limitations if
deemed proper in the particular case.
   Subd. 2   Inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the administrator to
check on these time limitations or any other limitations contained in the
approval and advise the City Council of any breach thereof. Breach of the
limitations, whether contained herein or specifically contained in the action
itself, shall be grounds for canceling the approval.
   Subd. 3   Expiration. Approval shall automatically expire and become void
one (1) year from and after the date on which the City Council granted such
approval if the building permit or other approved improvements have not been
issued a permit by the building inspector. The City Council may extend the
expiration date of such approval upon written application by the person to whom
the approval was granted. If the use for which any conditional or interim use
permit has been granted has ceased or has been discontinued for a period of
ninety (90) consecutive days, the permit shall automatically expire and become
void at the end of such ninety (90)day period unless reinstated by the City
Council.
   Subd. 4   Amendments of Site Plans, Conditional Use Permits, Interim Use
Permit, or Planned Unit Developments. An application for amendment shall be
administered in the same manner as required for a new application. Such
applications shall include re-applications for permits that have been denied,
revoked, or have expired; renewal or temporary permits; requests for changes in
conditions; and such other instances as are provided in this Code. Any
structural alteration, enlargement or intensification change in site plan, or
similar change not specially permitted, shall require City Council action and
all procedures shall apply as if a new application were being requested;
provided, however, that when such changes are deemed to be insignificant by the
zoning administrator, the requirements of a public hearing may be waived.
   Subd. 5   Periodic Review. A periodic review of the permit and its
conditions shall be maintained. A violation of any condition set forth in the
permit shall be a violation of this Code, and shall be cause for revocation of
the permit. In the event that the Zoning Administrator recommends to City
Council or revoke a permit, the City Council shall cause written notice thereof
to be given to the occupier, and owner shall have an opportunity to be heard,
but no further notice need be given.
   Subd. 6   Administrative Records. The zoning administrator shall maintain a
record of all approved, stamped and dated plans and permits issued, including
information on the use, location, conditions imposed, time limits, review
dates, and such other information as may be appropriate. Plans shall be signed
by the City Council Liaison to the Planning Commission and the Planning
Commission Chairman. It shall be the responsibility of the administrator to
place on the Planning Commission agenda and notify the City Council of any
expiring time limit, prior to expiration and/or violation of any approved
applications.
1355.07   Appeals to Administrative Decisions.
   Subd. 1   Appeals. The Planning Commission shall hear any appeals where it
is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirements, decision or
determination made by an administrative officer in the interpretation,
application, and/or enforcement of this Code and shall report its findings and
recommendations to the City Council for action.
   Subd. 2   Effect of Determinations. The findings and determinations made by
the Planning Commission shall be advisory only and shall have no binding
effect. The City Council shall take such action on the findings and
recommendations of the Planning Commission, as it deems proper in the
circumstances.
Section 1360 - Special Provisions
1360.01   Mobile Home Parks.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in this Zoning Code, mobile home
parks are subject to the requirements contained in the Arden Hills Code of
Ordinances, Mobile Homes, and amendments thereto.
1360.02   Swimming Pools.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in this Zoning Code, swimming
pools are subject to the requirements contained in the Arden Hills Code of
Ordinances, and amendments thereto.
1360.03   Mining.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in this Zoning Code, mining
activities are subject to the requirements contained in the Arden Hills Code of
Ordinances, and amendments thereto.
1360.04   Soil Processing.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in this Zoning Code, soil
processing activities are subject to the requirements contained in the Arden
Hills Code of Ordinances, and amendments thereto.
1360.05   Land Reclamation.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in this Zoning Code, land
reclamation activities are subject to the requirements contained in the Arden
Hills Code of Ordinances, and amendments thereto.
1360.06   Signs.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in this Zoning Code, all signs are
subject to the requirements contained in the Arden Hills Code of Ordinances,
and amendments thereto.
1360.07   Massage, Sauna And Rap Parlors.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in this Zoning Code, all massage,
sauna and rap parlors are subject to the requirements contained in the Arden
Hills Code of Ordinances, and amendments thereto.
1360.08   School Bus Terminal.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in this Zoning Code, bus terminals
are subject to the following requirements:
   Subd. 1   A school bus terminal site must be located within three hundred
(300) feet of an existing general education school.
   Subd. 2   A school bus terminal site must be located adjacent to both a
major arterial and collector road and have direct access to one of these roads.
Section 1365 - Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
1365.01   Building Permits.
   Subd. 1   No building permit or other permit pertaining to the use of land
or buildings shall be issued unless such building is designed and arranged to
conform to the provisions of this Section.
   Subd. 2   Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a
site plan, drawn to scale showing actual dimensions of the lot or lots to be
built upon, the location and size of the structures, improvement or use to be
erected, altered or placed, location of required parking and loading areas,
size of yards and open spaces, existing and proposed streets and alleys
adjoining or within the lot and such other information required in this Chapter
or in the Appendix A, Procedure Manual. The City may request a certified survey
in addition to a site plan if deemed necessary by the City.
1365.02   Certificates of Occupancy.
   Subd. 1   No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, reconstructed or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in
whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued by the Building Official, stating that the building and the use
appears to comply with all of the provisions of this Code applicable to the
building or premises of the use in the district in which it is to be located.
   Subd. 2   No change in use shall be made in any building or part thereof,
now existing or hereafter erected, reconstructed or structurally altered,
without a certificate of occupancy having been issued by the Building Official,
and no such permit shall be issued to make such a change unless it is in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Application for a certificate
of occupancy shall be made with the application for a building permit and shall
be issued within ten (10) days after the lawful erection, reconstruction or
structural alteration is completed.
Section 1370 - Enforcement & Fees
1370.01   Enforcing Officer.
   Subd. 1   This Code shall be administered and interpreted by the
administrator and enforced by the City Council through the Building Inspector/
Code Enforcement Officer. The Council may institute in the name of the city any
appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law.
   Subd. 2   The administrator shall:
   A.    Determine if applications comply with the requirements of this Code;
   B.    Cause the building inspector/code enforcement officer to conduct
inspections of buildings and the use of land to determine compliance with the
requirements of this Code;
   C.    Issue notices of Code violations when necessary.
   D.    Maintain current and permanent records of this Code, including but not
limited to, the zoning map, amendments, conditional use permits, variances,
appeals and applications.
   E.    Receive, file and forward all applications for appeals, variances,
conditional use permits and amendments to the appropriate official bodies.
1370.02   Fees.
   Subd. 1   The fees for the various applications of this Code shall be
established by the City Council by ordinance. Such fees may be reviewed and
revised by the Council periodically.
   Subd. 2   The required fee is payable at the time of the filing of the
application with the zoning administrator. Applications shall not be placed on
the Planning Commission's agenda unless the appropriate fee has been paid;
however, no fee shall be charged for discussion items.
Section 1380 - TCAAP Redevelopment Code
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 12-12-2016; Ord. 2016-012, passed 12-12-2016; Ord. 2023-
14, passed 2-12-2024; Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-8-2024; Ord. 2024-002, passed 4-
8-2024)
Section 1: Introduction
Introduction
In 2013, the City of Arden Hills hired the consultant team to create a Master
Plan for the Twin Cities Army Ammunition Plant (TCAAP) site, to conduct an
Alternative Urban Area Wide Review (AUAR), and to draft local regulations and
policies to implement the Master Plan. The Master Plan will amend the City of
Arden Hills 2030 Comprehensive Plan in an effort to successfully integrate the
TCAAP site into the rest of the City. This plan will also help ensure that
appropriate development and economic growth occurs and is in line with the
vision set forth by the City of Arden Hills and the owner of the property,
Ramsey County.
It is the goal of this project to “Develop TCAAP in a way that accommodates a
mix of land uses that is sensitive to the natural environment, economically
sustainable, and a benefit to the community” (Arden Hills 2030 Comprehensive
Plan, 4). This initiative will be economically and environmentally sustainable
and provide for a range of uses and development types.
A comprehensive community process resulted in a long-term vision for the
redevelopment of this brownfield ammunitions plant site into a true mixed-use
development area that incorporates regional employment, shopping and dining and
a variety of housing options. This document provides the regulatory tools for
redevelopment consistent with the TCAAP Master Plan for this area.
1.1   Purpose and Intent
The purpose of the TCAAP Redevelopment Code (TRC) is to implement the vision
for a walkable, mixed-use, resilient, and vibrant TCAAP development
(hereinafter, “Plan Area”) by:
   (a)   Creating regulations that realize market potential and promote the
creation of jobs and economic development;
   (b)   Developing a regulatory process that encourages quality growth and
saves time in the development process;
   (c)   Focusing on predictability for both developers and the community; and
   (d)   Providing a Natural Resources Corridor that offers active and passive
recreational features and is an amenity to the site.
Therefore, the goals of the TRC are to promote and to provide a more functional
and attractive community through the use of recognized community design
principles and to allow property owners, applicants or developers flexibility
in land use, while prescribing a higher level of detail in building design and
form than in the current standards of the Arden Hills City Code (AHC). The
standards in this code are not intended to stifle creativity nor over-regulate
building design but rather encourage better functional building patterns and to
create higher quality pedestrian environments along most streets.
1.2   Relationship to Adopted Plans
   (a)   Arden Hills Comprehensive Plan: In addition to implementing several
goals of the Arden Hills Comprehensive Plan, the TRC specifically implements
the following goals:
   1.   Develop and maintain a land use pattern that strengthens the vitality,
quality, and character of the residential neighborhoods, commercial districts
and industrial areas, while protecting the community’s natural resources to
develop a sustainable pattern for future development.
   2.   Develop TCAAP in a way that accommodates a mix of land uses that is
sensitive to the natural environment, economically sustainable and a benefit to
the community.
   3.   Promote the development, redevelopment and maintenance of a viable,
innovative and diverse business environment that serves Arden Hills and the
metropolitan area.
   4.   Develop and maintain a strong, vital, diverse and stable housing supply
for all members of the community.
   5.   Enhance the health, safety and well-being of all who live, work and
play in the City.
   6.   Create a comprehensive, maintained and interconnected system of parks,
pathways and open spaces, as well as a balanced program of recreational
activities for residents of all ages, incomes and abilities.
   7.   Preserve, protect and restore the community’s natural resources,
including open spaces, lakes, wetlands other significant natural features, and
historic resources.
2.0   Components of the Code
2.1   The Regulating Plan
The TCAAP Redevelopment Regulating Plan map (herein known as the Regulating
Plan) (Attachment 1) is hereby adopted as the official zoning map for the Plan
Area. Within any area subject to the approved Regulating Plan, this TRC becomes
the exclusive and mandatory regulation unless specified in Section 3.2. It
shall establish the following development standards for all properties within
the Plan Area:
   (a)   Establishment of TCAAP Zoning Districts – The Plan Area is
distinguished into different specialized zoning districts. Each zoning district
is intended to create a distinct development pattern based on the TCAAP Master
Plan for different sections within the Plan Area. Each zoning district shall
establish use and building development standards including standards for
building height, bulk, location, functional design and parking. The Regulating
Plan classifies all lots within the Plan Area into one of the following seven
(7) zoning districts:
   1)   Campus Commercial (CC) – The Campus Commercial Zoning District
facilitates a building format that allows multiple, single tenant buildings or
campuses within the northern “Thumb” site of the Plan Area. The goal is to
allow for an individual plan approach for each campus or building, based on
user preferences within a range of requirements.
   2)   Town Center (TC) – The Town Center Zoning District creates a vibrant
commercial and residential environment that maximizes the potential for an
outdoor experience. This district promotes walkability through allowing for
housing, office, retail, restaurant, and civic uses all within close proximity
of each other.
   3)   Office Mixed-Use (OMU) – The Office Mixed-Use Zoning District creates a
flexible zone that allows and promotes a seamless transition from Retail Mixed-
Use but focuses on employment and other compatible uses. This district promotes
employment as a primary use, but allows for other commercial, and up to ten
percent retail uses.
   4)   Retail Mixed-Use (RMU) – The Retail Mixed-Use Zoning District creates a
flexible zone that allows and promotes a seamless transition from Office Mixed-
Use but focuses on retail and compatible uses. This district promotes retail as
a primary use, but allows for other commercial uses.
   5)   Flex Office (FO) – The Flex Office Zoning District creates an
opportunity for large scale development for employment and manufacturing uses
that take advantage of the highway frontage and automobile access.
   6)   Civic District (C) – The Civic District is intended to allow civic and
community uses.
   7)   Neighborhood (NR) – The Neighborhood Zoning District provides for a
range of attached and detached single-family residential uses including multi-
family residential uses.
   (b)   Street Designations – The Streets within TRC shall be classified in
two different ways.
   1)   Street Cross Sections shall address vehicular lane widths, number of
lanes, pedestrian accommodation, street tree requirements, on-street parking,
snow storage and parkway and median standards. These standards are laid out in
Section 8.0 and Attachment 4.
   2)   Street Priority shall establish the phasing significance (Required or
Recommended) of different street segments within the Plan Area. Refer to
Section 8.0: Street Design Standards and Attachment 5 for the detailed
regulations.
   (c)   Building Frontage Standards – Building Frontage designations shall
classify different block frontages based on the pedestrian priority goals of
the TCAAP Master Plan on the Regulating Plan (Attachment 1). They shall be
classified into one of three frontage designations: (i) Pedestrian Priority
Frontage with the highest quality standards for pedestrian-oriented building
design; (ii) Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage that balances pedestrian-oriented
building design standards while accommodating some service and parking
functions; and (iii) General Frontage which mainly accommodates service,
utilities and parking functions.
   (d)   Open Space Designation – Open Space within the TRC shall be
categorized as Required Open Space. The detailed Open Space Standards for
different open space types are included in Section 9.0 and Attachment 2 of this
Code. These standards include general character, typical size, frontage
requirements and typical uses.
   (e)   Gateway Overlay Designation – The Gateway Overlay District indicates
where additional aesthetic treatments are required to create a welcoming
environment that establishes the character of the TCAAP Redevelopment Area. The
specific standards are included in Section 7.6 of this Code.
2.2   Development Standards:
The TRC text portion of this Code enumerates the development standards with
text and graphics for Zoning Districts, Frontage Types, building form,
landscape, building design, signage, and lighting.
2.3   Using This Code
The following basic steps should be followed to determine the uses and
development standards applicable on property within the Plan Area:
   (a)   Review Table 3-1 to evaluate the applicability of the TRC based on
scope of the proposed development.
   (b)   Locate the subject property on the Regulating Plan (Attachment 1).
   (c)   Identify the Zoning District in which the property is located.
   (d)    Review the Schedule of Uses by Zoning District as listed in Table 5-
1 to determine allowed uses.
   (e)   Examine the corresponding zone standards in the Building and Site
Development Standards in Section 6 to determine the applicable development
standards and any Frontage standards.
   (f)   Refer to Section 7.0 for Building Design Standards
The information listed in these graphics explain where the building will sit on
the lot, the limits on its physical form, the range of uses and the palette of
materials that will cover it.
3.0   Administration
3.1   Applicability
   (a)   The uses and buildings on all properties within the Plan Area shall
conform exclusively to the requirements of the TRC unless specifically
referenced as otherwise in the TRC.
   (b)   Table 3-1 (Applicability Matrix) shall determine the extent to which
different sections of the TRC apply to any proposed development.
   (c)   In addition, Table 3-2 shall determine which sections of the TRC apply
at which time in the development review process such as Subdivision Review,
Site Plan Review or Building Permit Review.
   (d)   Provisions of the TRC are activated by “shall” when required; “should”
or “may” when recommended or optional.
   (e)   Terms used throughout the TRC are defined in Section 4.0: Definitions.
For those terms not defined in Section 4.0, definitions in various sections of
the AHC shall apply. For terms not defined in either section, they shall be
accorded commonly accepted meanings. In the event of conflict, the definitions
of the TRC shall take precedence.
   (f)   Where in conflict, numerical metrics shall take precedence over
graphic metrics.
3.2   Relationship to other City Ordinances
   (a)   For all properties within the Plan Area, the standards in this Code
shall supersede standards under:
      i.   Commercial and Multi-Family Design Standards under Chapter 13, of
the AHC, as amended, except as specifically referenced herein.
      ii.   Sign Standards under Chapter 12, as amended, except as specifically
referenced herein.
      iii.   Landscaping Standards under Chapter 13, as amended, except as
specifically referenced herein.
      iv.   Subdivision Ordinance under Chapter 11, as amended, except as
specifically referenced herein.
   (b)   Development standards not addressed in this TRC shall be governed by
the AHC, to the extent the AHC standards are not in conflict with the TRC.
Table 3-1: Applicability Matrix
Note: To view Table 3-1 in PDF format, click HERE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1423.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1425.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1427.png]
Table 3.2 Application Review Specific Matrix
Note: To view Table 3-2 in PDF format, click HERE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1429.png]
= Applies for residential development only
*
= Applies during Sign Permit review only
3.3   JDA Development Review Process
   (a)   Pre-submittal Meeting Required: All projects shall have a pre-
submittal meeting with the JDA Development staff prior to submitting the
approved application form for development in the Plan Area. At the pre-
submittal meeting, the staff shall provide information on the requirements for
development and submittal within the Plan Area, including related necessary
City building permit and related final construction approvals.
   (b)   Site Plan Required: A Site Plan shall be required for all proposed
developments within the Plan Area. Requirements for Site Plans are listed per
Section 1355.03 of the AHC. A site plan is reviewed by staff prior to
preliminary plat submittal.
   (c)   JDA Review Generally: Projects that comply with all standards of the
TRC and projects that require Permitted Adjustments shall be processed by the
Joint Development Authority (JDA). The JDA shall review and consider projects
which meet all TRC standards as recommended by staff, with approval of such
projects subject to a majority vote of all the members of the JDA. Please refer
to Attachment 3 Development Review flow chart for information on the
development review process. The JDA may amend its development review process at
any time, subject to any applicable requirements of the Joint Powers Agreement
(the “JPA”).
   (d)   JDA Permitted Adjustments: The JDA may approve Permitted Adjustments
per the criteria set in Table 3-3 below, subject to a three-fifths (3/5) vote
of the JDA. The Permitted Adjustment process may be used only to authorize a
less restrictive standard and may not be used to impose a higher standard than
is established under the TRC on the subject property. A JDA Development staff
report and recommendation is required for the JDA to make a determination on a
Permitted Adjustment. Public notices shall be issued for all Permitted
Adjustment hearings; however, such hearings may be combined with any other JDA
hearing process, such as for consideration of approval of a project and its
related transactional documents.
   (e)   In reviewing any Permitted Adjustment request, the JDA shall use the
following criteria:
      i.   The goals, intent and vision of the adopted Regulating Plan Map and
TCAAP Master Plan;
      ii.   The extent to which the proposal fits the adjoining design context
by providing appropriate building scale and use transitions;
      iii.   The extent to which the proposal provides public benefits such as
usable civic and open spaces, livable streets, affordable housing, living wage
jobs, structured and/or shared parking and linkages to transit;
      iv.   The extent to which the proposal does not hinder future
opportunities for higher intensity development;
      v.   The extent to which the proposal provides a demonstration of
advanced energy resilience which may have an educational value; and
      vi.   Considerations of health and welfare to the general public.
   (f)   In reviewing any Permitted Adjustment, the JDA shall not grant
flexibility for the following:
      i.   Deviation from requirements of Section 5.0 (Schedule of Uses);
      ii.   Building height;
      iii.   Definitions included in Section 4.0;
      iv.   Density parameters for residential land uses;
      v.   Clear height;
      vi.   Minimum Multi-Family Unit Sizes
Table 3-3: Permitted Adjustments Table
Code Standard Extent of Adjustment Permitted Criteria
Table 3-3: Permitted Adjustments Table
Code Standard                                                                  Extent of Adjustment Permitted                                                  Criteria
1.   Regulating Plan Map
                                                                               Streets shall be on a grid system with block faces (measured right-of-way to
                                                                               right-of-way) no less than 200 feet and no more than 500 feet. Block faces may  i.   Shall maintain the connectivity intended by the Regulating Plan
a.   Location of any Required Street (Town Center, Retail Mixed-Use, Office be adjusted no more than 50%. Block faces longer than 500 feet shall include    ii.   Shall maintain the continuation and/or connectivity with any existing
Mixed-Use,)                                                                    mid-block pedestrian connections. Pedestrian connections to adjacent park and   streets where possible
                                                                               open space areas shall be no further apart than 750 feet. Pedestrian            iii.   Pedestrian connectivity must be maintained
                                                                               connections to parks and open space areas shall be at least 20 feet wide.       iv.   JDA staff, City Community Development and Public Works staff approval
                                                                               Pedestrian mid-block connections shall be 20 feet.
                                                                               Streets shall be on a modified grid pattern. Public views and access to open
                                                                               space areas are required. The use of cul-de-sacs should be minimized and must
                                                                               include pedestrian connections from the cul-de-sac to streets or open space     i.   Shall maintain the connectivity intended by the Regulating Plan
                                                                               located behind private lots. Block faces longer than 500 feet shall include     ii.   Shall maintain the continuation and/or connectivity with any existing
b.   Location of any Required Street (Neighborhood District)                mid-block pedestrian connections. Pedestrian connections to adjacent park and   streets where possible
                                                                               open space areas shall be no further apart than 750 feet. Pedestrian            iii.   JDA staff, City Community Development and Public Works staff approval
                                                                               connections to parks and open space areas shall be at least 50 feet wide and
                                                                               dedicated as public right-of-way. Pedestrian mid-block connections shall be 20
                                                                               feet.
                                                                               The area of any required Open Space may be reduced by no more than 3%. The      i.   Shall include required amenities identified by the City’s TCAAP Master
c.   Area and Location of any Required Open Space                           location of Open Space in the Hill and Creek Neighborhoods may be moved within  Parks and Open Space Plan
                                                                               those neighborhoods.                                                            ii.   JDA staff, City Community Development and Public Works staff approval
2.   Building Form and Development Standards
                                                                                                                                                               1)   Changes to the build-to-zones and setbacks may only occur when there is
                                                                                                                                                               cause by one or more of the following:
                                                                                                                                                               i.   A change to the street cross sections established in Attachment 4; or
                                                                                                                                                               ii.   Need to accommodate existing buildings and structures on the lot that meet
                                                                                                                                                               the overall intent and vision for redevelopment in the Plan Area; or
                                                                               No more than a 10% change in the maximum or minimum setback applicable or 6     iii.   Need to accommodate other required modes of transportation (transit,
a.   Build to zones/setbacks                                                feet whichever is greater.                                                      bike, pedestrian), storm water drainage, water quality, or low impact
                                                                                                                                                               development (LID) elements on the site; or
                                                                                                                                                               iv.   Need to accommodate overhead or underground utilities and/or easements; or
                                                                                                                                                               v.   Need to preserve existing heritage trees on the property.
                                                                                                                                                               2)   In no case shall the sidewalk be less than 8 feet in width along the “Spine
                                                                                                                                                               Road” and 6 feet in width along all other streets when sidewalks will be
                                                                                                                                                               publicly maintained.
                                                                                                                                                               Any reduction in the required building frontage shall be to address one or more
                                                                               No more than a 10% reduction in the required building frontage (applicable in   of the following:
                                                                               the designated zoning district) along each block or subject lot with Pedestrian i.   To accommodate porte-cocheres for drop-off and pick-up; or
                                                                               Priority Frontage designation or no more than a 10% reduction in the required   ii.   To accommodate existing buildings and site elements; or
b.   Building Frontage                                                      building frontage (applicable in the designated zoning district) along each     iii.   To accommodate other required transit, bike and pedestrian related, storm
                                                                               block or subject lot of a Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage designation.             water drainage, water quality, or low impact development (LID) elements on the
                                                                                                                                                               site.
                                                                               b.   Parking garages and porte-cocheres are allowed along Pedestrian PriorityAllowed when necessary for building design.
                                                                               Frontage and Pedestrian-Friendly streets.
                                                                                                                                                               Frontage requirement along one Pedestrian Priority designated frontage may be
                                                                               Reduction of no more than 10% of the building frontage requirements for lots    replaced with the corresponding standard for Pedestrian-Friendly frontage
                                                                               with two or more Pedestrian Priority frontages (applicable Frontage Standard    designation instead. In determining which Pedestrian Priority frontage may be
                                                                               for the zoning district of the subject corner lot)                              changed to a Pedestrian-Friendly frontage, precedence shall be given to matching
                                                                                                                                                               any existing building Pedestrian Priority frontages of adjoining blocks or lots
c.   Corner Lot Building Frontage                                                                                                                           on either side of the street.
                                                                                                                                                               Frontage requirement along one Pedestrian-Friendly designated frontage may be
                                                                               i.   Reduction of no more than 10% of the building frontage requirements for replaced with the corresponding standard for General frontage designation
                                                                               lots with two or more Pedestrian-Friendly frontages (applicable Frontage        instead. In determining which Pedestrian-Friendly frontage may be changed to a
                                                                               Standards for the designated zoning district of the subject corner lot)         General frontage, precedence shall be given to matching any existing building
                                                                                                                                                               Pedestrian-Friendly frontages of adjoining blocks or lots on either side of the
                                                                                                                                                               street.
                                                                               No more than 10% reduction in the sidewalks, street tree planting, street       Any changes to the streetscape standards shall be based on specific development
d.   Sidewalk and Streetscape standards                                     lighting, and other streetscape standards may be adjusted based on the          context such as existing vegetation, natural features, drainage, and fire access
                                                                               development context and street cross section.                                   and is subject to approval by the JDA.
                                                                                                                                                               Reduction in the number of parking spaces shall be based on one or more of the
                                                                                                                                                               following:
e.   Required Parking Spaces                                                Reduction in the number of required parking spaces up to 10% of total spaces    i.   A shared parking plan for parking within 1,000 feet of the subject
                                                                                                                                                               property; or
                                                                                                                                                               ii.   A parking study for the uses proposed on the site; or
                                                                                                                                                               iii.   A combination of the above
3.   Other
                                                                                                                                                               i.   A modification of a numerical standard is needed to accommodate existing
a.   Any other numerical standard in the code                               A modification up to 10% (increase or decrease)                                 conditions.
                                                                                                                                                               ii.   The proposed development still meets the intent of the TRC.
b.   Phased Developments                                                    Deferment of building frontage standards                                        i.   Phased developments may defer building frontage requirements as long as
                                                                                                                                                               they meet the build-to-zone and parking setback requirements
 
3.4.    TCAAP Regulating Plan Map and TCAAP Master Plan Modifications:
Upon denial by the JDA of an application which requires an amendment to the
TCAAP Regulating Plan Map (the “Map”) and/or the TCAAP Master Plan
(individually or collectively a “Plan Amendment”), or a modification of the
text of the TRC (“Text Change)”, or where the applicant has requested such a
change, the application shall be referred by the JDA to the City Council for
its consideration. A Community Development staff report and recommendation is
required for a Plan Amendment or Text Change request to be heard by the City
Council. Public notices shall be issued for all Plan Amendment or Text Change
hearings. The City Council shall consult with the County in the Council’s
consideration, approval or denial of a Plan Amendment or Text Change as
required by § 3.0 of JPA.
      i.   If the City Council approves the Plan Amendment or Text Change, the
JDA shall consider the application, as amended pursuant to such approval.
      ii.    A proposed denial of a Plan Amendment or Text Change by City
Council shall not be delivered to the JDA and such decision shall constitute
final denial of the application.
      iii.    Upon such final denial of a Plan Modification or Text Change, the
applicant may reapply to the JDA to seek JDA approval of a revised project
meeting the requirements of the TRC, or a revised project requiring a Permitted
Adjustment consistent with Table 3-3.
3.5   Plat Approval:
The TRC incorporates by reference Chapter 11 of the AHC for plat approval for
the purpose of design review, subject to the requirements for public
infrastructure per the TRC. This process includes City approval of grading/
erosion control plans and utilities plans. Fees or charges for public
infrastructure or facilities established by or applicable to subdivisions
processed under the AHC shall be applied to subdivisions processed under the
TRC.
3.6   Hearing Requirements:
The JDA shall conduct public hearings for consideration of all development
applications for the Plan Area. A notice of the time, place and purpose of the
hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the City at least ten
(10) days prior to the day of the hearing. In addition, JDA action on
subdivision requests in the Plan Area shall be governed by Minnesota Statutes
462.358.
4.0   Definitions
Many terms used in this document are defined in the AHC, Chapters 1 and 13.
Definitions are only included here if not defined in the AHC, or if the
definition for this document differs from the AHC. In case of a conflict
between the definitions under this Section and the AHC, Chapters 1 and 13, the
definitions in this section shall supersede.
A
Arcade
A portion of the main façade of the building that is at or near the property
line and a colonnade supports the upper floors of the building. Arcades are
intended for buildings with ground floor commercial or retail uses and the
arcade may be one or two stories. The ground floor area within the arcade may
be conditioned or non-conditioned space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1385.png]
Images of Arcade Buildings
B
Build-to Zone (BTZ)
The area between the minimum and maximum front setbacks from the property line.
The principal building façade line shall be located within this area.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Illustration indicating the location of the
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ build-to zone relative to the minimum and
IMAGES/0-0-0-1387.png]                    maximum setbacks and the building façade line
 
Building and Site Development Standards
The standards established for each Zoning District including but not limited to
building placement, building height, parking, service access, and other
functional design standards.
Building Façade Line
The location of the vertical plane of a building along a street frontage.
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1389.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-1391.png]
Section View – Gallery Building          Section View – Arcade Building 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/
0-0-0-1393.png]
Plan View
Building Façade Line Illustrations
 
Building Frontage
The percentage of a building’s façade line that is required to be located
within the Build-to Zone (BTZ) as a proportion of the lot’s width along the
fronting public street. Required stairs to access entrances, parks, plazas,
squares, improved forecourts, and pedestrian breezeway frontages shall count
towards the required building frontage.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Image showing Building Frontage
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ calculation
IMAGES/0-0-0-1395.png]
 
Building Height
The vertical distance from the average elevation of the grade along a face of a
building to the highest point of the roof surface of flat roofs, the deck line
of mansard roofs, or the average height between the eaves and the highest ridge
of gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. The height of a stepped or terraced building
shall be the height of the tallest segment of the building.
Building Step-Back
Building step-back is the setting back of the building façade line away from
the street at a specific floor or height.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Illustration of a Building Step-Back
IMAGES/0-0-0-1397.png]
 
C D
Clear Height
The distance from the top of the finished floor to the bottom of the finished
ceiling in portions of commercial buildings used for warehousing or
manufacturing.
Complete Street
A complete street is a transportation policy and design approach that requires
streets to be planned, designed, operated, and maintained to enable safe,
convenient and comfortable travel and access for users of all ages and
abilities regardless of their mode of transportation.
Cottage/Patio Home
The Cottage or Patio Home building type consists of small, one and two-story
single-family detached residential units that are built close to the street and
each other. They are typically sideyard/zero lot line homes with a small yard
or patio space. This type of building enables appropriate infill residential
within existing neighborhoods and is important for providing a broad choice of
housing types and promoting walkability.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1399.png]
   Image of a Cottage or Patio Home
Cottage Court
The Cottage Court building type consists of a series of small, detached
structures, providing multiple units arranged to define a shared court that is
typically perpendicular to the street. The shared court takes the place of a
private rear yard and becomes an important community-enhancing element. This
residential building type is appropriately-scaled to fit as transitions between
single-family neighborhoods and commercial corridors. It enables appropriately-
scaled, well-designed infill residential and is important for providing a broad
choice of housing types and promoting walkability.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0- Image of a Cottage Court
1401.png]
 
E
Encroachment
Any structural or non-structural element such as a sign, awning, canopy,
terrace or balcony that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory
limit, extending into a setback, into the public right-of-way, or above a
height limit.
F
Façade Area
The surface area of a building’s elevation (including all floors) not counting
minor indentations fronting a particular street. Ground floor façade area is
the surface area of a building’s ground floor elevation not counting minor
indentations fronting a particular street. Upper floor façade area is the
surface area of a building’s upper floor elevations not counting minor
indentations fronting a particular street.
G H I
Gallery
A roofed promenade or canopy, especially one extending along the wall of a
building and supported by arches or columns on the outer side. The gallery
space is unenclosed (non-conditioned) space and may be two (2) or more stories
tall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1403.png]
Illustration of a Gallery
Gross Density
The number of residential dwelling units per acre of a given land area,
including public rights-of-way for Town and Collector Streets but excluding
publicly-owned recreation areas or open space and public right-of-way for
arterial roads.
J K
J-Swing Garage
A home with a driveway that loads from the primary street and swings into the
side of the home to enter the garage. Two of these homes side-by-side should
share a driveway or a curb-cut to driveways and have garages facing each other.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1405.png]
Images of a home with a J-Swing Garage from the front and side of home.
L
Large Multi-Family
A building containing more than fifty (50) residential units, which may include
apartments or condominiums.
Live-Work Unit
A dwelling unit that is also used for work purposes, provided that the ‘work’
component is restricted to the uses of professional office, artist’s workshop,
studio or other similar use as allowed as a home occupation under the AHC and
is located on the street level and constructed as a separate unit under a
condominium regime or as a single unit. The ‘live’ component may be located on
the street level (behind the work component) or any other level of the
building. Live-work unit is further distinguished from a home occupation
otherwise defined by the AHC in that the work use is not required to be
incidental to the dwelling unit; non-resident employees may be present on the
premises and customers may be served on site.
M
Manor Home/Multi-Unit House
A multi-unit building (3 to8 units) that is designed to appear as a large home
from the exterior, but functions as a multi-unit building on the interior.
Manor Homes have one main front door for the building, but may also have side
and rear entries. Parking is accessed from an alley or a driveway to the rear
of the lot. Parking does not face a public right-of-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1407.png]
Image of Manor Home
Medium Multi-Family Use
A building containing nine to fifty (9-50) multi-family units, which may
include stacked flats, apartments, or condominiums.
Mixed-Use Building
A building that includes a combination of commercial, retail, residential,
civic, or institutional uses inside a single structure.
N O
Numerical Standard
Any standard that has a numerical limit (minimums and maximums) or value as
established within both the text and graphic standards of the TRC.
P Q
Parking Setback Line
The distance that any surface parking lot is to be set back from either the
principal building façade line or property line along any street frontage
(depending on the specific standard in the Zoning District). Surface parking
may be located anywhere behind the parking setback line on the property.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Illustration of a parking setback
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ line
IMAGES/0-0-0-1409.png]
 
Perimeter Frontage
The measurement of the proportion of public street frontage of the total
exterior perimeter of a park or open space area.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Illustration showing how Perimeter
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Frontage is calculated for Open Space
IMAGES/0-0-0-1411.png]                    along a Public Street
 
Permitted Adjustment
A requested modification to TRC zoning district standards per the Permitted
Adjustment provision of Section 3.0. The JDA shall have the authority to
approve a request for a Permitted Adjustment.
Primary Entrance
The public entrance located along the front of a building facing a street or
sidewalk that provides access from the public sidewalk to the building. It is
different from a secondary entrance which may be located at the side or rear of
a building providing private controlled access into the building from a
sidewalk, parking or service area.
Private Common Open Space
A privately owned outdoor or unenclosed area, located on the ground or on a
terrace, deck, porch, or roof, designed and accessible for outdoor gathering,
recreation, and landscaping and intended for use by the residents, employees,
and/or visitors to the development. This may or may not be accessible to the
public, but shall be maintained privately.
Property Line
A line dividing one lot or property, from another, or from a right-of-way.
Public Open Space
A publicly accessible open space in the form of parks, courtyards, forecourts,
plazas, greens, playgrounds, squares, etc. provided to meet the standards in
Section 9.0 of this Code. Open Space may be privately or publicly owned and/or
maintained.
R
Residential Use Building
A building that is built to accommodate only residential uses on all floors of
the building such as a detached single-family home, attached single-family home
(i.e., townhome), two family home (i.e. twin home), Manor Home (3 to 8 units),
or apartment building (under single ownership or under multiple owners within a
condominium regime).
Right-of-Way
An area dedicated to public use for vehicular and bicycle movement. Pedestrian
facilities, public utilities, and private utilities may be accommodated within
the right-of-way or outside of the right-of-way within public easements on
private property.
Right-of-Way Line
The lines that form the boundary of a publicly-owned right-of-way.
S
Service-Related Uses
All uses that support the principal use on the lot including parking access,
garbage/trash collection, utility meters and equipment, loading/unloading areas
and similar uses.
Setback
The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from
a right-of-way or property line.
Single Family Use
A building containing one or two primary living units and which may include
twin homes, detached townhomes and cottage/patio homes.
Small Lot Single Family
A single-family residential lot that measures less than fifty feet wide.  
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Image of a Small Lot Single Family
IMAGES/0-0-0-1413.png]
 
Small Multi-Family Use
A building containing three to eight (3-8) residential units and which may
include townhomes, row homes, manor homes/multi-unit houses, stacked flats, or
triplexes/quadplexes.
Small Retail or Office Building
The Small Retail/Office Building is a commercial building that is generally
located at street intersections or as transitions between higher intensity
commercial uses and lower intensity residential uses. The ground floor space
can be used for office, personal service or retail uses. It is especially
appropriate for incubating neighborhood-serving retail and service uses and
allowing some adjoining streets and multi-modal corridors to expand as the
market demands.
Stacked Flats
Stacked flats building type is a medium-sized structure that consists of less
than twelve (12) side-by-side and/or stacked dwelling units, typically with one
shared entry. This type of building can include a courtyard apartment. This
residential building type is appropriately-scaled to fit within medium-density
neighborhoods or as transitions between neighborhoods and commercial corridors.
It enables appropriately-scaled, well-designed infill residential and is
important for providing a broad choice of housing types and promoting
walkability.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1415.png]
Image of a Stacked Flat
Street Frontage Designation
As identified on the Regulating Plan, existing and recommended streets in the
TRC area are designated as Pedestrian Priority, Pedestrian-Friendly or General
Streets. Each frontage designation establishes a certain development context in
order to improve walkability and pedestrian orientation within the TRC Plan
Area.
Street Screen
A freestanding wall or living fence or combination fence built along the
frontage line or in line with the building façade along the street. It may
screen a parking lot or a loading/service area from view or provide privacy to
a side yard and/or strengthen the spatial definition of the public realm.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Image of a combination masonry and
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ living street screen
IMAGES/0-0-0-1417.png]
 
Street Wall
Indicates the creation of a “wall,” or a sense of enclosure along the street
with buildings placed immediately adjacent to the street/sidewalk. A street
wall has a “void” if there is a surface parking lot or service area adjacent to
the sidewalk/street.
T U V W X Y Z
TCAAP Natural Resources Corridor
The Natural Resources Corridor within the TCAAP Site Redevelopment will be
designed with the goal of maximizing compatibility and functionality of
regional storm water, wetland mitigation, the Rice Creek re-meander, floodplain
restoration, and groundwater requirements. An additional goal is to provide
visual features and active and passive recreational amenities to support
adjacent land uses.
TCAAP Redevelopment Regulating Plan (Regulating Plan)
The official Zoning Map for the TRC Plan Area. The Regulating Plan graphically
depicts development standards including Zoning Districts, Street Designations
and Special Requirement(s) applicable to properties within the TRC Plan Area.
Townhouse/Rowhouse
The Townhouse or Rowhouse is a small- to medium-sized typically attached
structure that consists of three to eight (3-8) houses attached horizontally,
not stacked vertically. This type of residential building is typically located
in a location that transitions from a single-family neighborhood into a
commercial corridor. This type of building enables appropriately-scaled, well-
designed residential infill and is important for providing a broad choice of
housing types and promoting walkability. A townhouse/rowhouse is a single
structure and does not require adjacent townhomes/rowhomes to maintain
stability.
Triplex/Quadplex
A Triplex/Quadplex building is a medium-sized attached structure that consists
of three to four (3-4) houses placed side-by-side and/or stacked dwelling
units. This residential building type is typically located in a location that
transitions from a primarily single-family neighborhood into a commercial
corridor. This building type enables appropriately-scaled, well-designed
residential infill and is important for providing a broad choice of housing
types and promoting walkability.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0- Image of a Triplex/Quadplex
0-0-1419.png]
 
Twin Home
The Twin Home, also known as a duplex, is a small- to medium-sized structure
that consists of two side-by-side or stacked dwelling units, both facing the
street, and within a single building structure. This residential building type
has the appearance of a medium to large single-family home and is
appropriately-scaled to fit within primarily single-family neighborhoods or
medium-density neighborhoods. It enables appropriately-scaled, well-designed
residential infill and is important for providing a broad choice of housing
types and promoting walkability.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0- Image of a Twin Home
1421.png]
 
5.0    Schedule of Permitted Uses
5.1   Applicability:
(revised 05/22/24)
General use categories have been identified by Zoning District (Table 5-1).
Uses that are not listed are prohibited. Uses that are allowed as accessory
uses may only remain in conjunction with an active principal use.
Table 5-1: TRC Zoning District Land Use Table
 P = Permitted | -- = Prohibited | P/C = Permitted with Criteria in Table 5.2
  A = Accessory | A/C = Accessory with Criteria in Table 5.2
                                        Office Retail
Zoning   Campus     Town   Town   Town                 Flex   Neighborhood Neighborhood Neighborhood Neighborhood       Additional
District Commercial Center Center Center Mixed- Mixed- Office 1            2            3            4            Civic Requirements
                   1      2      3      Use    Use
Uses
Sub-               TC-1   TC-2   TC-3                     NR-1         NR-2         NR-3         NR-4               
District
Table 5-1: TRC Zoning District Land Use Table
 P = Permitted | -- = Prohibited | P/C = Permitted with Criteria in Table 5.2
  A = Accessory | A/C = Accessory with Criteria in Table 5.2
                                                                  Office Retail
Zoning District                    Campus     Town   Town   Town                 Flex   Neighborhood Neighborhood Neighborhood Neighborhood       Additional
                                  Commercial Center Center Center Mixed- Mixed- Office 1            2            3            4            Civic Requirements
Uses                                          1      2      3      Use    Use

Sub-District                                 TC-1   TC-2   TC-3                     NR-1         NR-2         NR-3         NR-4               
Residential Uses
Bed & Breakfast                    --         P      P      P      --     --     --     P/C          P/C          P/C          P/C          --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Home Occupation: Class I           --         A      A      A      --     --     --     A            A            A            A            --     
Large Multi-Family                 --         P/C    P/C    P/C    --     --     --     --           --           --           P/C          --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Live/Work                          --         P      P      P      --     --     --     --           --           --           --           --     
Medium Multi-Family                --         P/C    P/C    P/C    --     --     --     --           --           --           P/C          --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Assisted Living, Memory Care and   --         --     --     P/C    --     --     --     --           --           --           P/C          --    See Table 5-
Skilled Nursing                                                                                                                                   2
Residential Facility               --         P/C    P/C    P/C    --     --     --     P/C          P/C          P/C          P/C          --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Senior Independent Living          --         --     P/C    P/C    --     --     --     --           P/C          P/C          P/C          --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Single Family                      --         --     --     --     --     --     --     P            P            P            --           --     
Small Lot SF Residential           --         --     --     --     --     --     --     --           P            P            --           --     
Small Multi-Family                 --         --     --     --     --     --     --     --           --           P/C          P/C          --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Solar Energy Systems               --         --     --     --     --     --     --     A/C          A/C          A/C                           See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Commercial Uses
Automotive Washing                 --         --     --     --     P/C    P/C    P/C    --                                                  --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Brewpub                            P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Business service                   P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Clinic, medical office             P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Club, sports & fitness             A          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Cocktail Lounge                    P          P      P      P      P      P      --     --                                                  --     
                                                                                                                                                  * Permitted
                                                                                                                                                  as an
                                                                                                                                                  accessory
Commercial Off-Street Parking      P/C*       P/C*   P/C*   P/C*   P/C*   P/C*   P/C*   --                                                  --    use with a
                                                                                                                                                  primary
                                                                                                                                                  building
                                                                                                                                                  only
Commercial recreation - indoor     P          --     --     --     --     --     P      --                                                  --     
Daycare Facility                   P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Daycare, family - 10 or less                 P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
                                                                                                                                                  * Completely
Dog kennel                         --         --     --     --     --     --     P*     --                                                  --    enclosed; no
                                                                                                                                                  outside runs
Drive-Up Windows                   P/C        --     --     --     P/C    P/C    P/C    --                                                  --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Dry cleaning & laundry, pick-up    P          P      P      P      --     P      --     --                                                  --     
station
Dry cleaning & laundry, self-      P          P      P      P      --     P      --     --                                                  --     
service laundry
Financial Institution & service    P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Food Preparation                   P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Hotel/ motel                       P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Liquor Store                       P          P      P      P      --     P      --     --                                                  --
Microbrewery                       P          P      P      P      --     P      P      --                                                  --     
Microdistillery                    P          P      P      P      --     P      P      --                                                  --     
Mortuary, funeral home             --         --     --     --     --     --     P/C    --                                                  --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Office                             P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Personal services                  P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Pet Services                       P          P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Research and development facility  P          --     --     --     P      --     P      --                                                  --     
Restaurant and restaurant fast-    P/C        P/C    P/C    P/C    P/C    P/C    P/C    --                                                  --    See Table 5-
food                                                                                                                                              2
Retail sales & service             P          P      P      P      P/C    P      P      --                                                  --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Service station                    A/C        --     --     --     --     P/C    P/C    --                                                  --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Storage, exterior                  --         --     --     --     --     --     --     --                                                  --     
Studio                             P          P      P      P      --     P      P      --                                                  --     
Theater, indoor                    P          --     --     P      --     --     --     --                                                  --     
Vehicle – motorized, leasing and --         --     --     --     P/C    --     P/C    --                                                  --    See Table 5-
rentals                                                                                                                                           2
Vehicle –motorized, service      --         --     --     --     P/C    P/C    P/C    --                                                  --    See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Civic Uses
Antenna or Tower                   P/C        P/C    P/C    P/C    P/C    P/C    P/C    --                                                  A/C   See Table 5-
                                                                                                                                                  2
Club or lodge (non-profit)         --         P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Community Center                   --         P      P      P      --     --     --     --                                                  P
House of worship                   --         P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  --     
Library                            --         P      P      P      P      P      P      P                                                   P
Municipal Building                 --         P      P      P      P      P      P      --                                                  P
Park Facilities (Public)           P          P      P      P      P      P      P      P                                                   P      
School, general education          --         P      P      P      --     --     --     P                                                   --     
School, specialized education      --         P      P      P      P      P      --     --                                                  --     
Theater, performing arts center    --         P      P      P      --     --     --     --                                                  P
Industrial Uses
Garage, Truck                      --         --     --     --     --     --     --     --                                                  --     
                                                                                                                                                  Warehousing
Manufacturing & processing: Class  P/C        --     --     --     --     --     P/C    --                                                  --    permitted as
I                                                                                                                                                 an accessory
                                                                                                                                                  use
Manufacturing & processing: Class  --         --     --     --     --     --     --     --                                                  --     
II
                                                                                                                                                  *Equipment
                                                                                                                                                  shall be
                                                                                                                                                  screened to
                                                                                                                                                  not be seen
                                                                                                                                                  from any
Utility Substation                 P*         --     --     --     --     --     P*     --                                                  --    public right
                                                                                                                                                  of way and
                                                                                                                                                  shall not be
                                                                                                                                                  placed in
                                                                                                                                                  the front of
                                                                                                                                                  any parcel
Warehousing                        A/C        --     --     --     --     --     A/C    --                                                  --     
Other Uses
Adult-Oriented Businesses          --         --     --     --     --     --     --     --                                                  --     
 
5.2    Additional Use Criteria:
(revised 05/22/24)
All uses listed as P/C in Table 5-1 shall also meet the following standards in
Table 5-2.
Table 5-2 Additional Use Criteria Table
Use Zoning District Location & Design Criteria
Table 5-2 Additional Use Criteria Table
Use                                         Zoning       Location & Design Criteria
                                            District
Residential Uses
                                                         No more than six(6) rentable rooms permitted. Shall be owner-occupied. Parking
Bed & Breakfast                             Neighborhood shall be placed behind the building, or screened from view of the public right-
                                                         of-way.
Assisted Living, Memory Care or Skilled
Nursing                                     Town Center  Buildings with Pedestrian Priority or Pedestrian Friendly Frontage shall be
Large Multi-Family                          Neighborhood required to include ground floor commercial uses for a minimum of fifty percent
Medium Multi-Family                                      (50%) of their street frontage as measured in linear feet.
Senior Independent Living
Assisted Living, Memory Care or Skilled                  i.   Homes shall be designed as either a collective of single-family or duplex
Nursing                                     Neighborhood homes to fit the scale of the surrounding development.
Senior Independent Living                                ii.   These homes may also be mixed with mixed-generational housing.
                                            Town Center  i.   Residential Facility shall be licensed by the State of Minnesota; and
                                                        ii.   Residential Facility shall serve no more than sixteen (16) residents at
Residential Facility                                     any given time.
                                                         i.   Residential Facility shall be licensed by the State of Minnesota;
                                            Neighborhood ii.   Residential Facility shall serve no more than six (6) residents at any
                                                         given time.
                                                         i.   Parking shall be placed against an alley or in the rear of the lot and be
Small Multi-Family                          Neighborhood screened from the public right-of-way.
                                                         ii.   Entrances to units that are not accessible from the front entries may have
                                                         access from the rear or the side of the building.
Solar Energy Systems                        Neighborhood Shall conform to the provisions included in Section 1325.03 Subd. 7 of the AHC.
Commercial Uses
                                            Office
Automotive Washing                          Mixed-Use
Vehicle – motorized, leasing and rentals  Flex Office  i.   Automotive drive through lanes, service bays, and/or gas station canopies
Vehicle- motorized, service                 Retail       shall meet the design standards in Section 7, Building Design Standards of this
                                            Mixed-Use    code.
                                                         ii.   Outdoor storage of vehicles or other products sold shall NOT have direct
                                            Campus       frontage along Pedestrian Priority Streets. Outdoor storage of vehicles and/or
                                            Commercial   other products sold shall be screened with a required street screen along
Service Station                             Retail       Pedestrian-Friendly Streets and General Streets (see Section 10 for standards).
                                            Mixed-Use
                                            Flex Office

                                            Campus       i.   New surface parking lots shall be permitted as an interim use only in the
                                            Commercial   case of phasing.
                                            Town Center  ii.   Applications for new surface lots shall include in-fill building concepts
                                            Office       on the lot with a site plan that meets the build-to-zone and building frontage
Commercial Off-Street Parking               Mixed-Use    standards of the specific character zone.
                                            Retail       iii.   New surface parking shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30’) from
                                            Mixed-Use    the edge of the right-of-way of Pedestrian Priority Streets.
                                            Flex Office  iv.   New surface parking shall not be located at a street intersection (of any
                                                        Pedestrian Priority and Pedestrian-Friendly Streets only) for minimum of thirty
                                                         feet (30’) from the intersection along each street.
                                                         i.   Pick-up and drop-off lanes, storage of vehicles, service areas, and drive
                                                         through facilities shall NOT have direct frontage along Pedestrian Priority
Mortuary, funeral home                      Flex Office  Streets.
                                                         ii.   All such areas along other streets shall be screened with a required
                                                         street screen (see Section 10 for standards).
                                            Campus
                                            Commercial
                                            Retail       Drive through or drive-up facilities shall meet the design standards in Section
Drive-Up Windows                            Mixed-Use    7, Building Design Standards of this code.
                                            Flex Office
                                            Office
                                            Mixed-Use
                                            Campus
                                            Commercial
                                            Town Center
Restaurant and Restaurant, Fast Food        Office       Six (6) queuing spaces per drive-through menu board.
                                            Mixed-Use
                                            Retail
                                            Mixed-Use
                                            Flex Office
                                                         i.   Retail sales and service uses may not comprise more than ten percent (10%)
                                                         of the total gross square footage of building space within the Office Mixed-Use
                                                         District.
                                            Office       ii.   Accessory retail uses associated with medical office clinics, including
Retail sales and services                   Mixed-Use    but not limited to pharmaceutical and corrective lens sales, shall not be
                                                         counted towards the maximum square footage of retail sales and service uses
                                                         permitted in the Office Mixed-Use District, but may not exceed twenty-five
                                                         percent (25%) of the gross square footage of the building in which they are
                                                         located..
Civic Uses
                                            Campus
                                            Commercial
                                            Town Center
                                            Office       i.   Located on top of a building or architectural component only.
Antenna or Tower                            Mixed-Use    ii.   Shall conform to additional design and location requirements for antennas
                                            Retail       and towers included in Section 1325 of the AHC.
                                            Mixed-Use
                                            Flex Office
                                             
Industrial Uses
                                            Campus       For buildings where manufacturing and processing are a principal or accessory
Manufacturing and Processing: Class I       Commercial   use, a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the gross building square footage must
                                            Flex Office  be in office use.
                                            Campus       Warehousing is only allowed as an accessory use to Manufacturing and Processing.
Warehousing                                 Commercial   For buildings where warehousing is an accessory use, a minimum of thirty percent
                                            Flex Office  (30%) of the gross building square footage must be in office use.
 
6.0    Building and Site Development Standards
All parcels within the TRC are assigned to one of seven (7) Zoning Districts:
1.   Campus Commercial
2.   Town Center
3.   Office Mixed-Use
4.   Retail Mixed-Use
5.   Flex Office
6.   Civic
7.   Neighborhood
In addition to standards that apply to all Zoning Districts, Building and Site
Development standards applicable to each Zoning District are described in
Sections 6.2 – 6.8.
The images and graphics in the first subsection of each zoning district
standards are provided as illustrative of intent and are advisory only without
the power of law. Refer to the standards on the following pages for the
specific Building and Site Development Standards.
In addition, the graphics used to illustrate the building and development
standards in each Zoning District are NOT intended to indicate exact conditions
within each Zoning District. Rather, illustrations are conceptual and standards
are to be applied based on the specific frontage types designated along the
subject property or site. For example, a specific site may not have frontages
along all streets as indicated in the illustrations and only the standards
applicable to designated building frontages on the property should be used. In
addition, the illustrations may depict other site elements to establish context
and only the standards regulated by the specific subsection shall apply. For
example, the Building Placement graphics may depict sidewalks for context
purposes only and the graphic should only be used to establish standards for
building placement on the site. Building form graphics in these sections are
NOT TO SCALE.
6.1    General to All Zoning Districts
   (a)   Building Frontage Designations: The Building Frontage designations are
established on the Regulating Plan (Attachment 1) to specify certain building
and site development standards along each street based on the priority placed
on pedestrian-orientation. The Regulating Plan illustrates the Building
Frontage designations within the TRC. For the purposes of this code, all
Building Frontages are classified into one of the following three categories:
      i.   Pedestrian Priority Frontages – Pedestrian Priority Frontages are
intended to provide the most pedestrian-friendly and contiguous development
context. Buildings and sites along Pedestrian Priority Frontages shall be held
to the highest standard of pedestrian-oriented design and few, if any, gaps
shall be permitted in the ‘Street Wall’. Breaks in the street wall may be
permitted for courtyards, forecourts, sidewalk cafes and pedestrian connections
between the individual sites and the public sidewalk. These street frontages
are the main retail, restaurant, entertainment streets, or are important
neighborhood connectors, as identified in the Regulating Plan.
         1.   Specific to Pedestrian Priority Frontages: The area between the
building facade and property line or edge of any existing sidewalk along any
street with Pedestrian Priority Frontage shall be designed such that the
sidewalk width shall be a minimum as determined by the street type (see
Attachment 4) and the remainder of any setback area shall be paved flush with
the public sidewalk. Sidewalk cafes, public art, landscaping within tree-wells
or planters may be incorporated within this area.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Illustration showing requirements
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ along Pedestrian Priority Frontages
IMAGES/0-0-0-1377.png]                    only
 
      ii.   Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages – Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages are
also intended to be pedestrian-oriented with a mostly contiguous development
context. However, in some locations, where access to a General Frontage street
or Alley is not available, Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages may need to
accommodate driveways, parking, service/utility functions, and loading and
unloading. In such cases, Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages may balance pedestrian
orientation with automobile accommodation. Typically, they shall establish a
hybrid development context that has a more pedestrian-supportive development
context at street intersections and accommodates auto-related functions and
surface parking in the middle of the block. Surface parking shall be screened
from the roadway following the Street Screen Standards in Section 10.4.
Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages are designated on the Regulating Plan.
      iii.   General Frontages – General Frontages are intended to accommodate
more auto-oriented uses, surface parking and service functions on a site with a
more suburban/automobile orientation. The General Frontages shall be building
frontages not designated as either a Pedestrian Priority or Pedestrian-Friendly
Frontage on the Regulating Plan. Surface parking shall be screened following
the Street Screen Standards in Section 10.4.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Graphic Illustrating the Application
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ of Street Type Designation Based on
IMAGES/0-0-0-1379.png]                    the Development Context
 
   (b)   Treatment of Street Intersections:
      i.   Corner building street facades along intersections of Pedestrian
Priority Frontages and Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages shall be built to the BTZ
for a minimum of twenty feet (20’) from the intersection along each street or
the width of the corner lot, whichever is less regardless of the building
frontage percentage required along that street. This requirement shall not
prohibit incorporation of curved, chamfered building corners or recessed
entries or civic/open spaces at such intersections. In addition, this standard
shall apply regardless of the frontage requirement along the intersecting
street even if it is a General Street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1381.png]
Illustration showing minimum frontage requirements at street intersections
      ii.   Corner Building Height Allowance: Corner buildings may exceed the
maximum building height by 25% along no more than 20% of the building’s
frontage along each corresponding street façade. The purpose of the allowance
is to encourage inclusion of architectural features and no mechanical equipment
shall be located on top of a roof area that takes advantage of this allowance.
Corner Building Height Allowances are not permitted in the Neighborhood Zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1383.png]
Illustration showing Corner Building Height Allowance
   (c)   Parking and Service Access:
      i.   Location of parking (both structured and surface) shall be per the
Zoning District specific building standards (Section 6.2 – 6.8).
      ii.   Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided per Table 6-
1 below.
Table 6-1 Parking Ratios
Zoning District TC/OMU/RMU/C CC/FO NR Additional Criteria
Min. Off-Street Vehicular Parking Requirement
Zoning District                                                              TC/OMU/RMU/ CC/FO          NR              Additional Criteria
                                                                             C
Min. Off-Street Vehicular Parking Requirement
                                                                             1 space/200 1 space/200
                                                                             sq. ft. of  sq. ft. of
Retail and Similar Uses1                                                     gross       gross retail   N/A
                                                                             retail      sales floor
                                                                             sales floor area.
                                                                             area
                                                                             1 space/250 1 space/250
Office and Similar Uses2                                                     sq. ft. of  sq. ft. of     N/A1.   
                                                                             gross floor gross floor
                                                                             area        area.
                                                                                         1 space/500
                                                                                         sq. ft. of
                                                                                         gross floor
                                                                                         area for
                                                                                         general
                                                                                         manufacturing/
Industrial Uses                                                              N/A         industrial; 1  N/A1.   
                                                                                         space/ 1,000
                                                                                         sq. ft. of
                                                                                         gross floor
                                                                                         area for
                                                                                         warehousing/
                                                                                         storage
                                                                             4 spaces
Auto-related Uses3                                                           for each    N/A            N/A1.   
                                                                             service bay                                1.   Plans that include shared parking or a reduction in the required number
Assembly Uses4                                                               1 space/    1 space/       1 space/        of parking spaces may be approved by the JDA as a Permitted Adjustment with
                                                                             3 seats     3 seats        3 seats1.    the provision of a parking demand study (See Section 3.0).
                                                                             1 space/    1 space/                       2.   On-street parking located along any public street shall count towards
                                                                             employee    employee and 1                 the required off-street parking.
Daycare                                                                      and 1       space/         N/A1.        3.   Landscaping within surface parking lots shall meet standards in Section
                                                                             space/      5 persons                      10.0 of this Code.
                                                                             5 persons   cared for
                                                                             cared for
                                                                             1space/     1space/
                                                                             employee    employee plus
                                                                             plus 1      1 space/200
Clinic, Medical Office                                                       space/200   sq. ft. of     N/A1.   
                                                                             sq. ft. of  gross floor
                                                                             gross floor area
                                                                             area
                                                                             One space   One space per
                                                                             per each    each 200 sq.
                                                                             200 sq. ft. ft. non-
                                                                             non-tennis/ tennis/
                                                                             racquetball racquetball
                                                                             court area. court area.
                                                                             Two spaces  Two spaces per
Indoor Recreation5                                                           per tennis/ tennis/        N/A1.   
                                                                             racquetball racquetball
                                                                             court. One  court. One
                                                                             space per   space per each
                                                                             each 50 sq. 50 sq. ft.
                                                                             ft. deck    deck area for
                                                                             area for a  a swimming
                                                                             swimming    pool.
                                                                             pool.
                                                                             1 space/
                                                                             employee                   1 space/
School, General                                                              plus 3      N/A            employee plus 3
                                                                             space/                     space/classroom
                                                                             classroom
                                                                             1 space/
                                                                             employee
School, Specialized Education                                                plus 1      N/A            N/A
                                                                             space/
                                                                             4 students
                                                                             1 space/300 1 space/300    1 space/400 sq.
All other Non-Residential Uses                                               sq. ft. of  sq. ft. of     ft. of gross
                                                                             gross floor gross floor    floor area.
                                                                             area.       area
Residential – Single Family and Two-Family Uses                            N/A         N/A            2.0 spaces/     --
                                                                                                        dwelling unit
                                                                             1.0 space/
                                                                             efficiency                 1.0 space/
                                                                             and one-                   efficiency and
Residential – Multi-Family Uses                                            bedroom     N/A            one-bedroom
                                                                             units; 1.5                 units; 2.0
                                                                             spaces/two-                spaces/two-
                                                                             bedroom+                   bedroom+ units
                                                                             units
                                                                             1.0 space/
                                                                             unit for                   1.0 space/unit
                                                                             Senior                     for Senior
                                                                             Independent                Independent     1.   See Section 1325.045 of the Arden Hills Code for additional criteria for
                                                                             Living                     Living units;   multi-family uses.
                                                                             units; 0.75                0.75 spaces/    2.   Plans that include shared parking or a reduction in the required number
Residential – Senior Independent Living, Assisted, Memory Care, or Skilled space/unit  N/A            unit for        of parking spaces may be approved by the JDA as a Permitted Adjustment with
Nursing Uses                                                                 for                        Assisted        the provision of a parking demand study (See Section 3.0).
                                                                             Assisted                   Living, Memory  3.   Landscaping within surface parking lots shall meet standards in Section
                                                                             Living,                    Care and        10.0 of this Code.
                                                                             Memory Care                Skilled Nursing  
                                                                             and Skilled                units.
                                                                             Nursing
                                                                             units.
                                                                             0.5 spaces  0.75 spaces
                                                                             per guest   per guest
                                                                             room; all   room; all
                                                                             other areas other areas
Lodging Uses (Hotels and Motels)                                             shall be    shall be       N/A
                                                                             parked at   parked at the
                                                                             the non-    non-
                                                                             residential residential
                                                                             rate above  rate above
Min. Bicycle Parking Requirement (# of Bicycles)
                                                                             10% of all  5% of all                      1.   Location of Bicycle Parking: For retail buildings, 25% of all provided
                                                                             provided    provided off-                  bicycle parking shall be located within 50 feet of a primary building
All Uses                                                                     off-street  street         N/A             entrance.
                                                                             automobile  automobile                     2.   See Section 1325.045 of the Arden Hills Code for additional criteria for
                                                                             spaces      spaces                         multi-family uses.
 
1 Includes Liquor Store.
2 Includes Business Services; Dog Kennel; Dry Cleaning; Library; Municipal
Building; Personal Services; Pet Services; Research and Development Facility;
and Vehicle – Motorized, Leasing and Rental.
3 Includes Automotive Washing; Service Station; and Vehicle – Motorized,
Service
4 Includes Brewpub; Club or Lodge (non-profit); Cocktail Lounge; Community
Center; House of Warship; Microbrewery; Mortuary, Funeral Home; Restaurant and
Restaurant Fast-Food; Studio; Theater, Indoor; and Theater, Performing Arts
Center.
5 Includes Club, Sports & Fitness and Commercial Recreation – Indoor.
   iii.   Driveways and Service Access:
      1.   Unless otherwise specified in the specific Zoning District standards
in Sections 6.2 through 6.8, driveway access and off-street loading and
unloading may be along General Frontages only.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified in the specific Zoning District standards
in Sections 6.2 through 6.8 or through permitted adjustments, driveway and off-
street loading and unloading may be located with access along a Pedestrian-
Friendly Frontage street only if the property has no access to either a General
Frontage street or joint use easement to an adjoining property with direct
driveway access to any other street.
      3.   Unless otherwise specified in the specific Zoning District standards
in Sections 6.2 through 6.8 or through permitted adjustments, driveways and
off-street loading and unloading may be located with access along a Pedestrian
Priority Frontage street only if the property has no access to either a
Pedestrian-Friendly or General Frontage Street or joint use easement to an
adjoining property with direct access to any other street.
      4.   Along Pedestrian Priority and Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages,
driveway spacing shall be limited to one driveway per each block face or per
200 feet of block face for blocks greater than 400 feet in length.
      5.   Shared driveways, joint use easements or joint access easements
shall be required to adjoining properties when driveway and service access is
off a Pedestrian Priority Frontage or Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage.
      6.   Service and loading/unloading areas shall be screened per standards
in Section 10.0.
      7.   Unless required to meet minimum fire access or service access
standards all commercial, mixed-use and multi-family residential driveways
shall be a maximum of twenty feet (20’) in width. Driveways used for service
access (trash, fire, deliveries, etc.) shall be a maximum of thirty feet (30’)
in width. Driveways wider than twenty-four feet (24’) in width shall only be
located off of General Frontage Streets. Driveways along County controlled
roadways shall meet Ramsey County Standards or the City’s adopted standards.
      8.   Additional easements may be required if shared driveways or access
agreements are established.
      9.   Residential Driveways and Garages:
         a.   Unless required to meet minimum fire access or service access
standards, driveways for Single-Family Residential Use Buildings shall be a
maximum of twelve feet (12’) in width at the curb cut.
         b.   Garages for Residential Buildings shall be located on streets
with General Frontage or at the rear of residential buildings.
         c.   If front-loaded garages are utilized on residential uses, each
bay of the garage shall be no greater than twenty-four feet (24’) wide and set
back at least three feet (3’) behind the front façade line, unless a front
porch meets the requirements of Section 6.1(c)(iii)(9)(d) below. Front-loaded
garages on residential lots less than fifty feet (50’) wide shall not be
allowed. Townhomes and courtyard apartments shall utilize garages at the rear
of the lot with access from streets with General Frontage or from Alleys.
            i.   Lots less than sixty-five feet (65’) in width shall not have
more than twenty-four feet (24’) of garage facing the street.
            ii.   Lots sixty-five to seventy feet (65’-70’) in width shall
permit up to three (3) car front-loaded garages provided the homes meet the
following requirements:
               1.   Each bay of the garage shall not be greater than twenty-
four feet (24’) wide and setback at least three feet (3’) from the front façade
line, unless a front porch meets the requirements of Section 6.1 (c) (iii) (9)
(d) below.
               2.   The garage portion of the home facing the street shall not
exceed fifty-five percent (55%) of the total front façade of the home.
            iii.   Lots greater than seventy feet (70’) in width shall permit
up to three (3) car front-loaded garages provided the homes meet the following
requirements:
               1.   Each bay of the garage shall not be greater than twenty-
four feet (24’) wide and setback at least three feet (3’) from the front façade
line, unless a front porch meets the requirements of Section 6.1 (c) (iii) (9)
(d) below.
               2.   The garage portion of the home facing the street shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total front façade of the home.
         d.   If garage is flush with the front façade, a porch shall be added
to the front façade measuring fifty percent (50%) of the main floor living
space portion of the front façade and a minimum of six (6) feet in depth.
         e.   Front driveways shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20’) long and
designed to fit at least two (2) parked vehicles and ensure that vehicles are
parked outside of the public right-of-way.
   (d)   Street Screen Required:
      i.   Any non-residential parking lot frontage along a public right-of-way
with surface parking shall be defined by a Street Screen. This required Street
Screen shall be located at the right-of-way edge. Refer to Section 10.0:
Streetscape and Landscape Standards of this Code for more specifications.
   (e)   Loading Dock Standards:
      i.   Facilities that include a loading dock shall have a maximum clear
height of twenty-four feet (24’) as measured from the surface of the ground
floor to the lowest point on the ceiling.
      ii.   No more than one loading dock shall be allowed per 10,000 square
feet of building area.
      iii.   Cross docks, where loading docks are situated along two (2) walls
of the same building, shall not be permitted.
      iv.   Loading docks shall be located in the side or rear yard and shall
be screened from view of the public right-of-way.
   (f)   Fire Separation Requirement: Side and rear setbacks shall be based on
minimum fire separation required between buildings, if applicable.
   (g)   Recessed Entry Setbacks: Building façade lines on recessed entries and
arcade buildings shall be measured from the front of façade with the recessed
entry or arcade (see Section 4.0 Definitions for illustration).
   (h)   Measuring Heights:
      i.   Elevator and stair enclosures; public flagpoles and monuments; and
chimneys are exempt from the height limit.
      ii.   Spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes of churches shall not exceed a
height of sixty-five feet (65’) as measured from the ground level.
      iii.   Vents, tanks, solar energy systems, HVAC equipment, and other
mechanical enclosures shall be exempted from the height limits so long as they
do not extend more than fifteen feet (15’) above the roof upon which they are
located.
      iv.   Internal building height shall be measured from finished floor to
bottom of the structural members of the ceiling.
      v.   Floor to ceiling heights shall not apply to parking structures or
civic buildings.
   (i)   Encroachments:
      i.   Encroachments into the public right-of-way shall not be permitted.
      ii.   Encroachments over Required Setbacks: Canopies, awnings, galleries,
and balconies may encroach over any required setback areas per standards
established in each zoning district as long as the vertical clearance is a
minimum of ten feet (10’) from the finished sidewalk elevation.
         1.   Maximum of fifty percent (50% of the depth of the sidewalk or ten
feet (10’) (whichever is less) (except blade signs which shall encroach no more
than six feet (6’) from the building façade line).
         2.   In no case shall an encroachment be located over an on-street
parking or travel lane.
         3.   Additional license agreements are required for all encroachments
over public right-of-way.
   (j)   Phased Developments: Due to the long-term development vision within
the TRC, certain building form and site development standards may be deferred
for phased development projects meeting the following criteria:
      i.   Submission of a site plan that illustrates how development and any
related private improvements will be phased over time. Each phase of the site
plan shall independently comply with all applicable standards of the TRC unless
a Permitted Adjustment is granted.
      ii.   Required private landscaping and open space amenities may also be
phased with the building.
      iii.   If a full block is being phased in development, design and
development standards may be measured at the full block level in order to
accommodate the various phases of the development.
   (k)   Required Public Improvements: All site plans that require public
improvements such as sidewalk and streetscape improvements may be deferred
through the payment of a proportional fee-in-lieu when the entire length of
that block is not within the site plan.
 
Campus Commercial Zoning District
 
6.2   Campus Commercial (CC)
   (a)   Illustrations and Intent
The Campus Commercial Zoning District facilitates a building format that allows
multiple, single tenant buildings or campuses within the northern “Thumb” site
of the Plan Area. The goal is to allow for an individual plan approach for each
campus or building, based on user preferences within a range of requirements.
TCAAP Master Plan Vision for Campus Commercial Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1447.png]
 
 
(b) Building Placement
 
Public   ∙   50’ min. setback
Open     ∙   Setback must be screened with vegetation and landscaping.
Space    ∙   If loading or service is oriented towards Rice Creek Regional Park or
         public trails, appropriate screening shall be required
General  10’ min. setback; no max. setback
Frontage
Side     No min.; no max.
Rear     No min; no max.
 
(c) Building Height
                                          (i)   Principal Building Standards
                                          Building   ∙   15 stories or maximum height of 210 feet                               K
                                          maximum
                                          First
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          height     ∙   Minimum height of 10 feet for all frontages                            M
                                          (fin.
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Ground     ∙   Maximum of 12 inches. above sidewalk for all buildings with Pedestrian
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ floor      Priority designation                                                            L
IMAGES/0-0-0-1479.png]                    finish     ∙   ADA Code applies
                                          level
                                          Upper
                                          floor(s)
                                          height
                                          (fin.      ∙   Minimum height of 9 feet.                                              N
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
                                          (ii)   Accessory Building Standards
                                          Accessory buildings shall meet the standards for Principal Building standards in the CC
                                          Zone.
 
(d) Parking & Service Access
(i)   Surface Parking Setbacks (with new building)
                                          Public    ∙   50’ min. setback
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Open      ∙   Setback must be screened with vegetation and landscaping              Q
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Space     ∙   If loading or service is oriented towards Public Open Space or public
IMAGES/0-0-0-1453.png]                              trails, appropriate screening shall be required
Standards for S and T in the              General   ∙   10’ min.                                                            Q’
illustrations above are referenced in     Frontages                                                                                 
standards for Driveways and Service       Side      ∙   0’ min.                                                             P
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                                                                                                          
                                          Rear      ∙   0’ min.                                                             R
                                                                                                                                    
(ii)   Structured Parking or Below Grade Parking Setbacks
                                          Public    ∙   50’ min. setback
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Open      ∙   Setback must be screened with vegetation and landscaping              O
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Space     ∙   If loading or service is oriented towards Public Open Space or public
IMAGES/0-0-0-1455.png]                              trails, appropriate screening shall be required
Standards for S and T in the              General   ∙   10’ min.                                                            C
illustrations above are referenced in     Frontages
standards for Driveways and Service       Side      ∙   0’ min.                                                             P
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                Rear      ∙   0’ min.                                                             R
                                          (iii)   Below Grade Parking
                                          May be built up to the property line.
 
 
Town Center Zoning District
 
6.3   Town Center (TC) Zone
   (a)   Illustrations and Intent
The Town Center Zoning District creates a vibrant commercial and residential
environment that maximizes the potential for an outdoor experience. This
district promotes walkability through allowing for housing, office, retail,
restaurant and civic use, all within close proximity of each other.
TCAAP Master Plan Vision for Town Center Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1467.png]
 
b) Building Placement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1477.png]
(i)   Build-to Zones (BTZs) and Setbacks
(Distance from property line to edge of the zone)
Pedestrian Priority/Open Space 10’ min. setback – 15’ max.  A
Frontage BTZ                   setback
Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage   10’ min. setback – 25’ max.  B
BTZ                            setback
General Frontage BTZ           10’ min. setback; no max. setbackC
Side – Adjacent to           10’ min. setback; no max. setback
Neighborhood District          0’ min. setback; no max. setback D
Side – All other adjacencies
Rear – Adjacent to           10’ min. setback; no max. setback
Neighborhood District          0’ min. setback; no max. setback D*
Rear – All other adjacencies
(ii)   Building Frontage
(Percentage of building façade built within the BTZ)
Pedestrian Priority Frontage   60% min.                           E
Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage   50% min.                           F
General Frontage               None Required
(iii)   Gross Density
Town Center Sub-District 1     Maximum density of 67 dwelling units/acre
(TC-1)
Town Center Sub-District 2     Maximum density of 67 dwelling units/acre
(TC-2)
Town Center Sub-District 3     Maximum density of 42 units/acre
(TC-3)
(vi)   Minimum Multi-Family Unit Sizes1
Alcove Units  475 square feet*                                    1 Assisted
Efficiency    550 square feet**                                   Living,
Units                                                             Memory Care
One-Bedroom   635 square feet                                     and Skilled
Units                                                             Nursing Units
Two-Bedroom   950 square feet                                     are Exempt.
Units
Three-Bedroom 1,200 square feet                                   *No more than
Units                                                             10% of the
                                                                  total units
                                                                  per building
                                                                  shall be
                                                                  Alcove Units.

Each                                                              **No more
Additional    +150 square feet                                    than 15% of
Bedroom                                                           the total
                                                                  units per
                                                                  building
                                                                  shall be
                                                                  Efficiency
                                                                  Units.
 
(c) Building Height
                                          (i)   Principal Building Standards
                                                   Town     ∙   10 stories or a maximum height of 130 feet: up to 25 percent of total lot
                                                   Center   area.
                                                   Sub-     ∙   5 stories or a maximum height of 65 feet: remaining portion of lot area (up
                                                   District to 100 percent)
                                                   1 (TC-1)
                                                            ∙   10 stories or a maximum height of 130 feet; up to 25 percent of the total
                                                   Town     lot area for properties with a Pedestrian Priority or Pedestrian Friendly
                                          Building Center   Fontage, but not to exceed 60 percent of the public street frontage as measured
                                          maximum  Sub-     in linear feet. Intersecting private streets shall be excluded from the total
                                                   District frontage.
                                                   2 (TC-2) ∙   5 stories or a maximum height of 65 feet: remaining portion of lot area (up
                                                            to 100 percent)
                                                   Town
                                                   Center   ∙   5 stories or a maximum height of 65 feet: properties with Pedestrian
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/                 Sub-     Priority or Pedestrian Friendly Frontage
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/          District ∙   4 stories or a maximum height of 52 feet: all other properties.
IMAGES/0-0-0-1471.png]                             3 (TC-3)
                                          First floor to
                                          ceiling height
                                          (fin. floor to    ∙   Minimum height of 10 feet for all frontages.                            M
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
                                                            ∙   Maximum of 12 inches above sidewalk for all buildings with Pedestrian
                                          Ground floor      Priority Frontage                                                                 
                                          finish level      ∙   ADA Code applies                                                        L
                                                            ∙   Concrete podium construction shall be used for ground floor of all building
                                                            along Pedestrian Priority of Pedestrian Friendly Frontage
                                          Upper floor(s)
                                          height (fin.      ∙   Minimum height of 9 feet                                                N
                                          floor to ceiling
                                          structure)
                                          (ii)   Accessory Building Standards
                                          Accessory buildings shall meet the standards for Principal Building standards in the TC Zone.
 
(d) Parking & Service Access
(i)   Surface Parking Setbacks
                                          Pedestrian  ∙   Shall be located behind the principal building along that street
                                          Priority or frontage; or                                                              O
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Open Space  ∙   Min. 3’ behind the building façade line along that street     O*
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Frontage
IMAGES/0-0-0-1473.png]                    Pedestrian-
                                         Friendly    ∙   Min. 3’ behind the building façade line along that street     Q
Standards for S and T in the              Frontage
illustrations above are referenced in     General     ∙   Min. 3’ behind the property line along that street             Q*
standards for Driveways and Service       Frontage
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                Side        ∙   6’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District;            P
                                                      ∙   0’ min. for all other adjacencies
                                          Rear        ∙   6’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District;            R
                                                      ∙   0’ min. for all other adjacencies
(ii)   Structured Parking
                                          Pedestrian
                                          Priority or ∙   Ground floor - Shall be min. of 30’ from the property line     O
                                          Open Space  ∙   Upper Floors – may be built to the façade line along that street
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Frontage
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Pedestrian-
IMAGES/0-0-0-1475.png]                    Friendly    ∙   May be built up to the building façade line along a that street; or
                                         Frontage or ∙   If no building is located along the street frontage; then the structured
Standards for S and T in the              General     parking shall meet the setback standards along that specific frontage.
illustrations above are referenced in     Frontage
standards for Driveways and Service       Side        ∙   10’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District;           P
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                            ∙   0’ for all other adjacencies
                                          Rear        ∙   10’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District;           R
                                                      ∙   0’ min. for all other adjacencies
                                          (iii)   Below Grade Parking
                                          May be built up to the property lines along all streets
 
 
Office Mixed-Use Zoning District
 
6.4   Office Mixed-Use (OMU)
   (a)   Illustrations and Intent
The Office Mixed-Use Zoning District creates a flexible zone that allows and
promotes a seamless transition from Retail Mixed-Use but focuses on employment
and compatible uses. This district promotes employment as a primary use, but
allows for other commercial and up to ten percent (10%) retail uses.
TCAAP Master Plan Vision for Office Mixed-Use Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1481.png]
 
(b) Building Placement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1483.png]
(i)   Build-to Zones (BTZs) and Setbacks
(Distance from property line to edge of the zone)
Pedestrian-Priority/Open Space Frontage  10’ min. setback – 25’ max. seAback
(BTZ)
Pedestrian-Friendly/Spine Road Frontage  10’ min. setback – 95’ max. seBback
(BTZ)
General or Highway Frontage              10’ min. setback; no max. setback C
Side                                     0’ min. setback; no max. setback  D 
Rear                                     0’ min. setback; no max. setback  D*
(ii)   Building Frontage
(Percentage of building façade built within the BTZ)
Pedestrian-Priority/Open Space Frontage  50% min.                            E
Pedestrian-Friendly                      40% min.                            F
General Frontage                         None Required                       C
 
(c) Building Height
                                          (i)   Principal Building Standards
                                          Building   ∙   65’ max.                                                           K
                                          maximum
                                          First
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          height     ∙   10’ min. for all frontages                                         M
                                          (fin.
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Ground     ∙   12” max. above sidewalk for all buildings with Pedestrian Priority
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ floor      Frontage                                                                      L
IMAGES/0-0-0-1485.png]                    finish     ∙   ADA code applies.
                                          level
                                          Upper
                                          floor(s)
                                          height
                                          (fin.      ∙   9’ min.                                                            N
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
                                          (ii)   Accessory Building Standards
                                          Accessory buildings shall meet the standards for Principal Building standards in the OMU
                                          Zone.
 
(d) Parking & Service Access
(i)   Surface Parking Setbacks
                                          Pedestrian- ∙   Shall be located behind the principal building along that street
                                          Priority or frontage; or                                                               O
                                          Open Space  ∙   Min. 3’ behind the building façade line along that street;     Q'
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Frontage    ∙   If no building is located along the street frontage; then surface
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/             parking shall be setback a minimum of 6’ from the property line.
IMAGES/0-0-0-1487.png]                    Pedestrian  ∙   Min. 3’ behind the building façade line along that street.
                                         Friendly    ∙   If no building is located along the street frontage; then surface Q
Standards for S and T in the              Frontage    parking shall be setback a minimum of 6’ from the property line
illustrations above are referenced in     General     ∙   Min. 10’ behind the property line; and                          Q*
standards for Driveways and Service       Frontage    ∙   Maximum of two rows of parking in front of building.
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                Highway     ∙   Min. 15’ from the property line and include a street screen and Q'
                                          Frontage    landscape buffer
                                          Side        ∙   0’                                                              P
                                          Rear        ∙   0’                                                              R
(ii)   Structured Parking or Below Grade Parking Setbacks
                                          Pedestrian-
                                          Priority or ∙   Ground floor - Shall be min. of 30’ from the property line      O
                                          Open Space  ∙   Upper Floors – may be built to the façade line along that street
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Frontage
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Pedestrian
IMAGES/0-0-0-1489.png]                    Friendly,   ∙   May be built up to the building façade line along that street frontage; or
Standards for S and T in the              General or  ∙   If no building is located along the street frontage; then the structured
illustrations above are referenced in     Highway     parking shall meet the setback standards along that street.
standards for Driveways and Service       Frontage
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                Side        ∙   0’                                                              P
                                          Rear        ∙   0’
                                          (iii)   Below Grade Parking
                                          May be built up to the property line along all streets.
 
 
Retail Mixed-Use Zoning District
 
6.5   Retail Mixed-Use (RMU)
   (a)   Illustrations and Intent
TCAAP Master Plan Vision for Retail Mixed-Use Zone
The Retail Mixed-Use Zoning District creates a flexible zone that allows and
promotes a seamless transition from Office Mixed-Use, but focuses on retail and
compatible uses. This district promotes retail as a primary use, but allows for
other commercial uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1491.png]
 
(b) Building Placement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1493.png]
(i)   Build-to Zones (BTZs) and Setbacks
(Distance from property line to edge of the zone)
Pedestrian Priority /Open Space Frontage 10’ min. setback – 25’ max. seAback
(BTZ)
Pedestrian-Friendly /Spine Road Frontage 10’ min. setback – 75’ max. seBback
(BTZ)
General or Highway Frontage              10’ min. setback; no max. setback C
Side – Adjacent to Neighborhood Distric10’ min. setback; no max. setback D
Side – All other adjacencies           0’ min. setback; no max. setback
Rear – Adjacent to Neighborhood Distric10’ min. setback; no max. setback D*
Rear – All other adjacencies           0’ min. setback; no max. setback
(ii)   Building Frontage
(Percentage of building façade built within the BTZ)
Pedestrian Priority /Open Space Frontage 60% min.                            E
Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage             50% min.                            F
General Frontage                         None Required
 
(c) Building Height
                                          (i)   Principal Building Standards
                                          Building   ∙   65’ max.                                                           K
                                          maximum
                                          First
                                          floor to
                                          floor
                                          height     ∙   10’ min. for all frontages.                                        M
                                          (fin.
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Ground     ∙   12” max. above sidewalk for all buildings with Pedestrian Priority
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ floor      Frontage                                                                      L
IMAGES/0-0-0-1495.png]                    finish     ∙   ADA Code Applies
                                          level
                                          Upper
                                          floor(s)
                                          height
                                          (fin.      ∙   9’ min.                                                            N
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
                                          (ii)   Accessory Building Standards
                                          Accessory buildings shall meet the standards for Principal Building standards in the
                                          Retail Mixed-Use Zone.
 
(d) Parking & Service Access
(i)   Surface Parking Setbacks
                                          Pedestrian
                                          Priority,
                                          Pedestrian
                                          Friendly,   ∙   Shall be located behind the principal building along that street frontage;Qor
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Open Space  ∙   Min. 3’ behind the building façade line along that street              O
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ or Spine
IMAGES/0-0-0-1497.png]                    Road
                                         Frontage
Standards for S and T in the              Highway     ∙   Min. 15’ from the property line and include Street Screen and landscape Q’er
illustrations above are referenced in     Frontage
standards for Driveways and Service       General     ∙   Min. 3’ behind the property line along that street                      Q*
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                Frontage
                                          Side        ∙   6’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District;                     P
                                                      ∙   0’ min. for all other adjacencies
                                          Rear        ∙   6’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District                      R
                                                      ∙   0’ min. for all other adjacencies.
(ii)   Structured Parking or Below Grade Parking Setbacks
                                          Pedestrian
                                          Priority or ∙   Ground floor - Shall be min. of 30’ from the property line              O
                                          Open Space  ∙   Upper Floors – may be built to the façade line along that street
                                          Frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Pedestrian-
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Friendly,   ∙   May be built up to the building façade line along a that street; or
IMAGES/0-0-0-1499.png]                    General or  ∙   If no building is located along the street frontage; then the structured parking
Standards for S and T in the              Highway     shall meet the setback standards along that specific frontage.
illustrations above are referenced in     Frontage
standards for Driveways and Service       Side        ∙   10’ min. (adjacent to Neighborhood District )                           P
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                            ∙   0’ min. (all other adjacencies)
                                          Rear        ∙   10’ min. (adjacent to Neighborhood District )                           R
                                                      ∙   0’ min. (all other adjacencies)
                                          (iii)   Below Grade Parking
                                          May be built up to the property line along all streets.
 
 
(e) Residential Transition Standards
The following transition standards shall apply to all new
building construction and all upper story additions to
existing buildings located adjacent to the Neighborhood
District. This requirement shall NOT apply if an alley or
other similar right-of-way separates the subject lot and
the Neighborhood District.
i.   Transition Area                         25’ minU
ii.   Max. Building Height within Transition 2
Area                                            stories  V [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                                or 30’   e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
iii.   Required setback                      Min. 10�W IMAGES/0-0-0-1501.png]
A Residential Transition Area fence (6 feet high) shall be
required when adjacent to the Neighborhood District and
shall be optional for all other adjacencies. The required
fence shall NOT be chain link or vinyl. A 6-foot wide
landscape buffer with evergreen shrubs planted at 3-foot
on center and 6 feet min. in height at maturity shall also
be required to be planted within the landscape buffer
parallel to the Neighborhood District border. (see surface
parking setbacks illustration).
 
 
Flex Office Zoning District
 
6.6   Flex Office (FO) Zone
   (a)   Illustrations and Intent
TCAAP Master Plan Vision for Flex Office Zone
The Flex Office Zoning District creates an opportunity for large scale
development for employment, and manufacturing uses that take advantage of the
highway frontage and automobile access.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1769.png]
 
(b) Building Placement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1505.png]
(i)   Build-to Zones (BTZs) and Setbacks
(Distance from property line to edge of the zone)
Pedestrian Priority / Open Space         10’ min. setback – 25’ max. seAback
Frontage (BTZ)
Pedestrian-Friendly /Spine Road Frontage 10’ min. setback – 95’ max. seBback
(BTZ)
General or Highway Frontage              10’ min. setback; no max. setback C
Side                                     0’ min. setback; no max setback   D
Rear                                     15’ min. setback; no max. setback D*
 
(c) Building Height
                                          (i)   Principal Building Standards
                                          Building   ∙   45’ max.                                                           K
                                          maximum    ∙   65’ max. for buildings with at least 75% office use.
                                          First
                                          floor to
                                          floor
                                          height     ∙   10’ min. for all frontages                                         M
                                          (fin.
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Ground     ∙   12” max. above sidewalk for all buildings with Pedestrian Priority
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ floor      Frontage designation                                                          L
IMAGES/0-0-0-1507.png]                    finish     ∙   ADA Code Applies
                                          level
                                          Upper
                                          floor(s)
                                          height
                                          (fin.      ∙   9’ min.                                                            N
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
                                          (ii)   Accessory Building Standards
                                          Accessory buildings shall meet the standards for Principal Building standards in the Flex
                                          Office Zone.
 
(d) Parking & Service Access
(i)   Surface Parking Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Highway    ∙   15’ min. from the property line and include a street screen and Q’
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Frontage   landscape buffer
IMAGES/0-0-0-1509.png]                    General    ∙   10’ min. behind the property line along that street; and        Q*
Standards for S and T in the              Frontage   ∙   Maximum of two rows of parking in front of building.
illustrations above are referenced in     Side       ∙   0’ min.                                                         P
standards for Driveways and Service       Rear       ∙   0’ min                                                          R
Access section below.
(ii)   Structured Parking or Below Grade Parking Setbacks
                                          Pedestrian
                                          Priority / ∙   Ground floor - Shall be min. of 30’ from the property line      O
                                          Open Space ∙   Upper Floors – may be built to the façade line along that street
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Frontage
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Pedestrian
IMAGES/0-0-0-1511.png]                    -Friendly, ∙   Shall be min. of 10’ from the property line;
Standards for S and T in the              General or ∙   If no building is located along the street frontage; then the structured
illustrations above are referenced in     Highway    parking shall meet the setback standards along that specific frontage.
standards for Driveways and Service       Frontage
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                Side       ∙   0’ min                                                          P
                                          Rear       ∙   0’ min                                                          R
                                          (iii)   Below Grade Parking
                                          May be built up to the property line along all streets.
 
 
Civic District
 
6.7   Civic District (D) Zone
   (a)   Illustrations and Intent
The Civic District is intended to allow civic and community uses.
TCAAP Master Plan Vision for Civic District Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1513.png]
 
(b) Building Placement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1525.png]
(i)   Build-to Zones (BTZs) and Setbacks
(Distance from property line to edge of the zone)
Pedestrian Priority/Open Space Frontage  10’ min. setback – 15’ max. seAback
BTZ
Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage BTZ         10’ min. setback – 25’ max. seBback
General Frontage BTZ                     10’ min. setback; no max. setback C
Side – Adjacent to Neighborhood Distric10’ min.; no max. setback         D
Side – All other adjacencies           0’ min.; no max. setback
Rear – Adjacent to Neighborhood Distric10’ min.; no max. setback         D*
Rear – All other adjacencies           0’ min.; no max. setback
(ii)   Building Frontage
(Percentage of building façade built within the BTZ)
Pedestrian Priority Frontage             60% min.                            E
Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage             50% min.                            F
General Frontage                         None Required
 
(c) Building Height
                                          (iii)   Principal Building Standards
                                          Building   ∙   52’ max                                                            K
                                          maximum
                                          First
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          height     ∙   10’ min. for all frontages                                         M
                                          (fin.
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Ground     ∙   12” max. above sidewalk for all buildings with Pedestrian Priority
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ floor      Frontage                                                                      L
IMAGES/0-0-0-1517.png]                    finish     ∙   ADA Code applies
                                          level
                                          Upper
                                          floor(s)
                                          height
                                          (fin.      ∙   9’ min.                                                            N
                                          floor to
                                          ceiling
                                          structure)
                                          (iv)   Accessory Building Standards
                                          Accessory buildings shall meet the standards for Principal Building standards in the TC
                                          Zone.
 
(d) Parking & Service Access
(iv)   Surface Parking Setbacks
                                          Pedestrian
                                          Priority or ∙   Shall be located behind the principal building along that street frontageO or
                                          Open Space  ∙   Min. 3’ behind the building façade line along that street             O*
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Frontage
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Pedestrian-
IMAGES/0-0-0-1519.png]                    Friendly    ∙   Min. 3’ behind the building façade line along that street             Q
Standards for S and T in the              Frontage
illustrations above are referenced in     General     ∙   Min. 3’ behind the property line along that street                     Q*
standards for Driveways and Service       Frontage
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                Side        ∙   6’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District;                    P
                                                      ∙   0’ min. for all other adjacencies
                                          Rear        ∙   6’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District;                    R
                                                      ∙   0’ min. for all other adjacencies
(v)   Structured Parking
                                          Pedestrian
                                          Priority or ∙   Ground floor - Shall be min. of 30’ from the property line             O
                                          Open Space  ∙   Upper Floors – may be built to the façade line along that street
                                          Frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Pedestrian-
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ Friendly    ∙   May be built up to the building façade line along a that street; or
IMAGES/0-0-0-1521.png]                    Frontage or ∙   If no building is located along the street frontage; then the structured
Standards for S and T in the              General     parking shall meet the setback standards along that specific frontage.
illustrations above are referenced in     Frontage
standards for Driveways and Service       Side        ∙   10’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District;                   P
Access section 6.1(c) iii.                            ∙   0’ for all other adjacencies
                                          Rear        ∙   10’ (min) only if adjacent to Neighborhood District;                   R
                                                      ∙   0’ min. for all other adjacencies
                                          (vi)   Below Grade Parking
                                          May be built up to the property lines along all streets
 
 
Neighborhood Zoning District
 
6.8   Neighborhood (NR) Zone
   (a)   Illustrations and Intent
The Neighborhood Zoning District provides for a range of attached and detached
single-family residential uses and multi-family residential uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1771.png]
 
(b) Building Placement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1525.png]
Natural Resources Corridor/Open Space Frontage
(i)   Build-to Zones (BTZs) and Setbacks
                                             10’ min.
Natural Resources Corridor/Open Space        setback –A
Frontage (BTZ)                               no max.     
                                             setback
                                             10’ min.
General Frontage                             setback;   C
                                             no max.     
                                             setback
                                             5’ min.
Side – Adjacent to SF-detached residential setback;   B
lot                                          no max.     
                                             setback
                                             0’ min.
Side – All other adjacencies               setback;   D
                                             no max.     
                                             setback
                                             10’ min.
Rear – Adjacent to SF-detached residential setback;
lot                                          no max.
                                             setback    D*
                                             0’ min.   
Rear – All other adjacencies               setback;
                                             no max.
                                             setback
(ii)   Building Frontage (Percentage of building façade built within the BTZ)
Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage                 50% min.   E
                                                         
General Frontage                             None Required
(iii)   Gross Density
Neighborhood Sub-District 1 (NR-1)           Maximum density of 2.5 dwelling units/acre
Neighborhood Sub-District 2 (NR-2)           Minimum density of 2.5 dwelling units/acre
                                             Maximum density of 4 dwelling units/acre
Neighborhood Sub-District 3 (NR-3)           Minimum density of 4 dwelling units/acre
                                             Maximum density of 6.75 dwelling units/acre
Neighborhood Sub-District 4 (NR-4)           Minimum density of 5 dwelling units/acre
                                             Maximum density of 21 dwelling units/acre
(c) Lot Standards
                                             §   Min. 20’ for single-family attached/duplex/townhome buildings
                                             §   Min. 40’ for single-family detached buildings
Lot Width                                    §   Min. 50’ for front-loaded or J-swing units. See Section 6.1 (c) iii 9. For
                                             driveway and garage size requirements
                                             §   Less than 50’ wide lots shall be alley-loaded lots.
(d) Building Height
                                              (i)   Principal Building Standards
                                              Building §   35’ max.                                                        K
                                              maximum                                                                             
                                              First
                                              floor to
                                              floor
                                              height   §   8’ min for single-family uses (all frontages)                   M
                                              (fin.    §   9’ min. for all other uses (all frontages)                       
                                              floor to
                                              fin.
                                              floor)
                                              Ground   §   18” min. above sidewalk for ground floor residential uses along
                                              floor    Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages that are also setback less than 10’ from  L
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/            finish   the front property line                                                    
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/     level    §   ADA Code applies on buildings with public access
IMAGES/0-0-0-1527.png]                        Upper
                                              floor(s)
                                              height                                                                             N
                                              (fin.    §   8’ min.                                                          
                                              floor to
                                              fin.
                                              floor)
                                              (ii)   Accessory Building Standards
                                              Building  15’ maximum
                                              Height
                                              BTZ/      Shall be placed behind the front façade of the principal building along all
                                              Setbacks  frontages.
                                              Building  Shall be limited to no more than 50% of the principal building footprint or
                                              Footprint 728 square feet, whichever is less.
 
(e) Parking & Service Access
i.   Residential Parking Setbacks
                                                                   Natural
                                                                   Resources §   Shall be located behind the principal building along that street  R
                                                                   Corridor  frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                 Frontage
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1529.png]    General   §   See Section 6.1 (c)(iii)(9)(d) for residential parking standards. Q
Standards for S and T in the illustrations above are referenced in Frontage
standards for Driveways and Service Access section 6.1(c) iii.     Side /    §   4’ min; no parking permitted on driveway, OR                    R
                                                                   Rear      §   20’ min; parking permitted on driveway
                                                                   Alley     §   4’ min from edge of typical pavement or                         T
                                                                   Fence     §   8’ min from edge of typical paving where above ground franchise S
                                                                             equipment exists
(f) Residential Transition Standards
The following transition standards shall apply to all new multi-
family, mixed-use and non-residential building construction and
all upper story additions to existing buildings located adjacent
to existing single-family detached lot(s). This requirement shall
NOT apply if an alley or other similar right-of-way separates the
subject lot and the existing single-family detached residential
lot(s).
i.   Transition Area                         20’ minU
ii.   Max. Building Height within Transition 2
Area                                            stories  V        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-
                                                or 25’          0-1531.png]
iii.   Required setback                      Min. 10�W
A Residential Transition Area fence (6 feet high) shall be
required when adjacent to an existing single-family detached
residential lot and shall be optional for all other adjacencies.
The required fence shall NOT be chain link or vinyl. A 6-foot
wide landscape buffer with evergreen shrubs planted at 3’ on
center and 6’ min. in height at maturity shall also be required
to be planted within the landscape buffer parallel to the SF-
residential lot line. (see surface parking setbacks illustration)
 
7.0   Building Design Standards
7.1   Purpose and Intent
The Building Design Standards for the TRC shall establish a coherent character
and encourage enduring and attractive development. Site and/or building plans
shall be reviewed by the JDA for compliance with the standards below (see Table
7-1 for more detail).
The key design principles establish essential goals for the redevelopment
within the Plan Area to be consistent with the vision for a vibrant mixed-use
development with a range of commercial, employment and residential uses serving
the neighborhoods and the region. Buildings shall be located and designed so
that they provide visual interest and create enjoyable, human-scaled spaces.
The key design principles include:
   (a)   New and redeveloped buildings and sites shall utilize building and
site elements and details to achieve a pedestrian-oriented public realm with
glazing, shading and shelter;
   (b)   Design compatibility is not meant to be achieved through uniformity,
but through the use of variations in building elements to achieve individual
building identity;
   (c)   Building facades shall include appropriate architectural details and
ornament to create variety and interest;
   (d)   Open space(s) shall be incorporated to provide usable public areas
integral to the environment; and
   (e)   Increase the quality, adaptability, energy efficiency, sustainability,
and resilience in Arden Hills’ building stock.
Table 7-1: Review Process for Building Design Standards
Note: To view Table 7-1 in PDF, click HERE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1533.png]
 
7.2   Building Orientation and Entrances
   (a)   Buildings shall be oriented towards Pedestrian Priority Frontages,
where the lot has frontage along Pedestrian Priority Frontages. If a building
has no frontage along a Pedestrian Priority Frontage, then it shall front a
Pedestrian-Friendly Frontage. All other buildings may be oriented towards
General Streets or Civic/Open Spaces.
   (b)   Primary entrances to buildings shall be located on the street along
which the building is oriented (See Figure 7-1). At intersections, corner
buildings may have their primary entrances oriented at an angle to the
intersection. Building entrances shall be provided for all separate ground
floor commercial use tenant spaces that are located along a Pedestrian Priority
or Pedestrian-Friendly frontage.
   (c)   All primary entrances shall be oriented to the public sidewalk for
ease of pedestrian access and entrances may be placed on the corner of the
building in order to serve both the sidewalk and the parking lot. Secondary and
service entrances may be oriented to parking areas or alleys.
   (d)   Primary Entrance Design: Primary building entrances along Pedestrian
Priority Frontages and Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages shall consist of at least
two (2) of following design elements so that the main entrance is
architecturally prominent and clearly visible from that street (see Figures 7-
2):
      i.   Architectural details such as arches, friezes, awnings, canopies,
arcades, tile work, murals, or moldings; or
      ii.   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape or
seating elements; or
      iii.   Prominent three-dimensional, vertical features such as belfries,
chimneys, clock towers, domes, spires, steeples, towers, or turrets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1539.png]
Figure 7-1 Figure showing required building orientation and location of primary
entrances
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1541.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1543.png]
Figures 7-2 Examples of Primary Entrance Designs
7.3   Façade Composition
   (a)   Commercial Use, Mixed-Use and Large and Medium Multi-Family Buildings:
      (i)   Facades greater than sixty feet (60’) in length along all
Pedestrian Priority Frontage, Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages and Civic/Open
Spaces shall meet the following façade articulation standards:
         1.   Include facade modulation such that a portion of the facade steps back or
extends forward with a depth of at least twenty-four inches (24”)(see Figure 7-
3).
         2.   The distance from the inside
edge of a building projection to the nearest inside
edge of an adjacent projection shall not be less than twenty feet (20’)
and not greater than sixty feet (60’) (see Figure 7-3).
      (ii)   All other facades shall be articulated by at least one discernable
architectural element every twenty feet (20’). Such architectural elements
include, but are not limited to:
         1.   Changes in material, color, and/or texture either horizontally or
vertically at intervals not less than twenty feet (20’) and not more than sixty
feet (60’) (see Figure 7-3); or
         2.   The construction of building entrances, bay windows, display
windows, storefronts, arcades, façade relief, panels, balconies, cornices,
bases, pilasters, or columns (see Figures 7-4).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Figure 7-3 Illustration showing
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ building articulation requirement
IMAGES/0-0-0-1545.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1547.png]
Figures 7-4 Images showing examples of appropriate building articulation
 
      (iii)   Façade Transparency Required:
         1.   All facades shall meet the minimum requirement for façade
transparency (percentage of doors and windows) as established in Table 7-
2 below.
         2.   In order to reduce building heat loss, a maximum of forty percent
(40%) transparency coverage is recommended for the upper floors of northern
facing facades.
Table 7-2 Required Minimum Façade Transparency by Façade Frontage Type
 
                                                         Pedestrian
Façade Frontage Type [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ Priority or          All
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-               General  other
1567.gif]                                                Pedestrian- Frontage facades
                                                         Friendly
                                                         Frontage
Commercial Use or Mixed-Use Buildings
Ground Floor                                             50% (min.)  None     None
Upper Floor(s)                                           25% (min)   None     None
Residential Use Buildings
Ground Floor                                             25% (min.)  None     None
Upper Floor(s)                                           20% (min.)  None     None
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1549.png]
Images showing appropriate transparency required along Pedestrian Priority and
Pedestrian-Friendly Frontages
   (b)   Single-Family and Small Multi-Family Use Buildings
      (i)   At least one (1) of the following shall be added along single-
family building facades to add pedestrian interest along the street:
         ·   porches,
         ·   stoops,
         ·   eaves, or
         ·   balconies
      (ii)   Attached townhome facades shall have variation in architectural
features and paint/siding between adjacent units. Variations of architectural
features may include one of the following:
         ·   porches,
         ·   stoops,
         ·   eaves,
         ·   windows or doorway treatments or framing, or
         ·   other architectural features acceptable as variation by community
development staff.
      (iii)   Windows and Doors:
         1.    All building facades single family use buildings shall meet the
transparency requirements established in Table 7-2
         2.    All residential garage doors shall be double clad solid core
garage doors.
      (iv)   The decking of front porches shall be constructed of one of the
following materials:
         1.   Grade #2 or better cedar
         2.   Composite
         3.   Concrete
      (v)   In a detached single-family development, along each block face a
minimum of five (5) façade designs or styles shall be required. No home shall
have the same design, style, or paint/siding as the homes immediately adjacent
or across the street. The following design standards shall be met:
         1.   Variation to façade and roof designs or styles shall be required
through changes to size and location of windows, doorways, or changes in eave
lines and massing.
         2.   In an effort to decrease monotony of design, changing the paint
color or material type will not be considered a different design or style.
      (vi)   Single Family and Small Multi-Family buildings shall not have more
than three materials used on the exterior of the structure. Of the three
materials a primary material shall be used for a minimum of sixty percent (60%)
of facades facing a public street. Primary materials shall be one of the
following:
         1.   Masonry (individual brick, stone, cast stone, or other durable
masonry material; any masonry product shall be mortared in place)
         2.   Cementitious fiber
         3.   Engineered wood
         4.   Wood, or
      (vii)   Secondary materials may be used up to forty percent (40%) of
facades facing a public street. Secondary materials shall be one of the
following:
         1.   A primary building material, or
         2.   Architectural metal with matte finish, or
         3.   Stucco utilizing a 3-step process of application.
   (c)   A recommended palette for exterior building colors is included in
Attachment 6. Fluorescent colors are prohibited. The colors of roofs, trim and
siding, and accents shall work together to create a unified whole.
      (i)   Accent colors shall be used on no more than ten percent (10%) of
any façade. No large expanses such as panels shall be painted in accent colors.
      (ii)   A darker value than façade colors is recommended for roofing
materials. White roofs are prohibited on pitched roof buildings.
   (d)   Best practices for bird safety are recommended as described in
Attachment 7.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1551.png]
Residential buildings with porches, fencing, balconies and stoops to add
interest along the street.
7.4   Non-Residential, Mixed-Use, and Large and Medium Multi-Family Residential
Building Materials
   (a)   On Pedestrian Priority and Pedestrian Friendly Frontages, primary
building structures shall have a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the
following primary building materials:
      (i)   Masonry (individual brick, stone, cast stone, etc. that is mortared
in place)
   (b)   On General Frontages, primary building structures shall have a minimum
of forty percent (40%) of the following primary building materials:
      (i)   Masonry (individual brick, stone, cast stone, etc. that is mortared
in place)
   (c)   Secondary materials shall only be used for up to forty percent (40%)of
the primary building façade for Pedestrian Priority and Pedestrian Friendly
frontages. On General Frontages, secondary materials may be used for up to
sixty percent (60%) of the primary building façade.
      (i)   Secondary materials include:
         1.   Architectural metal with matte finish
         2.   Cementitious fiber
         3.   Exterior Insulation Finish System (EIFS), on all frontages shall
not be used on the ground floor level. Use of EIFS is limited to ten percent
(10%) per total façade area.
         4.   Stucco utilizing a 3-step process of application.
         5.   Engineered wood
   (d)   Accessory buildings shall maintain the same building materials as the
primary building.
   (e)   For tilt-up wall construction, a veneer system of materials shall be
used to come into conformance with the above listed materials.
   (f)   Canvas awnings are not permitted.
7.5   Shading Requirement:
Shading of public and publicly accessible sidewalks, especially sidewalks
located along Pedestrian Priority and Pedestrian-Friendly frontages shall be
important to implementing the vision for walkable mixed-use in the Plan Area.
Shading may be achieved through any combination of canopies, awnings, street
trees and other similar devices. To this end, the following standards shall
apply (see Figure 7-5):
   (a)   Shaded sidewalks shall be provided alongside at least:
      (i)   Fifty percent (50%) of all building facades with Pedestrian
Priority Frontage designation per the Regulating Plan (Attachment 1).
      (ii)   Fifty percent (50%) of all building facades with frontage along an
off-street surface parking lot
   (b)   When adjacent to a surface parking lot, the shaded sidewalk shall be
raised above the level of the parking lot by way of a defined edge, such as a
curb. ADA ramps along the building must also be shaded.
   (c)   A shaded sidewalk must meet the following requirements:
      (i)   Along a street, a shaded sidewalk shall comply with
the applicable sidewalk standards for its designated street
type. If not otherwise required, the shaded sidewalk shall provide trees
planted no more than fifty feet (50’) on center.
      (ii)   Along any surface parking adjacent to the building (both off-
street or on street), the shaded sidewalk shall consist of a minimum five foot
(5’) clear zone and five foot (5’) planting zone, planted with trees no more
than fifty feet (50’) on center, or a five foot (5’) clear zone with
a minimum five foot (5’) wide over- head weather protection.
      (iii)   Building entrances along Pedestrian Priority and Pedestrian-
Friendly frontages shall be located under a shade device, such as an awning or
portico.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1553.png]
Figure 7-5 Images showing examples of shading along sidewalks
7.6   Gateway Overlay District: 
Given the visual importance of certain entrances and gateways to the site,
advanced architectural elements or landscaping features are required to be
provided for properties within the Gateway Overlay District as identified on
the Regulating Plan (Attachment 1).
   (a)   Properties within the Town Center, Retail Mixed-Use, or Office Mixed-
Use Districts shall meet the following standards for the Gateway Overlay
District:
      (i)   Corner buildings located at a street intersection must incorporate
a distinctive architectural feature as part of the building, such as a tower,
cupola, turret, or rotunda (see Section 6.1(b)(ii) for specifications and
restrictions).
      (ii)   Principal building structures shall have a minimum of seventy-five
percent (75%) of the required primary building materials listed in Section 7.4
(a)(i).
      (iii)   Commercial developments greater than ten (10) acres in size shall
provide a prominent gateway monument at the entrance to the development with
integrated landscaping.
   (b)   Properties within the Flex Office or Neighborhood Districts shall meet
the following standards for the Gateway Overlay District:
      (i)   A landscaped buffer with a minimum width of twenty feet (20’) shall
be provided along all frontages on public streets.
      (ii)   Landscaped buffers shall include a diversity of landscaping
materials, including shade, evergreen, and/or ornamental trees, shrubs, and
annual and perennial plants. Landscaping shall be a minimum of fifty percent
(50%) opaque at maturity.
7.7    Design of Automobile Related Building and Site Elements
   (a)   Where permitted under Section 5 of this Code, drive-through lanes,
auto service bays, and gas station canopies for commercial uses shall not be
located with frontage along any Pedestrian Priority Frontage. Drive-through
lanes may be permitted along Pedestrian-Friendly or Spine Road frontages only
if the property has no General or Alley frontage. Drive-through lanes, auto
service bays, and gas station canopies shall be hidden behind a three foot (3’)
high Street Screen along both Pedestrian-Friendly and General frontages (see
illustrations below). The Street Screen shall be made up of (i) a living screen
or (ii) a combination living and primary building material screen (See Section
10.4 for details).
   (b)   No more than sixty percent (60%) of a lot’s frontage along a
Pedestrian-Friendly or Spine Road frontage may be dedicated to drive through
lanes, canopies, service bays, and other auto-related site elements. There
shall be no such limitation along General or Alley frontages and along highway
frontage roads.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1555.png]
Image illustrating the appropriate design of retail/restaurant drive-throughs
(Corner Lot)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1557.png]
Image illustrating the appropriate design of auto-related site elements
(Gas stations, auto-service uses, and bank drive-throughs)
   (c)   Any automobile related retail sales or service use of a site or
property with Pedestrian Priority, Pedestrian-Friendly, or Spine Road frontage
designation shall have a primary building entrance along its Pedestrian
Priority Frontage. A primary building entrance may be along a building’s
Pedestrian-Friendly or Spine Road Frontage only if the site has no Pedestrian
Priority frontage designation.
   (d)   Drive through access (driveways only) may be from a Pedestrian
Priority Frontage only if the lot has no access to any Pedestrian Friendly or
General Frontage. Drive through access may be from a Pedestrian-Friendly or
Spine Road Frontage only if the lot has no access to any General Frontage. In
cases where drive through access is provided from a Pedestrian Priority
Frontage, a joint access easement shall be required to adjoining properties
providing alternative access to a Pedestrian-Friendly or General Frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1559.png]
Image illustrating the appropriate design of retail/restaurant drive throughs
(Interior Lot)
   (e)   All off-street loading, unloading, and trash pick-up areas shall be
located along alleys or General Frontages only unless permitted in the specific
building form and development standards in Section 6 of this Code. If a site
has no General Frontage or Alley access, off-street loading, unloading, and
trash pick-up areas may be permitted along a Pedestrian-Friendly or Spine Road
Frontage.
   (f)   All off-street loading, unloading, or trash pick-up areas shall be
screened using a Street Screen that is at least as tall as the trash containers
and/or service equipment. The Street Screen shall be made up of (i) a living
screen or (ii) a combination living and primary building material screen.
7.8   Design of Parking Structures
   (a)   All ground floors of parking structures located on Pedestrian Priority
frontages shall be constructed in order to accommodate ground floor retail/
commercial uses to a minimum depth of twenty-four feet (24’).
   (b)   To the extent possible, the amount of Pedestrian Priority frontage
devoted to a parking structure shall be minimized by placing the shortest
dimension(s) of the parking structure along the Pedestrian Priority frontage
edge(s) (see Figures 7-8 for illustrations below).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1561.png]
Figures 7-8 Allowed Parking Garage Configurations
   (c)   Where above ground structured parking is located at the perimeter of a
building with Pedestrian Priority Frontage, it shall be screened in such a way
that cars on all parking levels are completely screened from view (see Figures
7-9 for illustrative images). Architectural screens shall be used to articulate
the façade, hide parked vehicles, and shield lighting. Ramps within parking
garages shall not be visible from any Pedestrian Priority Frontages. Ramps
shall not be located along the exterior perimeter of the parking structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1563.png]
Figures 7-9 Illustrative Examples of Parking Garage Screening
   (d)   Ground floor façade treatment (building materials, windows, and
architectural detailing) shall be continued to the second floor of a parking
structure along all Pedestrian Priority Frontages (see Figures 7-10).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1565.png]
Figures 7-10 Images showing required façade treatment of parking garages along
Pedestrian Priority Frontages
   (e)   When parking structures are located at street intersections, corner
emphasizing elements (such as towers, pedestrian entrances, signage, glazing,
etc.) shall be incorporated.
   (f)   Parking structures and adjacent sidewalks shall be designed so
pedestrians and bicyclists are clearly visible (through sight distance
clearance, signage, and other warning signs) to entering and exiting
automobiles.
8.0   Street Design Standards
8.1   Purpose and Intent:
The Master Plan Vision for the TRC recognizes the importance of providing
adequate public infrastructure, which includes an ultimate Street Network that
maximizes connectivity, and other needed infrastructure to serve the vision for
redevelopment within the Plan Area.
Street design and connectivity is envisioned to support and balance automobile,
bicycle, and walking trips in addition to becoming the “living” space for
development. The “living” nature of streets will not only serve private
redevelopment, but the community at large and the people who live in and use
it. This section establishes context sensitive standards for Street Design and
Connectivity.
8.2   Street Designation Categories:
In order to service multiple modes of transportation within an appropriate
redevelopment context, streets within the TRC are designated under two (2)
major categories:
   (a)   Street Classification: The Street Classification designation
establishes standards for the actual cross-section of the street itself. The
Street Classification includes information on automobile, bicycle, pedestrian,
and parking accommodation. It typically addresses the space allocation within
the public right-of-way and its emphasis towards different modes of
transportation. The TCAAP Street Type Plan (Attachment 5) identifies the Street
Classification designations within the Plan Area and Attachment 4 provides
cross sections for the different Street Classifications.
   (b)   Street Network: In addition to Street Classification designations,
streets in plan are identified as Required streets to implement the ultimate
street network in the Master Plan Vision. The TCAAP Street Type Plan
(Attachment 5) illustrates the Street Network within the TRC.
      1.   Required Streets – these are mainly existing, improved or new
streets that are needed to implement the ultimate street network envisioned in
the Vision for the TRC. They shall be mandatory at the time of redevelopment
including the requirement to dedicate right-of-way as identified in the
Regulating Plan. The alignment of new Required Streets may be modified per
Permitted Adjustments in Section 3.3 of this Code.
8.3   Project Circulation Plan:
A Project Circulation Plan must be submitted with a site plan or subdivision
application (whichever comes first) for an area of four (4) acres or larger
that is subject to the requirements of this section. The Project Circulation
Plan shall be developed and reviewed for its consistency with this section and
the Regulating Plan, which illustrates proposed locations for new and improved
streets within the Plan Area. Required streets on the Regulating Plan shall be
mandatory and their alignments may be adjusted per Section 3.3 Permitted
Adjustments.
   (a)   A Project Circulation Plan must demonstrate:
      1.   How the proposed circulation meets the intent of the Master Plan
Vision for redevelopment of TCAAP;
      2.   How the on-site circulation system integrates with existing and
planned streets, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and trails in the
surrounding area;
      3.   How new street alignments conform with the Regulating Plan or how
modifications from the Regulating Plan, in terms of street placement,
alignment, and design are consistent with the intent of this Code;
      4.   How new street design conforms with the street cross section
standards in Attachment 4;
      5.   How the plan considers all modes of transportation including
walking, biking, and automobiles; and
      6.   How the plan provides adequate linkages between different
destinations within the Plan Area.
   (b)   For a subdivision, a private restrictive covenant depicting the
Project Circulation Plan shall be recorded and referenced on the plat. The
covenant may be amended if the JDA approves a revision to the Project
Circulation Plan as authorized under this section.
   (c)   Approvals: A Project Circulation Plan may only be approved by the JDA.
      1.   The Project Circulation Plan shall create interconnected blocks
bounded by streets to the extent feasible. The JDA may approve a Project
Circulation Plan containing blocks bounded by Highway right-of-way, subdivision
boundary lines, or natural and infrastructure features if no reasonable
alternatives are available.
      2.   When required, revisions to the Project Circulation Plan may be
approved by the JDA after considering the circulation characteristics of a
proposed development plan, the need for access to adjoining properties, phasing
of a larger-scaled project, and the context of surrounding development.
      3.   The JDA, with the recommendation of the Arden Hills Public Works and
Community Development Departments, may waive the requirement for a Project
Circulation Plan through the Permitted Adjustment process. This is permitted if
the JDA finds that a plan is not necessary due to the nature of the proposed
development on the site, the existence of surrounding incompatible development,
or other factors unique to the property which make strict compliance
unfeasible.
      4.   A subdivision or site plan may not be approved if the Project
Circulation Plan is not approved.
      5.   Joint Access and Public Cross-Access Easements: If necessary to
ensure access management goals along the Spine Road and to meet the intent of
the recommended alley/public cross-access easements as indicated on the
Regulating Plan, the JDA may require joint use driveways or public cross-access
easements within the site to adjacent properties and/or easements.
8.4   Street Standards:
Attachment 4 shall establish standards for all elements within the public
right-of-way including travel lane(s), on-street parking, bicycle
accommodation, streetscape/parkway standards, and sidewalk standards. The
process and standards in the Arden Hills Public Works Design Manual shall apply
to the extent that they do not conflict with the design and context standards
in Attachment 4 and the Master Plan Vision for streets in TCAAP. Landscaping
within the public right-of-way shall be per standards in Section 10 in the TRC.
Attachment 4 provides recommended cross sections for public streets within the
TRC based on available right-of-way and intended development context per the
Master Plan Vision.
9.0   Open Space Standards
9.1   Open Space Approach:
The Master Plan Vision for TCAAP recognizes the importance of providing a
network of open spaces with a multitude of passive and active recreational
opportunities. These opportunities are to be accommodated in a variety of
spaces ranging from large scale open spaces to small scale pocket parks located
within the Plan Area. The open space network will be serviced by an
interconnected network of trails and paths for pedestrians and bicyclists
alike, providing desired amenities for future residents and visitors alike.
The approach to Open Space facilitates the implementation of the Master Plan
Vision for the TRC. This vision for redevelopment is based on the City of Arden
Hills’ goal to create a comprehensive, maintained and interconnected system of
parks, pathways and open spaces, as well as a balanced program of recreational
activities for residents of all ages, incomes and abilities. The Open Space
approach recognizes that the development context, with varying density and
building types, is required to ensure quality open spaces that serve both
recreational and placemaking goals of the Master Plan.
9.2   Required Open Space Designations:
This section establishes standards for Open Space within the TRC. The TRC
Regulating Plan (Attachment 1) designates areas for required Open Spaces within
the TRC. The detailed Open Space Standards for each type are included in
Attachment 2. These standards include general character, design, typical size,
frontage requirements, and typical uses.
   (a)   Required Open Spaces are the areas shown on the Regulating Plan with
specific locations of future Open Spaces (including parks, plazas, greens, and
squares). These spaces have been identified on the Regulating Plan due to the
certainty of their location within the context of the overall Plan Area. Such
required spaces shall be publicly accessible open spaces. The specific location
of parks, particularly in the Hill and Creek neighborhoods, are likely to
change based on developer input, but will need to include the amenities
identified in the TCAAP Master Parks Plan.
9.3   Water Infrastructure Designation:
The Natural Resources Corridor within the TCAAP Site Redevelopment will be
designed with the goal of maximizing compatibility and functionality of
regional storm water, wetland mitigation, the Rice Creek re-meander, floodplain
restoration, and groundwater requirements. An additional goal is to provide
visual and active and passive recreational features to support adjacent land
uses. The Natural Resources Corridor is intended to be an amenity to the site’s
uses and users.
9.4   Permeable Area Requirement:
   (a)   All development is required to maintain a permeable ground area per
Table 9-1. In limited areas, the JDA may grant flexibility on these
requirements in accordance with MPCA guidelines.
Table 9-1 Permeable Area Requirements
 
District                  Min Pervious Lot Area
Neighborhood              40%
TC, Retail, Office, Civic 10%
Flex Office, CC           25%
 
   (b)   Permeable ground area shall be on-site within the parcel limits of the
development.
   (c)   Up to 100% of Private Common Open Space may count towards the
permeable ground area requirements if the materials and ground cover for the
Private Common Open Space meets the standards of permeability.
   (d)   Street screening for parking lots that utilize vegetative screening
may count towards the permeable ground area requirements.
   (e)   Permeable materials include:
      i.   Any natural vegetation or landscaping that allows direct water
infiltration
      ii.   Permeable paving materials designed and engineered to allow direct
water infiltration. Any new material not listed in any best practice guides for
permeable paving will be evaluated and considered by Community Development
Staff and may be approved by the JDA. Permeable paving materials shall not
count towards more than twenty percent (20%) of the total permeable area
requirements.
      iii.   Any material that requires a sheet flow and collection system for
water infiltration shall not be considered permeable cover.
   (f)   Design and placement:
      i.   In Town Center, Civic, Retail Mixed-Use and Office Mixed-Use Zones,
permeable area that is adjacent to or visible from the public right-of-way
shall be designed in context with the public realm and not interrupt the
walkable form of the public realm. An interruption may be considered any design
that blocks pedestrian walkability and clear zones, blocks views of entryways
and windows, or blocks access to any ingress/egress of a building.
      ii.   In the Neighborhood, Flex Office or Campus Commercial Zones, any
yard or buffer space on site shall be designed in context with the primary
building(s) and shall not block views or ingress/egress access to the
buildings.
9.5   Open Space Classification:
For the purposes of this Code, all open space shall fall into one of the
following three major classes:
   (a)   Public Open Space: Open air or unenclosed to semi-unenclosed areas
intended for public access and use and located per the Regulating Plan
(Attachment 1). These areas range in size and development and serve to
compliment and connect surrounding land uses and Code requirements.
   (b)   Private Common Open Space: A privately owned outdoor or unenclosed
area, located on the ground or on a terrace, deck, porch, or roof, designed and
accessible for outdoor gathering, recreation, and/or landscaping and intended
for use by the residents, employees, and/or visitors to the development. This
may or may not be accessible to the public, but shall be maintained privately.
   (c)   Private Personal Open Space: A privately owned outdoor or unenclosed
area, located on the ground or on a balcony, deck, porch, or terrace and
intended solely for use by the individual residents of a condominium or multi-
family dwelling unit.
9.6   Open Space Requirements
   (a)   All non-residential development shall provide four (4.0) sq.ft. of
Private Common Open Space for every 100 sq. ft. of non-residential building
space or fraction thereof. This standard shall only apply to site plans two (2)
acres in size or larger.
   (b)   All residential development of five (5) attached dwelling units or
more, on a single parcel, shall meet the Private Common Open Space standards
established in this Section. Table 9-2 establishes the Private Common Open
Space requirement based on the proposed intensity of residential development.
Table 9-2 Private Common Open Space Requirements
 
Residential Density       Private Common Open Space Standard Proposed
(dwelling units per acre) (area of private common space per dwelling unit)
0 – 4 DU / acre         Not required
5 – 19 DU / acre        Provide minimum of 160 sf per dwelling unit
20 – 29 DU / acre       Provide minimum of 120 sf per dwelling unit
30 DU / acre or greater   Provide minimum of 80 sf per dwelling unit
 
   (c)   All residential development with seven (7) or more attached units
within the TRC shall also meet the Private Personal Open Space standards
established in this Section. Table 9-3 establishes the Private Personal Open
Space requirement based on the proposed intensity and type of residential
development. Nursing Home and Assisted Living residential uses and Live-work
units are exempted from Private Personal Open Space requirements.
Table 9-3 Private Personal Open Space Requirements
 
Residential Density     Private Personal Open Space Standard Proposed
(dwellings per acre)
                        Ground floor units located on a Pedestrian Friendly or
                        Pedestrian Priority Frontage: all dwelling units shall
                        have private personal open space including one of the
7 - 19 DU / acre        following: Porch, Stoop, Patio, or Deck or combination
                         
                        Upper floor units: 60% of all dwelling units shall have
                        a balcony.
                        Ground floor units located on a Pedestrian Friendly or
                        Pedestrian Priority Frontage: all dwelling units shall
20 – 29 DU / acre     have one of the following: Porch, Stoop, Patio, or Deck
                         
                        Upper floor units: 60% of all dwelling units shall have
                        a Balcony.
                        Ground floor dwelling units located on a Pedestrian
                        Friendly or Pedestrian Priority Frontage: All units
                        shall include one of the following: Porch, Stoop,
30 or greater DU / acre Patio, or Deck
                         
                        Upper floor dwelling units: 50% of all upper dwelling
                        units shall have a Balcony.
 
   (d)   Attachment 2 shall provide the palette of open space types.
10.0   Streetscape and Landscape Standards
10.1   Sidewalks:
Publicly accessible sidewalks are required for all development under this Code
and shall meet the standards of Table 10-1 and shall be based on the Street
Classification per Attachment 4. The minimum sidewalk width requirement shall
apply regardless of the available right-of-way. If necessary to meet the
required sidewalk width, the sidewalk shall extend onto private property to
fulfill the minimum requirement, with a permanent public access easement
provided. Sidewalks shall consist of two zones: a planting zone located
adjacent to the curb, and a clear zone (see Figures 10-1).
   (a)   Planting Zone: The planting zone is intended for the placement of
street trees, if required, and street furniture including seating, street
lights, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, newspaper vending
boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks, public utility equipment such as electric
transformers and water meters, and similar elements in a manner that does not
obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility (see Figure 10-1). This zone
may be planted with vegetation along the street or paved to match the grade of
the clear zone. Landscaping and streetscaping shall follow the City of Arden
Hills Street Design Manual for details and process.
   (b)   Clear Zone: The clear zone shall be hardscaped, shall be located
adjacent to the planting zone, shall comply with ADA and Minnesota
Accessibility Code and shall be unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent
element for the required minimum width and a minimum height of ten (10) feet
(see Figure 10-1). Accessibility is required to connect sidewalk clear zones on
adjacent sites.
   (c)   Fee In-Lieu Option: An applicant may opt to pay a proportional fee in-
lieu for the required sidewalk if the development project is phased or the
sidewalk improvements need to match the timing of a programmed City capital
project affecting that street frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1569.png]
Figures 10-1 Illustrations delineating the Streetscape Zone elements
Table 10-1 Required Public and Publicly Accessible Sidewalk Standards
 
Street         Spine
Classification Road      Town Street                Collector Road (Various)   Neighborhood (Various)
               (Various)
Standard
Min.
Streetscape
Zone width                                                                     11’ (two-sides)
(includes      Varies    11’ (two-sides)          11’ (two-sides)          6’ (one-sided sidewalk; planting zone on side without
planting zone                                                                  sidewalk)
and clear
zone) (feet)
Min. Planting
Zone width     Varies    6’                       6’                       6’
(feet)
Min. Clear     Varies    5’ (within public access 5’ (within public access 5’ (one-side min.)
Zone (feet)              easement)                  easement)
Street Trees
Required (see  Yes       Yes                        Yes                        Varies
Section 10.2
for standards)
 
10.2   Street Trees and Streetscape:
   (a)   Street trees shall be required per Attachment 4 within the Planting/
Furnishings Zone.
   (b)   Street trees shall be centered within the Planting Zone and be planted
a minimum of three feet (3’) from the back of curb.
   (c)   Spacing shall be an average of forty feet (40’) on center (measured
per block face) along all Streets as required by Attachment 4.
   (d)   Requirements for minimum caliper size and height are included in the
Arden Hills Public Works Design Manual. Each tree shall be planted in a
planting area no less than thirty-six (36) square feet.
   (e)   Preferred street tree species are identified in the Arden Hills Public
Works Design Manual. Arrangement of species shall be interspersed in order to
prevent wholesale loss of street trees in the case of disease.
   (f)   Area between the building facade and property line or edge of existing
sidewalk along Pedestrian Priority Frontages shall be such that the sidewalk
width shall be a minimum of ten feet (10’) (with public access easement if
necessary) with the remainder of the setback area paved flush with the public
sidewalk. Sidewalk cafes, landscaping within tree-wells or planters may be
incorporated within this area. (see Illustration in Section 6.1)
   (g)   Placement of trees shall not impede the clear vision area as required
in Section 1325.05, Subsection 1 of the AHC.
10.3   Single-Family Landscaping and Tree Requirements
   (a)   The following table sets the required trees and landscaping
requirements for single-family residential uses per lot size:
Table 10-2 Single-Family Landscaping and Tree Requirements
 
Lot Size                     Requirement
Less than 40 feet wide       40 percent of permeable area requirement shall be
                             shrubbery or perennial; no on-site trees required.
40 feet wide to 75 feet wide 20 percent of permeable area requirement shall be
                             shrubbery or perennial; 2 trees required on-site.
Over 75 feet wide            10 percent of permeable area requirement shall be
                             shrubbery or perennial; 3 trees required on-site.
 
10.4   Screening Standards
   (a)   Street Screen Required: Any surface parking lot with frontage along a
public right of way shall be defined by a three-foot (3’) high Street Screen
(see Figure 10-2). Furthermore, along all streets (except alleys), service
areas and ground-mounted utility equipment shall be screened in such a manner
that the service area shall not be visible to a person standing on the property
line on the far side of the adjoining street (see Figure 10-3). Required Street
Screens shall be of one of the following:
      ·   The same building material as the principal structure on the lot or
      ·   A vegetative screen composed of shrubs planted to be a minimum of
seventy-five percent (75%) opaque at maturity, or
      ·   A combination of the two.
         i.   Street Screens cannot block any required sight triangles along a
cross street or driveway.
         ii.   Street Screens may include breaks to provide pedestrian access
from any surface parking or service area to the public sidewalk.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1571.png]
Figure 10-2 Illustration showing required Street Screen along all frontages
without a Building within the BTZ
   (b)   Screening of Roof Mounted Equipment: All roof mounted mechanical
equipment (except solar panels) shall be screened from view of a person
standing on the property line on the far side of the adjoining street (see
Figure 10-3). The screening material used shall be the same as the primary
exterior building material used.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1573.png]
Figure 10-3 Illustration showing required screening of roof and ground mounted
equipment
10.5   Street Lighting:
Street lighting should be provided on Spine, Town, Collector and Collector with
Trail roads. Refer to Arden Hills Public Works Design Manual for lighting
palette. The following standards shall apply for pedestrian scale lighting:
   (a)   Vehicular lighting shall be a maximum of thirty feet (30’) in height
and pedestrian-oriented lighting a maximum of eighteen feet (18’) in height.
   (b)   Street lights shall be placed at an average of forty feet (40’) on
center, approximately three (3) feet behind the back of curb, aligned with
street trees, and where street trees are planted.
   (c)   The light standard selected shall be compatible with the design of the
street and buildings.
   (d)   All other standards for street lighting shall direct light downward or
properly shielded with three-quarter (¾) or fully shielded fixtures to prevent
glare.
   (e)   High efficiency lighting, such as LED lamps, is required.
10.6   Exterior Lighting:
All development in the TRC (including surface parking lots) with the exception
of Single-Family Attached, Single-Family detached, Townhouse, and Two-Family
Residential Uses shall comply with the Exterior Lighting regulations in AHC
Section 1325.
10.7   Street Furniture
   (a)   Street Furniture shall be placed within the Plantings/Furnishings Zone
or within the front setback area only. Benches and bike racks are recommended
along all Pedestrian Priority Frontages and will be placed in alignment with
light poles and street trees.
   (b)   Trash receptacles shall be required for all development along
Pedestrian Priority Frontages. Trash receptacles should be placed at street
corners. If development is located mid-block, place the trash can near front
entry.
   (c)   All street furniture shall be located in such a manner as to allow a
Clear Zone of a minimum of six (6) feet in width. Placement of street furniture
and fixtures shall be coordinated with organization of sidewalks, landscaping,
street trees, building entries, curb cuts, signage, and other street fixtures.
   (d)   Materials selected for paving and street furniture shall be of durable
quality and require minimal maintenance.
10.8   Utilities
   (a)   All utility lines shall be underground.
   (b)   Locations on private property must be found for switchgear and
transformer pads needed to serve that property. Such locations shall be either
along General Frontages or at the side or rear of the property and screened
from view of a person standing on the property line on the far side of any
adjoining street (see Figure 10-3).
10.9   Parking Lot Landscaping:
All surface parking shall meet the standards for parking lot landscaping in the
AHC Section 1325.
11.0    Sign Standards
11.1   Applicability:
Except for sign types, sign dimensional standards, and as specifically listed
below, all other signage and sign standards shall comply with the AHC Chapter
12.
11.2   Prohibited Signs:
The following types of Signs shall be prohibited in the TRC:
   (a)   Any sign that flashes, blinks, revolves, or is put into motion will
not be permitted except as allowed in TRC Section 11.16;
   (b)   Streaming or video signs or screens;
   (c)   Non-shielded LED or flood lights;
   (d)   Streamers and inflatable mascots;
   (e)   Portable or wheeled signs and advertising devices on the site other
than sandwich board signs and mounted menu signs permitted in Table 11-1; and
   (f)   Any additional prohibited signage in AHC Section 1230.02.
11.3   Sign Types Permitted:
All development to which this Section is applicable shall comply with the Sign
Regulations in Table 11-1 below.
Table 11-1 Permitted Sign Types by Character Zone
LEGEND
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1635.png]
LEGEND
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1635.png]
Sign Type   Zoning District Allowed                    Description                                                              Image                                                               Standard
Permanent Signs
HIGHWAY     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         A sign not attached to a building, but permanently supported by a        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
MONUMENT    e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  structure extending from the ground and permanently attached to the      e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1579.png]     11.4
SIGN        IMAGES/0-0-0-1577.png]                     ground.
CORRIDOR    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         A sign not attached to a building, but permanently supported by a
MONUMENT    e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  structure extending from the ground and permanently attached to the      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                  11.5
SIGNS       IMAGES/0-0-0-1581.png]                     ground. A Corridor Monument sign shall be smaller than a Highway         e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1583.png]
                                                       Monument Sign.
BUILDING    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         A Wall Sign attached to the upper floor of a multiple story building or
IDENTITY    e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  parapet of single tenant one-story building that provides identification   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                              11.6
SIGN        IMAGES/0-0-0-1585.png]                     of the entire building. (May be used instead of the Building Projecting  e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1587.png]
                                                       Sign)
STOREFRONT/ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         Wall Sign attached to a retail storefront or sign band area directly     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
TENANT WALL e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  adjacent to the retail storefront within a multi-tenant building. (May   e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1591.png]     11.7
SIGNS       IMAGES/0-0-0-1589.png]                     be used instead of a Tenant Canopy Sign)
BUILDING    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         Wall Sign that extends a distance of more than 18” perpendicular from  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
PROJECTING  e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  the building façade. Sign is placed on the upper floors of a multiple   e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1595.png]     11.8
SIGNS       IMAGES/0-0-0-1593.png]                     story building. (May be used instead of the Building Identity Sign)
ROOF SIGNS  Not permitted                              A sign installed over or on the roof of a building.                      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                                                                                                                e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1597.png]
TENANT      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         A sign mounted to a canopy or awning that is within or directly adjacent [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
CANOPY      e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  to a retail storefront. (May be used instead of a Storefront/Tenant Wall e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1601.png]     11.9
SIGNS       IMAGES/0-0-0-1599.png]                     Sign)
TENANT      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         Wall Sign that extends a distance more than 18” perpendicular from the [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
BLADE SIGNS e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  building façade and is oriented towards the sidewalk. Sign is mounted toe56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1605.png]     11.10
            IMAGES/0-0-0-1603.png]                     a retail storefront or may be mounted under a canopy.
WINDOW      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
SIGNS       e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  A sign mounted to or intended to be seen through a window.               e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1609.png]     11.11
            IMAGES/0-0-0-1607.png]
DIRECTIONAL [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         A vehicular sign with directional information intended to direct         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
SIGNS       e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  visitors to various destinations within a larger development with        e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1613.png]     11.12
            IMAGES/0-0-0-1611.png]                     multiple buildings.
DIRECTORY   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         A pedestrian oriented sign containing a listing and or map of the          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
SIGNS       e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  tenants and destinations within an area, block, building or development. e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1617.png]     11.13
            IMAGES/0-0-0-1615.png]
SANDWICH    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
BOARD AND   e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  A temporary sign with two connected faces usually arranged back to back.   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                              11.14
MOUNTED     IMAGES/0-0-0-1619.png]                     A temporary pole or wall mounted sign that displays a restaurant menu.   e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1621.png]
MENU SIGNS
ADDRESS     All                                        A sign containing only the lot, building or retail tenant address.       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                  11.15
SIGNS                                                                                                                           e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1623.png]
                                                       A sign placed over the entrance to a theatre or other public gathering
                                                       venue. It has signage stating either the name of the establishment or,
MARQUEE     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         in the case of theatres or other public venues, the name of the event,   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
SIGN        e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/  artist, and other details of the event appearing at that venue. The      e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1627.png]     11.16
            IMAGES/0-0-0-1625.png]                     marquee is often identifiable by a surrounding cache of light bulbs,
                                                       usually yellow or white, that flash intermittently or as chasing lights.
                                                       Marquee signs may often be combined with Building Projecting signs.
Temporary Signs
             [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
BANNERS      e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ A temporary fabric or vinyl sign hung from a building façade.           e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1631.png]   11.17
             IMAGES/0-0-0-1629.png]
TEMPORARY                                              A temporary sign mounted to a construction fence that announces a new    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
CONSTRUCTION All                                       business or construction project.                                        e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/0-0-0-1633.png]     11.18
SIGNS
 
11.4   Highway Monument Sign
 
    Location  Standards
              a.   Located within 60 ft. of the edge of I-35W or Hwy 10.
              b.   Maximum height of 30 ft. above the street pavement grade of the elevated
    I-35W and portion of the highway.
    Hwy 10    c.   Maximum total sign face area of 400 sq. ft. (cumulative of all surfaces).
(a) Frontages Sign face may be divided into multiple segments. Area between segments does not
    only      count toward sign face area.
              d.   One sign allowed for lots with at least 1,000 ft. of highway frontage. Two
              signs permitted for frontages greater than 1,000 ft. Signs to be a minimum of
              1,000 ft. apart.
 
11.5   Corridor Monument Sign
 
    Location  Standards
              i.   Maximum area of 0.7 sq. ft. for each linear foot of street frontage with a
              maximum of 150 sq. ft. for multi-tenant signs.
              ii.   Corridor Monument Sign not permitted for single-tenant buildings, instead
              multiple single tenants should be combined onto one (1) Corridor Monument Sign.
    All per   iii.   One per lot. For lots with a total street frontage greater than 700 ft.,
(a) zoning    two (2) signs are permitted. Signs must be a minimum of 400 ft. apart.
    district  iv.   For lots fronting two streets, one sign is permitted on each street.
    permitted v.   Maximum height of 12 ft. above frontage street pavement grade.
              vi.   Monument structure shall include a base, frame, and cap around the sign
              area. Material shall be the same as the principal structure on the lot.
              vii.   Maximum total area shall not exceed 1.5 times the permitted sign copy
              area of a sign.
 
11.6   Building Identity Sign
 
    Location  Standards
    I-35W,    i.   May be used for single tenant commercial, office or institutional
    Hwy 10    buildings only (multiple tenant building shall be subject to 11.7 below).
(a) and MN-96 ii.   May be used instead of a Building Projecting Sign
    Frontages iii.   Maximum area of 200 sq. ft. or 15% of the façade area, whichever is
    only      less.
              iv.   Mount in upper third of the facade.
    All
    frontages i.   May be used for single tenant commercial, office or institutional
    other     buildings only (multiple tenant building shall be subject to 11.7 below).
(b) than I-   ii.   May be used instead of a Building Projecting Sign
    35W, Hwy  iii.   Maximum area of 150 sq. ft. or 10% of the façade area, whichever is
    10 and    less.
    MN-96     iv.   Mount in the upper third of the facade
     
 
11.7   Storefront/Tenant Wall Sign
 
    Location  Standards
              i.   May be used for multiple tenant commercial, office or institutional
              buildings only (single tenant building shall be subject to 11.6 above).
              ii.   May be used instead of a Tenant Canopy Sign
              iii.   May be located on the ground floor façade only (sign to be mounted below
              25 feet as measured from finished grade outside the facade).
    IH-35W,   iv.   One sign per tenant space; area to be calculated at 2 sq.ft. per linear
    Hwy 10    foot of tenant space façade along the building’s frontage up to a maximum of 150
(a) and MN-96 sq.ft.
    Frontages v.   Sign to be located between demising walls of leased storefront.
    only      vi.   Sign shall not overlap architectural features like window lintels, canopy
              support points, coping, etc.
              vii.   Wall sign may encroach, a maximum of 12”, on to a sidewalk while
              maintaining a vertical clearance of 8 ft. from the finished sidewalk if it is
              non-illuminated and 11 ft. from the finished sidewalk if it is illuminated.
              viii.   Building signs may be internally or externally lit.
              i.   May be used for multiple tenant commercial, office or institutional
              buildings only (single tenant building shall be subject to 11.6 above).
    All       ii.   May be used instead of a Tenant Canopy Sign
    frontages iii.   May be located on the ground floor façade only (sign to be mounted below
    other     25 feet as measured from finished grade outside the facade).
    than IH-  iv.   One sign per tenant space; area to be calculated at 1.5 sq.ft. per linear
    35W, Hwy  foot of tenant space façade along the building’s frontage up to a maximum of 100
    10 and    sq.ft.
(b) MN-96     v.   Sign to be located between demising walls of leased storefront.
             ix.   Sign shall not overlap architectural features like window lintels, canopy
             support points, coping, etc.
             vi.   Wall sign may encroach, a maximum of 12”, on to a sidewalk while
             maintaining a vertical clearance of 8 ft. from the finished sidewalk if it is
             non-illuminated and 11 ft. from the finished sidewalk if it is illuminated.
             vii.   Building signs may be internally or externally lit.
              viii.   Live-Work and Home occupations: One sign limited to an area of 30 sq.
              ft. max.
 
11.8   Building Projecting Signs
 
    Location  Standards
              i.   Building Projecting sign may be permitted in place of a Building Identity
              Sign.
             ii.   Maximum area of 200 sq. ft. or 15% of the façade area, whichever is less
    All per   iii.   Will not obstruct any pedestrian or vehicular way (vertical clearance of
    zoning    10 ft. from the finished sidewalk if it is non-illuminated and 11 ft. from the
(a) district  finished sidewalk if it is illuminated).
    permitted iv.   Sign may project no more than 50% of the width of the sidewalk or six (6)
             ft. from building façade line (whichever is less).
             v.   Sign may not extend above building parapet line or eaves line.
              vi.   Maximum of one per façade
              vii.   Signs must be constructed of durable materials. Impermanent materials,
              such as canvas or flexible vinyl, are not allowed.
 
11.9   Tenant Canopy Sign
 
    Location  Standards
             i.   May only be used instead of a Storefront/Tenant Wall Sign.
    All per   ii.   One sign per tenant space; area to be calculated at 1.5 sq.ft. per linear
    zoning    foot of tenant space façade along the building’s frontage up to a maximum of 100
(a) district  sq.ft.
    permitted iii.   Sign to be located between demising walls of leased storefront.
             iv.   Sign shall not extend beyond outermost edges of canopy.
             v.   Signs are to be mounted over the canopy, on the face of a canopy or over
             any awnings
 
11.10   Tenant Blade Sign
 
    Location  Standards
              i.   One Blade sign per tenant space
              ii.   May be located on the ground floor façade only (sign to be mounted
    All per   below 15 feet as measured from finished grade outside the facade)
    zoning    iii.   Maximum area of 15 sq. ft.
    district  iv.   Will not obstruct any pedestrian or vehicular way. Minimum vertical
(a) permitted clearance of ten (10) ft. from the finished sidewalk if it is non-
             illuminated and eleven (11) ft. from the finished sidewalk if it is
             illuminated.
              v.   Sign may project no more than three (3) ft. from building wall or a
              distance equal to 50% of the width of the abutting sidewalk (whichever is
              less).
 
11.11   Window Sign
 
    Location  Standards
              i.   No permit is required for small-scale (under 1.0 sq. ft. in total area)
              signs placed at the pedestrian eye level. These exempted signs include: tenant
    All per   logo and name, website or other social media address store hours and address,
    zoning    and public safety decals as required by applicable codes or government
(a) district  regulations.
    permitted ii.   Window signs include any signage attached to the storefront glazing or
              located on storefront interior within three (3) ft. of the storefront and
              intended to be viewed from the storefront exterior.
              iii.   Maximum area of 25% of overall glazed storefront, including doors.
 
11.12   Directional Signs
 
    Location  Standards
              i.   Permitted only for multi-tenant commercial and mixed-use developments with
              multiple building within one development.
              ii.   Applies only to signs located at lot entrances accessible from public
              streets.
    All per   iii.   Maximum size of 60 sq. ft.
(a) zoning    iv.   Maximum height of eight (8) ft. above frontage street pavement grade.
    district  v.   One sign permitted per development entrance. Maximum of two (2) signs per
    permitted street frontage.
              vi.   Signs located on interior of site and not intended to be viewed or
              utilized by traffic on public streets do not require a permit.
              vii.   In the Town Center, an electronic changeable copy sign is allowed for
              each parking structure entrance.
 
11.13   Directory Signs
 
    Location  Standards
    All per   i.   Signs located on interior of lot and not intended to be viewed or
(a) zoning    utilized by traffic on public streets do not require a permit. In such
    district  cases, any sign lettering or logos used must be less than 2” (max.).
    permitted
 
11.14   Sandwich Board and Mounted Menu Signs
 
    Location  Standards
              i.   Permitted only for retail, service, or restaurant tenants.
              ii.   Maximum area of 8 sq. ft. per sign face
              iii.   Maximum height of 4 ft.
    All per   iv.   One per storefront.
(a) zoning    v.   Sign shall not interfere with any pedestrian way and a minimum of 5 ft. of
    district  sidewalk shall remain clear.
    permitted vi.   Chalkboards may be used for daily changing of messages. Reader boards
              (electronic and non-electronic) shall be prohibited.
              vii.   Sandwich Board Signs and Pole-Mounted Menu Signs shall be removed every
              day after the business is closed.
 
11.15   Address Signs
 
    Location           Standards
(a) All per zoning     i.   Allowed per AHC Section 1230.01 – Subsection 3.
    district permitted
 
11.16   Marquee Signs
 
    Location  Standards
              i.   Permitted for theatres, auditoriums, and other public gathering venues of
    All per   100 persons or more;
    zoning    ii.   Marquee signs shall be attached to the building or located above or
(a) district  below a canopy only;
    permitted iii.   Area = 100 sq ft. maximum;
              iv.   Message board may be changeable copy provided that the copy does not
              change more than once every 15 minutes.
 
11.17   Banners
 
    Location  Standards
              i.   Maximum area of 150 square feet or 10% of the façade area, whichever is
              less.
    All per   ii.   For multi-tenant buildings, individual tenant banners shall not exceed the
(a) zoning    width of the tenant bay.
    district  iii.   Banners shall only be permitted on a temporary basis for a maximum period
    permitted of 30 days per calendar year. Upon review of need by Community Development
              Department, an extension or additional time may be granted with submittal of a
              new application.
 
11.18   Temporary Construction Signs
 
    Location  Standards
    All per
(a) zoning    i.   Must be attached to a part of a temporary construction
    district  fence.
    permitted
 
11.19   For Sale/Lease Signs
 
    Location           Standards
(a) All per zoning     i.   Allowed per AHC Section 1250.02 – Subsection 5.
    district permitted
 
11.20   Additional Standards
   a.   Signs located on interior of a lot and not intended to be viewed or
utilized by traffic on public streets do not require a permit.
   b.   Retail, service, and restaurant business that wrap a building corner
creating two or more storefronts will be permitted to place signs on each
storefront.
   c.   Encroachments into public right-of-way shall not be permitted. See
section 6.1(i) for standards for encroachments over required setback areas.
ATTACHMENTS
Adopted May 26, 2015
Amended December 12, 2016
Amended January 8, 2024
Amended April 8, 2024
Table of Contents
1:   Regulating Plan
2:   Palette of Open Space Types
3:   Development Review Chart
4:   Street Cross Sections
5:   Street Type Plan
6:   Recommended Color Palette
7:   Audubon Minnesota Bird-Safe Building Guidelines
8:   TCAAP Energy Integration Resiliency Framework
Attachment 1: Regulating Plan
(PDF)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1776.png]
Attachment 2: Palette of Open Space Types
The Open Space Types and Standards contained herein shall be used as a guide to
fulfill the required and recommended Open Space requirements of Section 9 of
the TRC. These open space types may be Public or Private Common Open Spaces.
The following section provides a description of these open space types
including the design context and criteria consistent with the Vision for TRC
Neighborhoods.
1.   Public Open Space Types
(a)   Pocket Park Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1778.png]
Pocket Parks are small scale public open spaces intended to provide
recreational opportunities where (publicly accessible/park) space is limited.
They are often located between buildings and developments; on single vacant
lots; and on small irregular pieces of land. Low maintenance landscaping and
facilities is recommended in order to support multiple pocket parks in a park
system.
Development may include pavilions, picnic tables, small performance stage,
seating areas, gathering areas, family play areas, gazebos, small game areas,
small community gardens, dog parks, and interactive art. Shade and lighting is
desired.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Small open space responding to specific user groups and space available.
Range of character can be for intense use or aesthetic enjoyment. Low
maintenance is essential.
Location and Size
0.25 - 1.99 acres
Within walking distance of either a few blocks or up to a ¼ mile of residences
Typical Uses
Varies per user group
 
(b)   Green Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1780.png]
A Green is a public open space available for civic purposes, commercial
activity, unstructured recreation and other passive uses. Greens shall
primarily be naturally landscaped with many shaded places to sit. Open lawn
areas shall encourage civic gathering. Appropriate paths, civic elements,
fountains or open shelters may be included and shall be formally placed within
the Green.
A Green shall be adjacent to a public right of way and be spatially defined by
buildings which shall front onto and activate this space.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Open space
Spatially defined by street and building frontages and landscaping
Lawns, trees and shrubs naturally disposed
Open shelters and paths formally disposed
 
Location and Size
0.25 - 4 acres
Minimum width - 25'
Minimum pervious cover - 80%
Minimum perimeter frontage on public right of way - 50%
 
Typical Uses
Unstructured recreation
Casual seating
Commercial and civic uses
No organized sports
 
(c)   Square Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1782.png]
A square is a public open space available for civic purposes, commercial
activity, unstructured recreation and other passive uses. The square should
have an formal character and be defined by the surrounding building frontages
and adjacent tree-lined streets. All buildings adjacent to the square shall
front onto the square. Adjacent streets shall be lined with appropriately
scaled trees that help to define the square.
The landscape shall consist of lawns, trees, and shrubs planted in formal
patterns and furnished with paths and benches. Shaded areas for seating should
be provided. A civic element or small structure such as an open shelter,
pergola, or fountain may be provided within the square.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Formal open space
Spatially defined by buildings and tree-lined streets.
Open shelters, paths, lawns, and trees formally arranged
Walkways and plantings at all edges
Abundant seating opportunities
 
Location and Size
0.25 - 4 acres
Minimum width - 25'
Minimum pervious cover - 60%
Minimum perimeter frontage on public right of way - 60%
Located at important intersections
 
Typical Uses
Unstructured and passive recreation - no organized sports.
Community gathering
Occasional commercial and civic uses
 
(d)   Plaza Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1784.png]
A plaza is a public open space that offers abundant opportunities for civic
gathering. Plazas add to the vibrancy of streets within the higher density
zones and create formal open spaces available for civic purposes and commercial
activity. Building frontages shall define these spaces.
The landscape should have a balance of hardscape and planting. Various types of
seating should be provided from planter seat walls, to steps, to benches, to
tables, and chairs. Trees should be provided for shade. They should be formally
arranged and of appropriate scale. Plazas typically should be located at the
intersection of important streets. A minimum of one public street frontage
shall be required for plazas.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Formal open space
A balance of hardscape and planting
Trees important for shade
Spatially defined by building frontages
 
Location and Size
0.1 - 1 acre
Minimum width - 30'
Minimum pervious cover - 20%
Minimum perimeter frontage on public right of way - 25%
Located at important intersections, at vista termini, or at entrances to
public/civic buildings
 
Typical Uses
Commercial and civic uses
Formal and casual seating
Tables and chairs for outdoor dining
Retail and food kiosks
 
(e)   Pocket Plaza Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1786.png]
A pocket plaza is a small scale public open space that serves as an impromptu
gathering place for civic, social, and commercial purposes. The pocket plaza is
designed as a well-defined area of refuge separate from the public sidewalk. It
is frequently located in a building supplemental zone next to the streetscape.
These areas contain a lesser amount of pervious surface than other open space
types. Outdoor dining with café tables and chairs, water features, public art
and other shaded amenities are appropriate uses.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Formal open space for gathering
Defined seating areas
Refuge from the public sidewalk
Spatially defined by the building configuration
 
Location and Size
Min. 300 s.f.
Min. width - 15' / Max. width 20'
Minimum pervious cover -10 %
Minimum perimeter frontage on public right of way - 25%
Located at important intersections, at vista termini, or at entrances to
public/civic buildings
 
Typical Uses
Civic and commercial uses
Formal and casual seating
 
(f)   Pedestrian Passage (Paseo) Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1788.png]
Pedestrian passages or paseos are linear public open spaces that connect one
street to another at through-block locations. Pedestrian passages create
intimate linkages through buildings at designated locations. These wide
pathways provide direct pedestrian access to residential or other commercial
addresses and create unique spaces for frontages to engage and enter off of.
Pedestrian passages allow for social and commercial activity to spill into the
public realm.
Pedestrian passages should consist of a hardscape pathway with pervious pavers
activated by frequent entries and exterior stairways. The edges may simply be
landscaped with minimal planting and potted plants. Shade is required for the
success of the paseo.    Typical Characteristics   
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Hardscape pathway with pervious pavers
Defined by building frontages
Frequent side entries and frontages
Shade Required
Minimal planting and potted plants
Maintain the character of surrounding buildings
 
Standards
Min. Width   15 feet
 
Typical Uses
Pedestrian connection and access
Casual seating
 
(g)   Multi-Use Trail Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1790.png]
A multi-use trail is a linear public open space that accommodates two or more
users on the same, undivided trail. Trail users could include pedestrians,
bicyclists, skaters, etc. A trail frequently provides an important place for
active recreation and creates a connection to regional paths and biking trails.
Pedestrian amenities add to recreational opportunities. These include drinking
fountains, scenic view posts, fitness stations, and directional signs, and may
be spread along the trail or grouped in a trailhead area.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Multi-use trail in Neighborhood Park:
   Naturally disposed landscape
   Trees lining trail for shade
   Appropriately lit for safety
Formally disposed pedestrian furniture, landscaping and lighting
Multi-use trail along Spine Road or through neighborhoods.:
Paved trail with frequent gathering spaces and regular landscaping.
 
Standards
Min. Width   12 feet
 
Typical Uses
Active and passive recreation
 
(h)   Family-friendly Play Area Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1792.png]
Family-friendly play areas are areas within open spaces that are conducive to
the recreational needs of families with children. Family-friendly play areas
range in style from pocket parks within mixed use developments to playscapes
within neighborhood parks.
These play areas should serve as quiet, safe places -- protected from the
street and typically located where children do not have to cross major streets
to access. An open shelter, play structures or interactive art and fountains
may be included with landscaping between. Shaded areas and seating shall be
provided for ease of supervision.
Playscape equipment and design must be reviewed and approved by the City prior
to installation. The need for fencing depends on the surrounding environment.
A larger playground may be incorporated into a neighborhood park, whereas a
more intimate family oriented design may be incorporated into a pocket park.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Focused toward family-friendly needs
Fencing depends on surroundings
Open shelter
Shade and seating provided
Play structure, interactive art or fountains
 
Standards
Min. Size   300 sq.ft.
Max. Size   N/A
As described by open space type in which playground is located
Protected from traffic
No service or mechanical equipment
 
Typical Uses
Active and passive recreation
Unstructured recreation
Casual seating
 
2.   Private Common Open Space Types
(a)   Forecourt Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1794.png]
Forecourt is a small scale private common open space surrounded on at least two
sides by buildings. A forecourt is typically a building entry providing a
transition space from the sidewalk to the building. The character serves as a
visual announcement of the building to visitors with additional amenities such
as signage, water features, seating, planting, etc.
Forecourts should be laid out proportionate to building height with a 1:4
(min.) ratio. In order to offset the impact of taller buildings, the detail of
the forecourt level should seek to bring down the relative scale of the space
with shade elements, trees, etc.
The hardscape should primarily accommodate circulation. Seating and shade are
important for visitors. Trees and plantings are critical to create a minimum of
30% pervious cover and offset the effect of the urban heat island.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Small scale private common open space
Defined by buildings on at least 2 sides with connection to public sidewalk
Size of court should be proportionate to building height
Hardscape should accommodate entry circulation
Trees and plants are critical
Enhance the character of surrounding buildings
 
Standards
Min. Width   25'
Minimum Size   Depth: Based on building height ratio; Width: Max. of 50% of the
building's frontage along that street
Minimum pervious cover - 30%
 
Typical Uses
Building Entry Circulation
Visual building announcement
 
(b)   Courtyard Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1796.png]
Courtyards are small scale private common open spaces surrounded on at least
three sides by buildings with a pedestrian connection to a public sidewalk.
Courtyards maintain the character and style of the surrounding buildings.
Courtyards should be laid out proportionate to building height between 1:1 and
2:1 ratio (width to height of building). In order to offset the impact of
taller buildings, the detail of the courtyard level should seek to bring down
the relative scale of the space with shade elements, trees, etc. Transition
areas should be set up between the building face and the center of the court.
The hardscape should accommodate circulation, gathering, seating, and shade.
Trees and plantings are critical to create a minimum of 30% pervious cover and
offset the effect of the urban heat island.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Small scale private common open space
Defined by buildings on at least 3 sides with connection to public sidewalk
Size of court should be proportionate to building height
Hardscape should accommodate circulation, gathering, and seating.
Trees and plants are critical
Maintain the character of surrounding buildings
 
Standards
Min. Width   25'
Minimum Area   650 s.f.
Minimum pervious cover - 30%
 
Typical Uses
Gathering
Casual seating
 
(c)   Roof Terrace Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1798.png]
A Roof Terrace is a private common open space serving as a gathering space for
tenants and residents that might not be at grade.
Up to 50% of the required private common open space may be located on a roof if
at least 30 % of the roof terrace is designed as a Vegetated or Green Roof. A
Vegetated or Green roof is defined as an assembly or system over occupied space
that supports an area of planted beds, built up on a waterproofed surface.
Private common open space on a roof must be screened from the view of the
adjacent property. The hardscape should accommodate circulation, gathering,
seating, and shade.
Typical Characteristics
General Character
Small scale private common open space on roof top
Screened from view of adjacent property
Vegetated portion critical
Hardscape should accommodate gathering, seating, shade
Provides common open space that might not be available at grade
 
Standards
Min. Area   50% of the roof top
Planted area - 30% min.
 
Typical Uses
Gathering for tenants and residents
Green Roof
 
 
Attachment 3: Development Flow Chart
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1800.png]
 
Attachment 4: Street Cross Sections
The following street cross sections are established for the Street Types as
established in Regulating Plan for TRC. The cross sections (including vehicular
lane and on-street parking configurations, street tree placement, etc.) may be
adjusted to fit existing contexts or other development contexts consistent with
the vision for the Neighborhood with the approval of the City Engineer. In
addition, the proposed cross sections may be adjusted to meet the needs of the
Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the City.
TOWN STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1802.png]
TOWN STREET AT INTERSECTIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1804.png]
COLLECTOR ROAD
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1806.png]
COLLECTOR ROAD WITH TRAIL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1808.png]
NEIGHBORHOOD STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1810.png]
RESIDENTIAL ALLEY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1812.png]
COMMERCIAL ALLEY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1814.png]
 
Attachment 5: TCAAP STREET TYPE PLAN
May 26, 2015 (PDF)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1834.png]
 
Attachment 6: TCAAP Recommended Color Palette
The following recommended color palette is established for exterior building
colors within TCAAP. This color palette is based on the Sherwin William paint
palette. Other manufacturers may be used provided that the colors are similar
in tone, shade, and intensity to the ones listed below.
Body/Wall Trim/Accent
Body/Wall               Trim/Accent
                        Renwick Beige 2805
Renwick Rose Beige 2804 Pewter Tankard 0023
                        Polished Mahogany 2838
                        Downing Straw 2813
Renwick Golden Oak 2824 Roycroft Vellum 2833
                        Deepest Mauve 0005
                        Rookwood Clay 2823
Downing Sand 2822       Rookwood Sash Green 2810
                        Rookwood Blue Green 2811
                        Downing Sand 2822
Sheraton Sage 0014      Rookwood Antique Gold 2814
                        Fairfax Brown 2856
                        Classical White 2829
Eastlake Gold 0009      Curio Gray 0024
                        Downing Slate 2819
                        Classic Light Buff 0050
Pearl Gray 0052         Colonial Revival Stone 2827
                        Mulberry Silk 0001
                        Downing Straw 2813
Downing Slate 2819      Rookwood Antique Gold 2814
                        Rookwood Medium Brown 2807
                        Renwick Beige 2805
Downing Earth 2820      Rookwood Terra Cotta 2803
                        Rookwood Dark Brown 2808
                        Downing Sand 2822
Renwick Olive 2815      Rookwood Dark Green 2816
                        Rookwood Amber 2817
                        Roycroft Vellum 2833
Craftsman Brown 2835    Rookwood Brown 2806
                        Naval 6244
                        Roycroft Brass 2843
Birdseye Maple 2834     Roycroft Bronze Green 2846
                        Aurora Brown 2837
                        Weathered Shingle 2841
Roycroft Pewter 2848    Roycroft Vellum 2833
                        Roycroft Copper Red 2839
                        Sage Green Light 2851
Downing Stone 2821      Roycroft Bronze Green 2846
                        Classic Light Buff 0050
 
Body/Wall Trim/Accent
Body/Wall                         Trim/Accent
                                  Pure White 7005
Rookwood Clay 2823                Downing Sand 2822
                                  Teal Stencil 0018
                                  Roycroft Vellum 2833
Downing Straw 2813                Roycroft Pewter 2848
                                  Classic French Gray 0077
                                  Roycroft Suede 2842
Antique White 6119                Creamy 7012
                                  Bunglehouse Blue 0048
                                  Rookwood Antique Gold 2814
Peace Yellow 2857                 Classical White 2829
                                  Roycroft Bottle Green 2847
                                  Downing Stone 2821
Roycroft Mist Gray 2844           Extra White 7006
                                  Rookwood Dark Red 2801
                                  Classic Light Buff 0050
Needlepoint Navy 0032             New Colonial Yellow 2853
                                  Antiquarian Brown 0045
                                  Westchester Gray 2849
Chelsea Gray 2850                 Decorous Amber 0007
                                  Roycroft Pewter 2848
                                  Classical White 2829
Downing Sand 2822                 Toile Red 0006
                                  Rookwood Dark Brown 2808
                                  Classical White 2829
Colonial Revival Stone 2827       Tricorn Black 6258
                                  Rookwood Red 2802
                                  Pure White 7005
Colonial Revival Gray 2832        Downing Slate 2819
                                  Harvester 6373
                                  Classic Light Buff 0050 Polished Mahogany
Colonial Revival Green Stone 2826 2838
                                  Roycroft Bronze Green 2846
Cardboard 6124                    Believable Buff 6120
                                  Urbane Bronze 7048
Wool Skein 6148                   Hardware 6172
                                  Fired Brick 6335
Universal Khaki 6150              Moderate White 6140
                                  Naval 6244
Summit Gray 7669                  Extra White 7006
                                  Greenblack 6994
Restrained Gold 6129              Polar Bear 7564
                                  Forestwood 7330
Virtual Taupe 7039                Accessible Beige 7036
                                  Rustic Red 7593
Poolhouse 7603                    City Loft 7631
                                  Peppercorn 7674
 
Body/Wall Trim/Accent
Body/Wall             Trim/Accent
Whole Wheat 6121      Antique White 6119
                      Raisin 7630
Knitting Needles 7672 Pearly White 7009
                      Seaworthy 7620
Humble Gold 6380      Wool Skein 6148
                      Griffin 7026
Jubilee 6248          Extra White 7006
                      Salute 7582
Green Earth 7748      Nacre 6154
                      Fiery Brown 6055
Red Barn 7591         Alabaster 7008
                      Domino 6989
Dormer Brown 7521     Patience 7555
                      Cordovan 6027
Slate Tile 7624       Grecian Ivory 7541
                      Manor House 7505
Softer Tan 6141       Foothills 7514
                      Darkroom 7083
Maison Blanche 7526   Alabaster 7008
                      Dried Thyme 6186
Carriage Door 7594    Windsor Greige 7528
                      Thunder Gray 7645
Khaki Shade 7533      Tiki Hut 7509
                      Brandywine 7710
Burlap 6137           Rice Grain 6155
                      Bitter Chocolate 6013
Tree Branch 7525      Divine White 6105
                      Rustic Red 7593
Rare Gray 6199        Casa Blanca 7571
                      Pewter Green 6208
Dover White 6385      Gateway Gray 7644
                      Mediterranean 7617
Concord Buff 7684     Pure White 7005
                      Porpoise 7047
Wool Skein 6148       Artisan Tan 7540
                      Status Bronze 7034
Bamboo Shoot 7733     Alabaster 7008
                      Roycroft Pewter 2848
Breezy 7616           Extra White 7006
                      Rookwood Amber 2817
Tatami Tan 6116       Colony Buff 7723
                      Homburg Gray 7622
Fresco Cream 7719     Pottery Urn 7715
                      Carnelian 7580
Dry Dock 7502         Hot Cocoa 6047
                      Chateau Brown 7510
 
Body/Wall Trim/Accent
Body/Wall            Trim/Accent
Muslin 6133          Straw Harvest 7698
                     Rural Green 6418
Homestead Brown 7515 Keystone Gray 7504
                     Moderne White 6168
Outerbanks 7534      Rice Grain 6155
                     Rookwood Terra Cotta 2803
Extra White 7006     Rushing River 7746
                     Spiced Cider 7702
Uncertain Gray 6234  Evening Shadow 7662
                     Peppercorn 7674
Birdseye Maple 2834  Cocoon 6173
                     Olde Worlde Gold 7700
Retreat 6207         Netsuke 6134
                     Edgy Gold 6409
Perfect Greige 6073  Popular Gray 6071
                     Garret Gray 6075
Artifact 6138        Creamy 7012
                     Ramie 6156
Jogging Path 7638    Intellectual Gray 7045
                     Thunder Gray 7645
Shoji White 7042     Relaxed Khaki 6149
                     Hopsack 6109
Restrained Gold 6129 Burlap 6137
                     Pier 7545
Anjou Pear 6381      Jersey Cream 6379
                     Warm Stone 7032
Techno Gray 6170     Connected Gray 6165
                     Alchemy 6395
Rustic City 7699     Dover White 6385
                     Raisin 7630
Cork Wedge 7539      Smokehouse 7040
                     Rustic Red 7593
Silvermist 7621      Pure White 7005
                     Chamois 6131
Stone Lion 7507      Quiver Tan 6151
                     Incredible White 7028
 
Attachment 7: Audubon Minnesota Bird-Safe Building Guidelines
(PDF)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1890.png]
Over 100 bird species have been recovered from building collisions in Minnesota
including Lincoln's Sparrow, Black-capped Chickadee, Indigo Bunting, Common
Yellowthroat, and Nashville Warbler
Published by audubon Minnesota, May 2010
Project director: Joanna Eckles (Audubon Minnesota)
Contributor: Edward Heinen (Perkins + Will)
Reviewers: Mark Martell, Mark Peterson (Audubon Minnesota); Lori Naumann
(Minnesota Department of Natural Resources); Chris Sheppard (American Bird
Conservancy); Susan Elbin (NYC Audubon); Jonee Kulman Brigham (Center for
Sustainable Building Research, UMN), Benjamin Sporer, Paul Neuhaus (Perkins +
Will)
Design Manager: Bonita Jenné (Audubon Minnesota)
Cover Cityscape Artwork: Edward Heinen
Printing made possible by TogetherGreen
Citation: Audubon Minnesota. (2010). Bird-Safe Building Guidelines
Photographs in this publication are copyrighted by the individual photographers
and have been used with permission. Site and lighting diagrams courtesy of the
City of Toronto from their Bird-Friendly Development Guidelines.
The mission of Audubon Minnesota is to conserve and restore natural ecosystems,
focusing on birds and their habitats, for the benefit of humanity and the
earth's biological diversity.
Audubon Minnesota
2357 Ventura Drive, Suite 106 * Saint Paul MN 55125
mn.audubon.org
Thank you to New York City Audubon and their original working group for
permission to revise their Bird-Safe Building Guidelines (May 2007).
NYC Project Director: Kate Orff, RLA, Columbia University GSAPP
NYC Authors: Hillary Brown, AIA, Steven Caputo, New Civic Works
NYC Audubon Project Staff: E.J. McAdams, Marcia Fowle, Glenn Phillips, Chelsea
Dewitt, Yigal Gelb Graphics.
NYC Reviewers: Karen Cotton, Bird-Safe Working Group; Randi Doeker, Birds &
Buildings Forum; Bruce Fowle, FAIA, Daniel Piselli, FXFOWLE; Marcia Fowle;
Yigal Gelb, Program Director, NYC Audubon; Mary Jane Kaplan; Daniel Klem, Jr.,
PhD., Muhlenberg College; Albert M. Manville, PhD., US Department of the
Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service; E. J. McAdams, Former Executive Director
NYC, Audubon; Glenn Phillips, Executive Director, NYC Audubon.
Original publication of these guidelines was made possible with the support of
US Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service through the
Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Act, Joseph & Mary Fiore and the
support of NYC Audubon members and patrons.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1892.png]
Site and Landscape Design
Objective: Minimize the potential for bird collisions when siting buildings
near existing landscape features and when planning new landscapes in close
proximity to buildings.
A WELL-INTEGRATED SUSTAINABLE DESIGN enhances open space and protects and
restores habitat while enhancing the overall architectural and operational
quality of a built facility. Efforts to integrate nature and attract wildlife
should be balanced with specific considerations of a site's impact on birds.
Birds attracted to on-site habitat are vulnerable to collisions with glass.
These guidelines encourage bird-safe design strategies early in the
collaborative design process through consideration of site, existing habitat,
and bird-safe landscaping.
CONSIDER SITE ANALYSIS                                                             CONSIDER EXISTING HABITAT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
0-0-0-1888.png]                                                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-1886.png]
Urban parks attract birds                                                          Treat windows near habitat
Analyze the site to determine potential attractions for bird populations.          Site building(s) to reduce conflicts with existing and planned landscape features
                                                                                   that may attract birds.
•   Consult with an ecologist or bird specialist to inventory the site.       •   Where buildings cannot be located away from bird sensitive areas, take
                                                                                   special care in treating windows. See "Exterior Glass" pages 20-21.
                                                                                   •   Where strategic reductions to building footprint have been made in order to
•   Document the location of nearby vegetated streetscapes and urban parks.   enhance vegetated open space and habitat, assess site conflicts and include bird
                                                                                   safe treatments.
•   Identify all sources of food and shelter for migratory and resident bird  •   Use soil berms, furniture, landscaping, or architectural features to prevent
populations, including plants, water and other natural features.                   reflection in glazed building facades.
•   Identify human-made features that attract birds, including water sources,  
nesting and perching sites, and shelter from adverse weather.15
Coordinate with LEED Credits                                                       Coordinate with LEED Credits
SS 5.1 Site Development: Protect or Restore Habitat                                SS 5.2 Site Development: Maximize Open Space
 
WHILE BIRDS COLLIDE WITH BUILDINGS AT ALL LEVELS, ground-level stories are
considered the most dangerous because this is where habitat reflections,
glazing and internal planting are often all quite prominent . Analysis of bird
collision data over 10 years in New York City showed that "most collisions were
documented to occur during the day at the lower levels of buildings where large
glass exteriors reflected abundant vegetation, or where transparent windows
exposed indoor vegetation ."16
CANOPY HEIGHT
Glass treatments should be applied to the height of the top of the surrounding
tree canopy of the anticipated height of surrounding vegetation at maturity.13
 
CONSIDER LANDSCAPE PLACEMENT                                                      CONSIDER INTERIOR LANDSCAPING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1884.png]                                                            0-0-0-1882.png]
Dangerous reflections                                                             Confusing interior plants
Birds are vulnerable to collisions nearly anywhere glass occurs. Habitat in       Birds will mistakenly seek shelter in landscaping located behind glass.
proximity to glass exacerbates this threat unless reflections are avoided or      •   Mask views of interior plantings from outside the building.
eliminated or visual cues are incorporated in glazing.                            •   Use screening, window films or treatments to make glass visible.
•   When planning new landscapes be aware of reflections and see-through effects
created by habitat in relation to building features. Place plantings to minimize  CONSIDER ROOFTOP LANDSCAPING
these effects.
•   Alternatively, situate trees and shrubs immediately adjacent to the exterWith the increased use of green roof technology, impacts on birds must be
glass walls, at a distance of less than three feet from the glass.17 Close        considered.
proximity will minimize habitat reflections. in addition, if a bird does try to   •   Treat glass to minimize the reflection of rooftop landscaping in adjacent
fly to a reflection at this range, flight momentum will be minimal, thereby       building features.
reducing fatal collisions. This planting strategy also provides beneficial        •   Consider foregoing green roof installation or eliminating access to birds if
summertime shading and reduces cooling loads.                                     reflection in adjacent buildings will occur.
•   If any bird-attracting features (food, water, shelter) are in reflective Coordinate with LEED Credits
range of the building(s), use fritting, shading devices or other techniques to    SS 7.1 Heat Island Effect: Non-Roof
make glass visible. See "Exterior Glass" pages 20-21.                             SS 7.2 Heat Island Effect: Roof
 
Building Layout and Massing
Objective: Include bird-safe strategies as part of an integrated design
approach before construction rather than retrofitting a building that proves
problematic.
BIRD-SAFE STRATEGIES do not restrict the ability to design creatively. These
guidelines encourage an integrated design approach, challenging building
designers to include bird-safe strategies to enhance aesthetic, functional, and
building performance goals. The layout of individual buildings and their
relationship to other structures on the site can affect the number of bird
collisions that occur. Building layout and massing can be planned along with
landscaping to minimize the likelihood of bird collisions.
 
CONSIDER SPECIFIC SITE FEATURES                                                     
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/
0-0-0-1880.png]                                                                    0-0-0-1878.png]
These two birds were fooled by habitat reflections                                 Clear barriers create a deadly hazard for birds
Ground level stories are the most hazardous areas of all buildings and should be   Clear barriers such as transparent bus-shelters, skyways, linkways, railings,
designed to minimize bird collisions.                                              windscreens and noise barriers create a serious hazard for birds because they are
                                                                                   invisible, causing a deadly fly-through hazard.
•   Minimize those hazards that bring birds close to buildings such as vegetat•   Avoid use of transparent materials in these structures in any location where
water and other features.                                                          birds may be present. Use translucent or decorative glazing as an alternative.
•   Provide uniform covering with bird-safe materials, especially adjacent to •   If clear panels of any kind are in use, incorporate surface treatments to make
landscapes. See "Exterior Glass" pages 20-21.                                      glass visible. See "Exterior Glass" pages 20-21.
•   Use angled glass, between 20 and 40 degrees from vertical, to reflect the  
ground instead of adjacent habitat or sky.18
 
"BIRD SAFETY IS EASIER TO SELL WHEN IT OVERLAPS WITH OTHER GREEN STRATEGIES.
SLANTED GLASS REDUCES SOLAR HEAT GAIN BUT ALSO WORKS TO EFFECTIVELY REDUCE BIRD
INJURIES. FRITTED GLASS REDUCES HEAT GAIN, AND IF IT'S 50% YOU CAN STILL SEE
THROUGH IT."
Jeanne Gang, Studio Gang architects, Chicago
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
0-0-0-1876.png]                                                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-1874.png]
Confusing corners with multiple reflections                                        Birds can fall through grates after hitting windows
Courtyards may contain landscaping and confusing internal corners that limit bird  Site ventilation grates also present a unexpected danger for birds. an injured
escape routes.These areas often allow sudden access by people that flush birds     bird that falls onto a ventilation grate with large pores can become trapped.
into glass.                                                                        •   Specify ventilation grates with a porosity no larger than 0.8 inches.13
•   Control access to enclosed areas so birds flush away from glass into open Cover larger grates with netting.
areas.                                                                             •   Never up-light ventilation grates.
•   Treat glass with bird-safe materials so birds see and avoid glass.
Rooftop obstacles such as antennas and media equipment can injure or kill birds    Driveways can also cause birds to flush from landscaping into reflective glazing
and should be minimized. In poor weather and bright lighting conditions birds may  as vehicles approach.
congregate on and around rooftops.
•   Co-locate antennas and tall rooftop media equipment to minimize conflicts •   ensure routes of escape for birds that are using landscaping along driveways
birds.                                                                             and access roads.
•   Utilize self-supporting structures that do not require guy wire supports. •   Take care in routing driveways adjacent to landscaping and reflective
•   Avoid up-lighting rooftop antennas and tall equipment, as well as decoratiglazing.
architectural spires. See "Lighting Design" pages 24-25.
 
Exterior Glass
Objective: Prevent bird collisions with glazed surfaces, while maintaining
transparency for views, daylighting and passive environmental control.
MOST BIRD COLLISIONS OCCUR at the glazed surfaces of buildings. While
circumstances such as lighting and other obstacles do contribute, glass areas
are the primary focus of bird-safe design and retrofit strategies regardless of
the overall site, landscape, layout and massing features. Bird-friendly glass
products can contribute to aesthetics, energy efficiency, and effective
daylighting. For bird safety, efforts focus on creating visual markers to make
glass visible to birds and minimize reflection of habitat and sky.
 
CONSIDER VISUAL MARKERS                                                             
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/IMAGES/
0-0-0-1872.png]                                                                    0-0-0-1870.png]
Interior shades and exterior film at the Minneapolis Central Library               White fritted pattern on glass facade at IAC Offices in New York City
"Visual noise" is what allows us to see glass. It is created by varying materials, textures, colors, opacity, or other features and helps to break up glass
reflections and reduce overall transparency.19 Creating these visual markers can alert birds to the presence of glass as an obstacle. This is the most effective way
to mitigate the danger that glass poses to birds.
•   Utilize etching, fritting, translucent and opaque patterned glass to reduc•   Consider applying acid-etched or sandblasted patterns to glass on the outside
transparency and reflection, while achieving solar shading. (Note: although        surface to "read" in both transparent and reflective conditions.
fritting is useful for creating visual noise, it is less effective at reducing     •   Create patterns that follow the "hand-print" rule (below).
reflectance since it is generally applied on the interior face of the glass.)
                                                                                   •   Use window films featuring artwork or custom patterns permanently or on a
•   Incorporate windows with real or applied divided lights to break up large rotating basis.
window expanses into smaller subdivisions.                                         •   Low-reflectivity glass has not been sufficiently tested for bird safety but
                                                                                   may prove beneficial in certain installations.
 
DID YOU KNOW?
Studies show that small birds will attempt to fly through any opening larger
than 4 inches wide or 2 inches tall or about the size of a child's handprint
oriented horizontally. When creating "visual noise" on or around a window,
optimal openings are no larger than a small handprint.19
 
CONSIDER INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR TREATMENT                                          CONSIDER INTEGRATED DAYLIGHTING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1868.png]                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-1866.png]
An exterior ceramic framework provides shading and daylighting (New York Times)   Translucent glass can help balance daylighting and prevent bird collisions
                                                                                  Large expanses of clear exterior glazing do not equate to effective day-
Exterior shading or other architectural devices enhance bird safety.              lighting for buildings. in fact, over-glazing can contribute to glare, veiling
                                                                                  reflections, unwanted heat gain, and also bird collisions. Many strategies used
                                                                                  to achieve effective daylighting are compatible with bird safety.
•   Utilize shading devices, screens, and other physical barriers to reduce  •   Where appropriate, daylighting strategies such as exterior shading devices,
reflectivity and birds' access to glass.                                          fritted glass, and diffuse and translucent glass can also help to prevent bird
•   incorporate louvers, awnings, sunshades, light shelves or other exterior collisions.
shading/shielding devices to reduce reflection and give birds a visual indication •   in general, the more untreated glass you have, the greater the risk to
of a barrier.                                                                     birds, especially on sites that are in predictable migratory and resident bird
•   Consider other highly patterned shading/shielding devices that will proviareas.
visual cues and encourage bird safety.
Interior window treatments can provide visual cues for birds and reduce both      Coordinate with LEED Credits
transparency and reflections. They also help reduce light trespass from           EQ 8.1 and 8.2 Daylight & Views
buildings. See "Building Operations" page 26.                                     EA 1 Optimize Energy Performance
•   design interior window treatments using light-colored solar reflective blinds
or curtains. Partially open blinds during the day.
•   Close curtains and blinds if evening lighting is utilized.                
•   for best results, consider photo-sensors, timers and other automatic controls
to regulate shading devices, lighting and daylighting.
 
WINDOW AREA
Windows constitute about 25-40 percent of the wall area of effectively designed
daylit buildings, an area very similar to the windowed area in non-daylit
buildings. 20
Lighting Design
Objective: Undertake strategies to reduce light trespass from buildings,
particularly during migration seasons.
REDUCING EXTERIOR BUILDING AND SITE LIGHTING has been proven effective at
reducing nighttime migratory bird collisions and mortality. At the same time,
such measures reduce building energy costs and decrease air and light
pollution. These guidelines encourage efficient design of lighting systems as
well as operational strategies to reduce light trespass from buildings,
particularly during migration seasons.
 
CONSIDER EXTERIOR LIGHT TRESPASS                                                  PREFERRED                                 DISCOURAGED
                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/       e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1864.png]                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-1862.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-1860.png]
                                                                                  Direct exterior lighting downwards and adhere to Lights Out Guidelines
                                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Light pollution is largely a result of inefficient exterior lighting.             e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
                                                                                  IMAGES/0-0-0-1858.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-1856.png]
•   Eliminate light directed upwards by attaching cutoff shields to street-
lights and external lights.                                                       Light advertising from above to reduce the light projected skyward
•   Highlight building features without up-lighting.
•   Rreduce the amount of light that spills outside areas where it is needed DID YOU KNOW?
safety and security.                                                              Red lights that don't flash are most attractive (and therefore deadly) to birds.
•   Maximize the useful light directed to targeted areas.                    Instead use flashing white or non-flashing blue or green lights.24
•   Eliminate the use of spotlights and searchlights during bird migration.
 
Lighting diagrams courtesy of the City of Toronto
 
PREFERRED                                 DISCOURAGED                               CONSIDER INTERIOR LIGHT TRESPASS
                                                                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
                                                                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-1894.png]
                                                                                    Light trespass from within buildings can be reduced through design and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        operational changes.
e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/ •   Design lights to shut off using automatic controls, including photo-
IMAGES/0-0-0-1898.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-1896.png]                    sensors, infrared and motion detectors. These devices generally pay for
                                                                                    themselves in energy savings within one year.
                                                                                    •   Reduce the need for extensive overhead lighting.
                                                                                    •   Encourage the use of localized task lighting and shades.
                                                                                    •   Reduce perimeter lighting and/or draw shades wherever possible.
Preferred lighting designs project light  Discouraged lighting designs cause spill  Coordinate with LEED Credits
downward, reducing waste and light        light to be directed into the sky where   SS 8.0 Light Pollution Reduction
pollution.                                it is not needed.                         EQ 6.1 Controllability of Systems: Lighting
                                                                                    EA 1 Optimize Energy Performance
 
Products and innovations
While product innovations continue to emerge, many currently available products
have potential bird-safety features even if they were developed for other
purposes such as balanced daylighting, innovative aesthetics, building safety
and security, and energy efficiency.
The following material sources may contribute to bird safety for new or
existing buildings. Products and manufacturers listed below are for information
only, and are neither recommended nor endorsed by Audubon Minnesota and its
Project BirdSafe partners.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1900.png]
Tennessee Warbler
Translucent and Decorative Glazing:     Architectural Metal Mesh:
3Form (3-form.com)                      Cambridge Architectural
                                        (cambridgearchitectural.com)
Bendheim (bendheim.com)                 GKD Metal Fabrics (gkdmetalfabrics.com)
Cabont Nanogel/Aerogel (cabot-corp.com) Johnson Screens (johnsonscreens.com)
Goldray Industries                      Building-integrated Photovoltaics:
(goldrayindustries.com)
Kalwall (kalwall.com)                   PowerFilm (powerfilmsolar.com)
Major Industries (majorskylights.com)   Uni-Solar (www.uni-solar.com)
Schott (us.schott.com)                  ARCH Aluminum and Glass
                                        (archaluminum.net)
TG P/Pilkington Profilit                Exterior Louvers and Sunscreens:
(tgpamerica.com)
Viracon (viracon.com)                   Hunter Douglas Contract
                                        (hunterdouglascontract.com)
Decorative Ceramic Fritting:            Industrial Louvers Inc.
                                        (www.industriallouvers.com)
Goldray Industries                      Nysan Shading Systems (nysan.com)
(goldrayindustries.com)
Oldcastle Glass (oldcastleglass.com)    Savannah Trims (suncontrolers.com)
Viracon (www.viracon.com)               Façade-integrated Leds:
PPG Industries (ppg.com)                Cambridge Architectural
                                        (cambridgearchitectural.com)
Applied Window Films and Spectrally     GKD Metal Fabrics (gkdmetalfabrics.com)
Selective Glass:
Arnold Glas, Ornilux (glaswerke-        Schott (us.schott.com)
arnold.de)
Collidescape (fetchgraphics.com)        Window Treatments and Banners:
Solutia / CPFilms Inc. (cpfilms.com)    Banner Creations (bannercreations.com)
SurfaceCare USA (surfacecareusa.com)    Biographix (rainierdisplays.com/
                                        biographix.html)
The Convenience Group                   Exterior Coverings, Nettings,
(conveniencegroup.com)                  Screening:
U.S. Dept. of Energy (eere.energy.gov)  Bird-B-Gone (birdbgone.com)
Electrochromic Glass:                   Nixalite bird exclusion netting
                                        (nixalite.com)
Sage Electrochromics Inc. (sage-ec.com) Stealthnet (birdbarrier.com)
Smart Glass International               TopRite Netting (cutlersupply.com)
(smartglassinternational.com)
 
Attachment 8: TCAAP Energy Integration Resiliency Framework
March 31, 2015
Acknowledgements
The Project Team would like to thank the City of Arden Hills, Ramsey County,
the Energy Resiliency Advisory Board, and the Joint Development Authority for
all of their input and guidance. Their leadership and insights proved
invaluable as the Project Team progressed toward the TCAAP energy vision. The
Project Team is also grateful to the Minnesota Army National Guard, the
University of Minnesota Center for Sustainable Building Research, and Xcel
Energy for their cooperation and partnership through the development of this
Framework.
About the Project Team
1.1.   Ever-Green Energy
Ever-Green Energy is one of the country's premier community energy system
experts, with decades of experience in developing, operating, and managing
district energy systems. The unique combination of technical expertise,
business acumen, and operations know-how has helped communities, colleges and
universities, and government organizations advance their exploration and
implementation of integrated energy systems.
1.2.   Burns & McDonnell
Burns & McDonnell, headquartered in Kansas City, MO, is a full-service
engineering, architecture, construction, environmental and consulting solutions
firm. The company's multidisciplinary staff of nearly 5,000 employee-owners
includes engineers, architects, construction professionals, planners,
estimators, economists, technicians, and scientists, representing virtually all
design disciplines.
1.3.   Center for Energy and the Environment
The Center for Energy and Environment is a nonprofit organization that promotes
energy efficiency to strengthen the economy while improving the environment.
CEE conducts research and develops programs so that: businesses operate more
efficiently and profitably; government agencies and nonprofits spend less on
facilities and functions; utilities achieve their energy-efficiency goals at
least- cost; and households save money and improve comfort.
1.4.   Fresh Energy
For more than 20 years, Fresh Energy has transformed widely held economic and
environmental ideas into smart energy policy. Fresh Energy works in the realm
of public policy, changing the rules that govern our energy system. The
organization's efforts focus on energy efficiency, clean energy, transportation
and land use, and carbon reduction.
Brief: TCAAP Energy Integration Resiliency Framework
The redevelopment of the Twin Cities Army Ammunition Plant (TCAAP) site in
Arden Hills, Minnesota, offers unique and exciting opportunities to build a
vibrant community that attracts residents and businesses, and serves as a
national model for sustainable redevelopment. Ramsey County (County), Arden
Hills (City), and neighboring property owners are working together to build a
forward-looking community that optimizes innovative energy supply systems that
can be developed for reliability and resiliency, increases the use of local
renewable energy systems that can reduce the environmental impact of the
community, and develops energy efficient buildings that can provide low-cost
energy for residents and tenants.
TCAAP is a 427-acre site that has recently gone through an extensive demolition
and environmental remediation program. The site is centrally located at the
intersection of I-35 E and Highway 10, just ten miles from downtown Minneapolis
and downtown Saint Paul. TCAAP is unique for its size, prime location,
greenfield condition, and potential partnerships. The partnerships between the
Minnesota Army National Guard (MNARNG), the U.S. Army, Xcel Energy, the City,
and the County create dynamic and beneficial opportunities for all entities.
To facilitate TCAAP redevelopment, the County and the City have engaged in a
partnership through the formation of a Joint Development Authority (JDA). For
the purposes of energy planning, they have also established the Energy
Resiliency Advisory Board (ERAB) and appointed community stakeholders to help
define an energy vision for TCAAP. The Project Team includes Ever-Green Energy,
Center for Energy and Environment, Fresh Energy, and Burns & McDonnell.
Findings
• Given current market drivers and the timing of TCAAP development,
implementation of the opportunities identified in this Framework should begin
immediately.
• Partnership with Xcel Energy and the Minnesota Army National Guard will be
essential to achieving the vision for TCAAP.
• Implementing the opportunities recommended in this Framework can reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by as much as 70%.
• A solar photovoltaic (PV) installation at the Primer Tracer site has the
potential to provide sufficient power to TCAAP and AHATS when operating at peak
conditions.
• Combined heat and power (CHP) is an efficient and effective step toward
developing a microgrid at TCAAP and AHATS.
• The locally treated groundwater possesses enough energy to meet all of the
thermal needs of the planned TCAAP residential neighborhoods.
• Enhanced building design standards applied in the request for proposal (RFP)
process can attract and streamline energy efficient development.
• Building orientation, co-location of complementary use buildings, and use of
sub-meters can reduce energy consumption and improve energy efficiency.
• Integrating several of these energy opportunities would allow residents of
TCAAP to achieve netzero energy status.
• The County and JDA should allow corridors for future energy infrastructure
along the Spine Road
• The JDA should begin pursuing funding opportunities that support the
strategies in this Framework.
• The strategies identified in this Framework should be incorporated into the
developer selection process.
The City, County, and ERAB have worked with the Project Team to develop a two-
part TCAAP Energy Integration Resiliency Framework that outlines the
appropriate planning guidelines and policies with careful consideration of
local resources, stakeholder interests, project goals, and the best available
technologies for implementation over the next 50 years. Phase one of the study
was the development of the Policy White Paper which was accepted by the JDA and
the Arden Hills City Council in November 2014. The White Paper helps guide
policy and provides a unifying vision for the site's energy future and
identifies a number of opportunities for energy efficiency and efficient energy
supply options.
Phase two of the study focused on the development of this document, the Energy
Integration Resiliency Framework (Framework) which provides more details about
how the County, the City, and the JDA can technically achieve the vision and
recommendations put forth in the White Paper. The Framework considers the TCAAP
Redevelopment Plan, which outlines land use, infrastructure planning, and the
site development timeline. The expectation is for TCAAP to be redeveloped as a
mixed-use community with residential, commercial, and retail space. The
Framework evaluates the energy supply alternatives and demand-side management
strategies that were the most immediately implementable concepts from the White
Paper. The Framework outlines the energy supply technologies that can be built
during the early phases of site development and would be financially
beneficial, financeable, practical, and achievable. The Framework also provides
a detailed analysis of the optimal initial energy efficiency strategies,
including site and building planning, demand-side management, advanced
technology, and building design. Energy supply and energy efficiency solutions
at TCAAP will also be influenced by collaboration between partners, including
the MNARNG and Xcel Energy. These partnership opportunities are immediate and
implementable to meet the loads of the buildings that are currently in the
area, as well as the future buildings expected to be built within TCAAP and
nearby.
During development of the White Paper, the ERAB outlined their vision and
guiding principles for TCAAP energy development.
Vision Statement
TCAAP will be a vibrant development that leverages long-term energy
conservation and resilience to attract investment and partnership, and achieves
sustainable benefits for Arden Hills and the surrounding community.
Guiding Principles
• Establish TCAAP as a national model for development of integrated energy
systems.
• Develop a resilient community for energy and other utilities.
• Implement infrastructure solutions that are flexible and scalable over the
next 50 years.
• Deliver a model of efficient energy and water usage that minimizes TCAAP’s
impact on the environment.
• Create an economically competitive and attractive environment for developers
and businesses.
Partnership Opportunities (Outlined in Section 2)
The Project Team has begun to assess several potential partnerships, including
infrastructure and operations opportunities with the local utility provider,
Xcel Energy, and MNARNG. The MNARNG owns and operates the Arden Hills Army
Training Site (AHATS) adjacent to the TCAAP site. The MNARNG has developed a
master plan for the buildings on its site that includes the goals of net-zero
energy, water, and waste, and is currently working on implementation plans to
achieve these goals. The MNARNG has expressed a strong interest in
collaborating with the County and JDA on the development of energy solutions
for the area.
Xcel Energy is committed to reaching energy efficiency and renewable energy
goals, as well as the potential for innovative demonstration projects that
showcase energy efficiency and resilient energy. Xcel Energy leadership has
expressed a commitment to partnership with the County in the implementation of
the energy plan for TCAAP, and the County should continue to pursue
opportunities that can benefit both parties and achieve the energy vision for
TCAAP.
 
Partnerships with Xcel Energy and MNARNG could create unique and exciting
opportunities to optimize energy supply and energy efficiency at TCAAP.
 
Additionally, there are two areas for additional partnership. The Ramsey County
Public Works (RCPW) facility on County Highway 96 is an existing facility
adjacent to AHATS and TCAAP. In the Primer Tracer area on the north edge of
TCAAP and AHATS, the Department of Public Safety is contemplating the
installation of an emergency operations facility. Both of these facilities
should be considered when planning energy solutions for the area. Through
partnership discussions, a number of immediate and implementable partnership
opportunities were identified to meet the loads of the buildings that are
currently in the area, as well as the initial buildings expected to be built at
TCAAP.
Energy Source Recommendations (Outlined in Section 3)
After evaluating a range of possible energy sources and considering the TCAAP
goals, timeline, and resources, the Project Team recommends the development of
solar PV, CHP, low-temperature district energy system, and the foundational
components of a future microgrid. Beyond meeting the energy needs of customers
and the goals of stakeholders, these recommendations are customized to the
distinctive features of TCAAP.
When considering the recommended technologies, it is important to consider the
potential CO2 reductions that accompany these strategies. In total, over 8510
tons of CO2/year can be avoided, which is the equivalent of removing 1625 cars
from the road each year. The environmental benefits of reduced greenhouse gas
emissions will be further increased through integration with the other energy
supply alternatives recommended and implementation of demand-side management
strategies, ultimately leading to more sustainable redevelopment of TCAAP and
the long-term potential of reaching carbon-neutrality for the site in the
future.
Solar PV
The utilization of solar technology can enable the generation and utilization
of renewable energy at TCAAP.
Solar PV at Prime Tracer
Based on generally accepted solar generation estimates, a large-scale solar
installation on 40-acre of the Prime Tracer site could generate approximately 8
megawatts of electricity (MWe) in peak conditions. Conservatively, this could
account for approximately 70% of the peak electric load in the area.
Implementing a solar PV array in the Primer Tracer area will result in a
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by approximately 7,524 tons of CO2 per
year.
 
A solar PV array at the Primer Tracer site could meet the electricity needs of
TCAAP and AHATS when operating at peak conditions.
 
Solar PV at AHATS
A 2 MWe solar PV installation at the capped soil area west of the existing
AHATS Field Maintenance Shop would primarily meet a portion of the electric
needs of the AHATS site, but could provide additional renewable electric energy
to TCAAP during the non-peak energy usage times at AHATS.
Combined Heat and Power
The vision for the TCAAP site is for the Thumb, Town Center, and Flex areas to
be served electrically and thermally by a CHP energy system located at or near
TCAAP. This localized energy source would enable achievement of many of the
guiding principles established by the ERAB, potentially reducing greenhouse gas
emission reductions by 20%.
Depending upon the type of business that develops in the Thumb, a CHP plant
located on that property could efficiently serve the electric and thermal
energy needs of that business, as well as the thermal needs of buildings in the
Town. A CHP plant located close to AHATS and the existing facility at Ramsey
County Public Works could be used to meet the electric needs of MNARNG, while
simultaneously meeting the thermal needs of MNARNG and RCPW buildings. As TCAAP
development progresses, these two CHP systems could be integrated to serve the
majority of the thermal energy needs of the commercial portion of TCAAP.
 
Implementing a CHP system at the Thumb could reduce greenhouse gas emissions by
as much as 20%, reduce energy costs, increase energy efficiency, and establish
the foundation of a future microgrid.
 
Microgrid - There is an opportunity to implement and demonstrate "next
generation" electricity grid technologies that will help achieve the TCAAP
energy vision, including development of a microgrid connected to a CHP plant.
It will be important for Xcel Energy, the MNARNG, and the JDA to develop a plan
to expand the scope of the CHP plant and develop a microgrid for the broader
area as TCAAP development proceeds.
Low-Temperature District Energy System
The residential neighborhoods planned for the TCAAP site present a unique and
highly visible opportunity to leverage low-grade energy from the treated
groundwater as an energy supply for the neighborhoods, distributed via a low-
temperature district energy system. This energy would be sufficient to meet the
heating and cooling needs of the Hill and Creek residential neighborhoods of
TCAAP, with approximately 3 MMBtu/hour of excess capacity available for
additional TCAAP buildings.
For the proposed system to be successfully implemented, it would need to be
constructed as the first homes are being built, so that service can be provided
from the outset of development. To optimize the economic benefits of the
system, every home in the selected neighborhoods should be constructed with a
heat pump HVAC system and be connected to the proposed system. This would
provide the most financeable, cost-effective implementation plan, and also
maximize energy efficiency for TCAAP.
 
The available energy from the treated groundwater can serve all of the TCAAP
homes with a lower-cost energy source that reduces GHG emissions by ~30%.
 
One important advantage of a low-temperature district energy system is the
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Comparing emission rates between
traditional heating ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems and the
proposed low-temperature district energy system in the Hill and Creek
neighborhoods shows carbon dioxide emissions are could be reduced by almost 30%
or 310 tons CO2/year.
Implementing a low-temperature district energy system in the residential
neighborhoods of TCAAP can deliver several benefits to the site and
stakeholders, including the following:
   •   An energy system that is more energy efficient than traditional heating
and cooling systems.
   •   Reduced fossil fuel usage and greenhouse gas emissions.
   •   Competitive, stable costs of energy for homeowners.
   •   Xcel Energy could avoid installing gas pipe in the neighborhoods
   •   Installation of an infrastructure network in the neighborhoods will
allow for easier integration of future energy sources or technology
advancements as they become available.
   •   Implementation of this system would establish the TCAAP approach to
sustainable neighborhoods as a national model for energy efficiency and
innovative site development.
Additional Energy Technology Opportunities
While not recommended for any of the initial options in this Framework, there
are two additional technologies that should be considered for future TCAAP
energy system integration:
Thermal Energy Storage - On the AHATS site, there is an existing one million
gallon water storage tank and related water distribution piping. This tank
could be used as a thermal energy storage tank to store water for the heating
and cooling needs of the area. This would work like a battery, which would fill
up during non-peak energy hours and be discharged during peak energy usage
times to balance out the energy usage profile for the area.
Solar Thermal - The MNARNG utilizes solar-thermal technology on its buildings
and is investigating further integration of it as their site is built out. This
technology should be considered for individual sites or as part of a larger
energy plan for TCAAP development.
Energy Efficiency Strategies through Demand-Side Management (Outlined in
Section 4)
To promote energy efficiency at TCAAP, the Project Team recommends a combined
approach through flexible building design assistance, readily available
technical resources, planning best practices, and development RFP criteria that
will attract and streamline energy efficient development. High- performance
buildings with a lower energy profile will provide an economically attractive
environment where building owners save money through increased efficiency and
lower energy bills. The implementation of improved building energy efficiency
will be as important as the energy sources to achieving the community's low-
carbon, resiliency goals. Considering demand-side management alongside
development increases the opportunities for demonstration projects and
resident, tenant, and commercial participation. For these efforts, Xcel Energy
and the Center for Sustainable Building Research at the University of Minnesota
will be valuable partners.
Throughout the development of TCAAP, the recommended demand-side initiatives
will depend strongly on engaging developers, who can help implement the TCAAP
energy vision. These energy efficiency recommendations make use of the truly
unique opportunities at TCAAP, which include:
   •   A greenfield development to minimize the cost of initial installation of
energy efficient systems.
   •   The advantage of large scale deployment to optimize economies of scale.
   •   Focus on replicable designs and proven technologies to simplify
developer implementation.
   •   Emphasis on building performance based standards, instead of only design
conditions.
   •   Important strategic partnerships with Xcel Energy and the Center for
Sustainable Building Research at the University of Minnesota.
High-Efficiency Commercial Buildings
As development moves forward it is recommended that the County, the JDA, and
development consultants utilize building standards, technical resources,
planning tactics, and proposal criteria to attract and streamline energy
efficient development.
Utilize SB 2030
Minnesota's Sustainable Buildings 2030 (SB 2030) is a performance based
building energy standard developed to incrementally move new commercial
building construction to net-zero energy by 2030. On average, SB 2030 will
require commercial buildings to be 35% to 45% more efficient than the new
building code (IECC 2012). As nearly 75% of the energy loads for TCAAP are
estimated to be in the retail, commercial, and flex areas of the development,
energy conservation measures for these areas will be paramount for successful
achievement of the Energy Vision. The key way to incentivize use of SB 2030 is
to give preference during the RFP review process to proposals that plan to
implement these standards.
 
On average, SB 2030 will require commercial buildings to be 35% to 45% more
efficient than the new building code (IECC 2012).
 
Sub-metering
Commercial and multi-family building sub-metering is an important consideration
because the additional design cost is relatively low when considered up front,
but has the potential to maintain lower energy use since tenants directly see
and pay for their energy use.
Sub-metering has been shown to save up to 21% in leased building spaces.1 The
material, software, and labor cost for each sub-meter ranges from $5,000 to
$7,500. Several metering companies provide sub-metering services by owning,
operating, and maintaining the meters. Monthly fees are based on the type of
service needed and the quantity of sub-meters served, but costs per sub-meter
range from $150 to $400.
1 "Tenant Occupants of Green Office Buildings: Driving the Market for Improving
Existing Building Stock" McGraw-Hill Construction and CBRE. September, 2011.
www.cbre.com/EN/aboutus/MediaCentre/2011/Pages/10062011.aspx
Strategic Building Siting and Co-Location
The County and JDA could facilitate building co-location through the platting
and RFP process. Building energy use types can be identified as potential
candidates, and referred to energy design experts to define the specific energy
benefits that could be achieved through co-location. Buildings with processes
that produce hot water or heat could sell their excess to adjacent buildings
that have use for it at different times of day. District energy infrastructure
could enhance this load diversity and energy sharing. Businesses would be
interested in this opportunity because it would improve the efficiency of their
consumption, reduce upfront capital equipment and maintenance costs, and
increase comfort.2
2 The Primary Energy Factor (PEF) difference between district heating systems
and Gas-fired heating (0.8/1.3=0.61) http://www.euroheat.org/Files/Filer/
documents/Publications/District%20Heating%20in%20buildings_final.pdf
Low-Load Residential Development
Residential developments at TCAAP could feature homes that do not require
natural gas, by utilizing electric appliances and serving minimal heating and
cooling demands through ground-source heat pump technology. A low-load home
would not require the larger heating and cooling capacity of traditional
systems, but instead could meet residents' comfort needs with smaller capacity
systems. The key technologies and strategies include high levels of building
insulation and passive solar design, a tight building shell, and high
efficiency lighting and appliances. These homes do not require significant
insulation like a passive house, but are 40% to 50% more efficient than what is
required by the new energy code (IECC 2012).
 
Homes built at TCAAP could be 40% to 50% more efficient than what is required
by the new energy code.
 
Incorporation of high-performance technologies that have little to no impact on
the up-front costs, such as efficient appliances and low-flow plumbing, will
help minimize hot water use and help maximize home efficiency.
Building Orientation and Passive Solar
The process for solar-oriented development should be described in residential
and commercial building RFPs and should be integrated as evaluation criteria
for development proposals. It should be evaluated based on lowest total energy
load of the homes or buildings to be sited under one proposal and should
consider street orientation, building orientation, and passive solar building
envelope design elements.
The thermal loads of homes and commercial buildings will be impacted by the
building envelope, street orientation, lot and building orientation, and
building massing. The likely locations where street orientation could vary
significantly to accommodate energy implications would be the Creek, the Hill,
and the Transition neighborhood on the periphery of the Town Center.
 
By pairing solar heat gains and window design strategies, heating energy
savings can be up to 30%
 
By considering these variables prior to the subdivision process, planners and
developers have the opportunity to produce efficient results with little or no-
cost impacts.
High-Efficiency Streetlights
The City of Arden Hills has included a site-wide requirement for all
streetlights to be "high-efficiency lighting, such as LED lamps." This
requirement will trigger the inclusion of high efficiency lights in the
development process. Current LED technology saves approximately 50% to 70% of
lighting energy use. Another significant cost savings occurs by additionally
reducing maintenance costs, given the longer life of the bulbs.
Community Participation and Education
Community participation and education have been consistently mentioned as
important factors for TCAAP, both to engage the wider Arden Hills community and
to leverage the energy savings potential from facilitating ongoing awareness of
energy use by site tenants and residents. Many details of community engagement
will need to be planned once the site sees its first residents and tenants.
However, certain engagement elements can be planned for or implemented during
the early development stage, including:
   •   A TCAAP or Arden Hills-wide website that tracks energy goals and
performance of buildings at the site, including energy and carbon savings. The
website could promote major metrics and milestones, and issue periodic
challenges (e.g. the "lowest user" challenge).
   •   Community-wide open house or showcase events of leading edge
technologies on the site, especially for housing, that will attract and excite
potential residents.
   •   Commissioning of design or signage elements in public spaces that
connect users to the site's energy resiliency goals and their contribution and
participation in those goals. A targeted marketing campaign around community
solar development, as an early symbol of community- driven, low carbon energy
use at the site.
Demonstration Opportunities
Advanced Distribution Grid
TCAAP's greenfield status, combined with the site's forward looking energy
vision, make it an ideal opportunity to pilot and demonstrate advanced
technologies in the electric distribution grid. Many of the opportunities
outlined in this report, such as high solar PV penetration, advanced commercial
building metering, or responsive electric loads, are all facilitated by a
distribution system with increased communications and control functions.
Implementing an advanced distribution grid can save customers money and reduce
the environmental impact of their energy use.
 
By laying the groundwork for an advanced distribution system at TCAAP during
the planning phase, residents and businesses would have access to cutting edge
opportunities such as advanced rate design or real-time load response.
 
Innovative Energy Technologies
In addition to pilot opportunities at the grid level, TCAAP is ideal for
demonstrating innovative energy technologies at scale. The Project Team
recommends that the JDA and County seek and attract partnerships to demonstrate
proven technologies and strategies.
While the technologies may be proven, TCAAP offers scalable and living
demonstration opportunities, where an apartment, house, or street of homes
could serve as a living lab. Additionally, as a cold climate site that can
attract multiple partners, there is great opportunity to demonstrate the
synergies that can exist between multiple innovative technologies and design
strategies. This might include piloting new in-road luminescent street or
pedestrian path lighting products in conjunction with high efficiency overhead
LED street lighting, electric vehicle storage and integration, or homes that
have on-site electric storage and remote controlled appliances/electronics that
communicate with each other.
Conclusion
The ERAB has adopted a very forward-thinking vision for the TCAAP site. This
will be achievable through strategic partnerships with Xcel Energy, the MNARNG,
the University of Minnesota Center for Sustainable Building Research,
environmentally conscious citizens, and developers who see the economic and
environmental value of the TCAAP energy vision. Through these partnerships,
TCAAP will be uniquely poised to be the national model for the development of
integrated energy systems.
The first steps toward achieving the energy vision include implementing energy
supply options that focus on efficiency, reliability, scalability, and
sustainability, such as the low-temperature district energy system in the
residential neighborhoods and the community solar garden at the Primer Tracer
site. These specific opportunities have been shown to be financially beneficial
and financeable.
Developing a CHP that meets the needs of current buildings in the area and is
expandable in the future provides a platform for establishing a resilient TCAAP
microgrid as TCAAP development progresses.
Implementing a demand-side management strategy that focuses on building
performance through the development RFP process will build a resilient
community for energy use. Focusing on improving performance in the buildings to
reduce the energy needs of the buildings will provide an economically
attractive environment as building owners are able to take advantage of the
financial savings realized by the increased efficiency, compared to traditional
energy expenditures.
Schedule and Next Steps (Outlined in Section 6)
The development schedule that is currently proposed is scheduled to begin in
2016 with the construction of the interchanges of County Hwy 96 and County Road
H with the Spine Road. The Spine Road construction is also expected to begin in
2016. Currently, site development is projected to begin with the residential
and retail areas in the northern region of TCAAP in late 2016 or early 2017.
Development is expected to progress southward from the Town and Creek
neighborhoods as the market allows. The Thumb area is being actively marketed
by the JDA at this time, and could be developed as soon as the right proposal
is received from the development community. The current development plan is
included in the appendix as Exhibit III.
Given this development timeline, the JDA will need to begin implementation on
each of the individual opportunities presented in this Framework, including
immediate focus on the following:
   •   partnerships
   •   solar PV
   •   combined heat and power
   •   low-temperature district energy system
   •   demand-side management
   •   infrastructure planning
   •   funding pursuits
   •   RFP development
   •   education workshops
The TCAAP site is positioned to be a national model for site redevelopment.
With planning and leadership, this area can be developed to meet the bold
energy vision of the ERAB to become a vibrant development that leverages long-
term energy conservation and resilience to attract investment and partnership,
and achieves sustainable benefits for Arden Hills and the surrounding
community.
Energy Integration Resiliency Framework
1.   Introduction
The Twin Cities Army Ammunitions Plant (TCAAP) site offers an incredible
opportunity for Ramsey County, Arden Hills, and the surrounding community to
build a forward-looking community that optimizes the energy and environmental
opportunities of the next generation. Innovative energy supply systems can be
developed for reliability and resiliency, increased use of local renewable
energy systems can reduce the environmental impact of redevelopment, and energy
efficient buildings can provide low-cost energy for residents and tenants. The
TCAAP site is positioned to be a national model for site redevelopment. With
planning and leadership, this area can be developed to utilize economically
competitive, low-carbon energy sources, follow exceptional energy and
environmental standards, and engage future residents as stewards of the energy
vision.
Beyond being a greenfield, TCAAP has a number of characteristics that make it
distinctive. One of the unique opportunities TCAAP redevelopment offers is the
potential to partner with the local utility provider, Xcel Energy, and the
MNARNG on energy supply infrastructure and operations. The MNARNG owns and
operates the AHATS adjacent to the TCAAP site. The MNARNG has developed a
master plan for the buildings on its site that includes the goal of net-zero
energy, water, and waste, and are currently working on implementation plans to
achieve this goal. The partnership between the MNARNG, the City, and County
creates dynamic and beneficial opportunities for all entities.
Xcel Energy provides electricity and natural gas to the area in and around
Arden Hills. Xcel Energy views the TCAAP redevelopment as an opportunity to
partner with local government and the community to develop demonstration
projects that showcase energy efficiency and resilient energy projects.
To facilitate TCAAP redevelopment, the County and the City have engaged in a
partnership through the formation of a Joint Development Authority (JDA). For
the purposes of energy planning, they have also established the Energy
Resiliency Advisory Board (ERAB) and appointed community stakeholders to help
define the TCAAP energy vision. The ERAB has worked with energy experts on the
Project Team to develop a two part TCAAP Energy Integration Resiliency
Framework that outlines the appropriate planning guidelines and policies with
careful consideration of local resources, stakeholder interests, project goals,
and the best available technologies for implementation over the next 50 years.
Phase one of the study was the development of the Policy White Paper which was
accepted by the JDA and the Arden Hills City Council in November, 2014. The
White Paper provides a unifying vision for the site's energy future and
identifies the most beneficial opportunities for energy efficiency and
efficient energy supply options. Phase two of the study is to develop this
document, the Energy Integration Resiliency Framework (Framework,) which
provides more details about how the County, the City, and
the JDA can technically achieve the vision and recommendations put forth in the
White Paper. The Framework focuses on determining which energy supply
technologies can be built during the early phases of site development and would
be financially beneficial, financeable, practical, and achievable. The
Framework also provides more detailed analysis of the optimal initial energy
efficiency strategies, including demand-side management, advanced technology,
and building design. Each of these opportunities is considered with the goals,
benefits, and risks for the County, City, JDA, ERAB, the MNARNG, and Xcel
Energy in mind.
Through the development of the White Paper, the ERAB outlined their vision and
guiding principles for TCAAP energy development.
 
Vision Statement
TCAAP will be a vibrant development that leverages long-term energy conservation
and resilience to attract investment and partnership, and achieves sustainable
benefits for Arden Hills and the surrounding community.
Guiding Principles
• Establish TCAAP as a national model for development of integrated energy
systems
• Develop a resilient community for energy and other utilities
• Implement infrastructure solutions that are flexible and scalable over the
next 50 years
• Deliver a model of efficient energy and water usage that minimizes TCAAP’s
impact on the environment
• Create an economically competitive and attractive environment for developers
and businesses
 
2.   Partnership Opportunities
2.1.   Background
The TCAAP EIRF Project Team met with members of the Minnesota Army National
Guard staff to discuss the potential for working together to meet the energy
needs and goals of both sites. In those meetings, it was found that the goals
of the MNARNG are very similar to the energy vision established by the ERAB.
Together, the MNARNG and the Project Team identified several energy-supply
opportunities that should be pursued, including solar photovoltaic (PV),
combined heat and power (CHP) generation, energy capture from treated
groundwater, and thermal energy storage. In addition, the parties identified
several opportunities for collaboration on energy efficiency improvements and
demand-side management.
The Project Team has also engaged in discussions between the County, the
MNARNG, and Xcel Energy to gage the utility's interest in each of these
opportunities. Xcel Energy has expressed interest or support of each option,
with further details provided in the following sections.
The remainder of Section 2 provides further details on each of the partnership
opportunities identified in the conceptual map provided in Exhibit I.
2.2.   Energy Loads
Following the development of the White Paper, the Project Team refined the
estimated loads for the TCAAP site to reflect the changes to the TCAAP
Redevelopment Plan. The Project Team also collaborated with the MNARNG to
understand the energy needs of current and future buildings on the AHATS site.
In addition to the AHATS and TCAAP sites, the Project Team identified one
existing campus and one possible future campus that could be connected to the
proposed system. The RCPW facility on County Highway 96 is an existing facility
adjacent to AHATS and TCAAP that could be integrated with the initial system.
In the Primer Tracer area on the north edge of TCAAP and AHATS, the Department
of Public Safety facility is contemplating the installation of an emergency
operations facility that, if built, could be a strong candidate for connecting
to the proposed system.
The Project Team also worked with Xcel Energy to estimate energy loads that
were in line with energy usage in Minnesota. The estimated loads for all
prospective customer areas are provided in Table 1.
Table 1: Total estimated energy loads
 
Estimated Energy Loads
                Electric Thermal          Cooling
TCAAP           8.01 MW  38.91 MMBtu/hour 6171 tons
AHATS           3.4 MW   7.3 MMBtu/hour   500 tons
DPS EOC         0.07 MW  0.5 MMBtu/hour   30 tons
RCPW            0.40 MW  4.1 MMBtu/hour   240 tons
Estimated Total 11.9 MW  50.8 MMBtu/hour  1,387 tons
 
Note:
1 Loads are estimated based upon the current projection of land use.
2.3.   AHATS Considerations
Through initial discussions with the MNARNG, the following considerations were
identified as being important components of energy plan development for the
MNARNG:
   •   The MNARNG has net-zero goals for energy, water, and waste.
   •   The MNARNG intends to develop an energy resiliency plan for periods of
grid outage in order to meet mission requirements, including the ability to be
disconnected from the larger grid.
   •   The MNARNG will need to receive benefit for any opportunity that is
developed on its property.
   •   The development must not be intrusive or obstruct the training at AHATS.
   •   Funding is limited for the MNARNG. Third-party financing is preferred.
   •   Third-party operations and maintenance of the installed systems is
preferred.
These fundamental goals will continue to drive much of the partnership
discussions with the MNARNG and have been included in the planning for the
options provided in this Framework.
2.4.   Xcel Energy Considerations
TCAAP provides an opportunity for Xcel Energy to pilot advanced energy
solutions that will help them meet and exceed their Minnesota energy efficiency
and renewable energy goals. Through discussions with Xcel Energy, the Project
Team has identified the following considerations that will be important through
the course of development:
   •   Consideration should be given to the potential for an Xcel Energy-owned
community solar garden, which could expedite development, minimize potential
risks, and visibly demonstrate partnership linkages at the TCAAP site.
   •   Xcel Energy would be an important support partner in any innovative
energy demonstration projects at the site, and for investments at TCAAP that
would help the utility further its statewide efficiency or renewable energy
goals.
   •   As a regulated utility, Xcel Energy's investments into the TCAAP site
are more likely to be supported if the ERAB, JDA, and other local partners
would advocate for these investments and partnerships with the Public Utilities
Commission.
Xcel Energy leadership has expressed a commitment to partnering with the County
and the JDA in the implementation of the TCAAP energy plan, and the County
should continue to pursue opportunities that can benefit both parties and
achieve the energy vision for TCAAP.
2.5.   Near-Term Partnership Opportunities
Through partnership discussions, a number of immediate and implementable
partnership opportunities were identified to meet the loads of the buildings
that are currently in the area, as well as the initial buildings expected to be
built at TCAAP. The related technologies are introduced in this section and
further explored later within the Framework.
2.5.1.   Solar PV
2.5.1.1.   Primer Tracer
The Primer Tracer area neighboring the AHATS and TCAAP sites is currently an
area with soil contamination that requires remediation to be suitable for
development. The Army Corps of Engineers has shown interest in having this site
cleaned up and put to productive use, and it does present a good opportunity
for the construction of a solar PV site because of the limited excavation,
maintenance, and human interaction that is necessary. The site is approximately
60 acres in size, with 20 acres being considered for the Department of Public
Safety State Emergency Operations Center. This would leave 40 acres for a
large-scale solar installation. Based on generally accepted solar generation
estimates, this 40-acre site could generate approximately 8 megawatts of
electricity (MWe) in peak conditions, depending on the technology and system
installed. Conservatively, this could account for approximately 70% of the peak
electric load for the area.
2.5.1.2.   AHATS Solar PV
The 2009 Master Plan for AHATS produced by Jacobs Engineering identifies a two
MWe solar PV installation at the capped soil area west of the existing Field
Maintenance Shop. This installation would primarily meet a portion of the
electric needs of the AHATS site, but could provide renewable electric energy
to TCAAP during the non-peak energy usage times at AHATS.
2.5.2.   Combined Heat and Power
Combined heat and power (CHP) could be used to meet the electric needs of TCAAP
and adjacent properties, while simultaneously capturing the thermal energy
created from electric generation to meet the thermal needs of the area. This
would provide a local energy generation source to the area that could be
disconnected from the grid in the event of a grid disruption. As the existing
electric and thermal energy loads are based at the AHATS and RCPW buildings, it
would be optimal to locate the initial CHP plant as close to those buildings as
possible, with the opportunity of expanding it to meet future TCAAP energy
needs. This initial proposed location provides two advantages. First, having
the plant located near the initial load will reduce the up-front capital cost
for the installation of the distribution network providing thermal energy.
Second, this location is near the existing and proposed AHATS buildings,
meaning that training operations (located in the central and northern areas of
AHATS) would not be negatively impacted. Additional CHP facilities could be
located in the Thumb area of TCAAP, or near other concentrated loads at TCAAP
as development proceeds. The CHP system should be designed to allow for
expansion to serve the thermal needs of the TCAAP site as it is developed, to
align with the vision of TCAAP as a comprehensive energy program that optimizes
efficiencies, minimizes costs, and reduces greenhouse gas emissions. The
initial system should also be designed for future fuel flexibility, such as
biogas integration, and the ability to meet growing thermal needs of the area.
2.5.3.   Groundwater Treatment Station
Approximately two million gallons per day (2 MGD) are pumped to AHATS from the
groundwater treatment station located on TCAAP. This pumping is required to
continue until the chemical remediation goals are reached for the water, which
is estimated to be at least another 25-30 years. This groundwater pumping can
be useful to meet the energy goals of both AHATS and TCAAP through the
implementation of a low-temperature district energy system.
In addition, kinetic energy could be captured from the pumped water at the
point of discharge at the gravel pit on the AHATS site. The water is being
pumped uphill to a point that provides energy which potentially could be used
for micro-hydroelectric generation. This would provide a small amount of
electric generation, but could be used to offset the power necessary to pump
the groundwater.
The temperature of the water in this loop is close to 52° F throughout the
year. Assuming a thermal energy transfer of 11° F, the energy in the water per
hour is estimated to be approximately 10 MMBtu/hour. This energy would be
enough to meet the heating and cooling needs of the residential neighborhoods
of TCAAP, with approximately 3 MMBtu/hour of excess capacity available for
AHATS or additional TCAAP buildings. When groundwater remediation is completed,
the district energy infrastructure could be utilized to distribute energy from
other sources such as low-grade waste heat recovery or geothermal wells.
2.6.   Future Potential Opportunities
2.6.1.   Thermal Energy Storage
On the AHATS site, there is an existing one million gallon water storage tank,
and related water distribution piping, that was originally used during
ammunitions manufacturing. The tank was built with adequate ground cover to
prevent water from freezing in the winter. This tank could be used as a thermal
energy storage tank to store water for the heating and cooling needs of the
area. This would work like a battery, which would fill up during non-peak
energy hours and be discharged during peak energy usage times to balance out
the energy usage profile for the area. The size, shape, and structural
condition of the tank need to be studied to judge the feasibility of this
opportunity. It is likely that the tank would require the installation of a
liner or bladder to be able to hold water. While utilization of this tank is
not included in any of the immediate options detailed in this Framework, it is
a valuable asset that should be contemplated as each energy option is further
developed, and as TCAAP redevelopment progresses.
2.6.2.   Solar Thermal
Solar thermal systems are most commonly installed on residential and small
commercial buildings, although larger shared systems are gaining popularity.
Solar thermal systems are comprised of solar collectors and a fluid moving
between the collectors and a hot water reservoir. Typically the heated fluid is
pumped from the tank to a heat exchanger where heat is extracted into the air
to heat space or domestic hot water. Solar thermal systems are highly efficient
in their ability to capture and transfer solar energy.
When included as part of a broader energy plan, benefits of a solar-thermal
system can be enhanced. For example, solar thermal can be paired with thermal
storage to capture excess energy when it is available and dispatch to users
during higher demand periods. The MNARNG utilizes solar thermal technology on
its buildings and is investigating further integration of it as their site is
built out. Solar thermal is not a priority recommendation for initial
implementation, but this technology should be considered for individual sites
or as part of a larger energy plan as TCAAP development progresses.
3.   Energy Source Implementation
As outlined in the partnership section, there are immense opportunities for
technology development at TCAAP. The success of their implementation hinges on
the effectiveness of partnerships and incorporating the right technology
solution for the right project within the development. The technologies
recommended in the following section were selected to fit the partner
interests, development timeline, and both environmental and economic goals.
This includes the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Through the
implementation of the energy supply opportunities presented in this section,
the TCAAP development will be poised to reduce the amount of CO2 emitted into
the atmosphere as the equivalent amount of CO2 produced by 1625 automobiles3.
3 http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/energy-resources/calculator.html#results
Table 2: Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Summary
 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Summary
                        Annual CO2 Reductions % Reduction from traditional
                                               scenarios
Solar PV                 7,524 (tons CO2/yr)   100%
CHP                      676 (tons CO2/yr)     19%
Low Temp District Energy 310 (tons CO2/yr)     29%
Totals                   8,510 (tons CO2/yr)   70%
 
The environmental benefits shown in Table 2 will be further increased through
implementation of demand-side management strategies outlined in section 4, and
will lead to more sustainable redevelopment of TCAAP. This combination of
responsible energy supply opportunities, sustainable building practices,
effective demand side management, continuous commissioning of building systems,
and improving occupant awareness set the stage for the possibility of the
entire development being carbon-neutral in the future.
3.1.   Solar PV
As noted in the White Paper, the utilization of solar PV technology can enable
the generation and utilization of renewable energy at TCAAP. While individual
property owners could choose to install roof-mounted or ground-mounted solar PV
systems for some of their site needs, another possibility would be to install a
large-scale community solar array adjacent to the TCAAP site.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1942.png]
3.1.1.   Introduction
The most prime opportunity for solar PV is likely within the Primer Tracer area
north east of the existing TCAAP site. The array, as proposed, would reach a
peak of approximately 8MWe of solar PV generation, which would produce
approximately 14,500,000 AC kWh of energy annually. The project could be
financed by Xcel Energy or a third party developer through a combination of
debt and equity, with the land leased from the County or the MNARNG. The
project owner could utilize available tax incentives such as the 30% investment
tax credit and 5-year accelerated depreciation to help offset the cost of the
project and lower the cost of energy from the array. Electric energy sales and
associated revenues could be generated from subscribers' purchases or lease
interests of the solar garden system through Xcel Energy's existing community
solar garden program. Alternatively, Xcel Energy could own, develop, and sell
the energy from the project.
3.1.2.   Implementation Strategy
3.1.2.1.   Existing Project Site
Between 40 and 60 acres of land are available for the preliminary development
of a solar PV array. This plot of land is relatively flat, with minimal
elevation change from north to south or east to west.
Although a detailed siting study was not conducted, the site characteristics
determined by a Google Earth analysis all point to a feasible site with
significant potential. This solar array would be built atop land with existing
structures currently in place. These structures would be demolished and removed
as part of the solar project construction. Current structures, above and below
grade would need to be removed to a depth of approximately five feet.
3.1.2.2.   Conceptual Solar Plant Site Layout
A conceptual layout of an 8 megawatt alternating current (MWAC) capacity solar
PV array was prepared on the proposed parcel of land to assess feasibility of
this installation on a 40 acre site. If all 60 acres are able to be utilized,
the array could be increased to 12 MWAC. The array would consist of eight, 1
MWAC (1.3 megawatts of direct current - MWDC) blocks. Table 3 outlines the
high-level plant characteristics for this potential array.
Table 3: Solar plant characteristics
Characteristic Value
Characteristic         Value
Plant Capacity (AC)    8MW
Plant Capacity (DC)    10.4MW
Block Capacity (AC/DC) 1MWAC/1.3MWDC
Module                 310W poly-crystalline
Inverter               1 - 1000kW Central Inverter/block
Racking System         Fixed-Tilt @ 30°
Pitch                  26.2 ft
Internal Access Roads  Inverter Access Roads: 30 ft
                       All other internal roads: 16 ft
 
A high-level representation of a potential site configuration is shown in
Figure 1. Figure 1 depicts the manner in which an 8 MWAC capacity plant might
be laid out on these 40 acres, but detailed design will need to confirm this
configuration.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1938.png]
Figure 1: Solar PV plant conceptual site layout
3.1.3.   Economic Analysis
3.1.3.1.   PV System Components
Solar PV power plants are simple in their operation. The main components of a
solar PV plant include PV Modules, racking, inverters, transformers, combiner
boxes, DC cabling and AC cabling. The modules convert the solar irradiance to
DC power. A collection of modules are electrically wired together to form what
is referred to as a "string." Multiple strings are combined together into a
single DC output in a combiner box. All outputs from the combiner boxes in a
block are run to a central skid where they are connected to the inverter. The
inverter converts the DC module power into AC power and feeds the AC output
through a medium-voltage (MV) transformer. This transformer steps-up the
inverter voltage to the solar arrays main collection system voltage. The
inverters and medium-voltage transformers are often co-located on a platform
referred to as the power conversation station, sometimes referred to as a skid.
If a site has a local substation, then all the outputs from the skids feed into
the substation where a generator step-up unit outputs the main interconnection
voltage.
Racking is an integral part of any solar plant as it provides the support for
the modules. In addition to proving a fixed point to which the modules are
attached, racking serves as the means to optimize the angle between module
surfaces and the solar irradiance. This angle has significant impacts on a
solar plant's energy production. There are two main classes of racking systems,
tracking and fixed-tilt, the latter of which was used in this layout.
3.1.3.2.   Capital and Operations and Maintenance Costs
The upfront capital construction costs are incurred during the development and
construction of the plant. These costs include material costs, installation
costs, contractor markup, and project indirect costs. The capital costs are
impacted by relative system size (larger systems have the benefit of economies
of scale), project location, and a collection of market factors. Project
capital costs are commonly presented as a cost per installed watt basis ($/W).
This allows for project costs to be expressed independently of system size and
provides for an easy comparison of costs for systems with difference
characteristics. In addition to the cost of the solar PV array, the existing
Primer Tracer site will need to have the existing infrastructure removed and
the site will need to be redeveloped, before the project can be constructed.
The land acquisition is expected to occur through a public benefit sale from
the U.S. Government if the County acquired the property. If the MNARNG took
possession it would be included in their license and remain in the ownership of
the U.S. Government. The cost of the land acquisition is anticipated to be $0
due to the nature of the site and the proposed usage. It is assumed that there
will be no property taxes levied against the properties as the land owner will
be a government entity. The estimated cost to remove the existing
infrastructure and redevelop the 40 acres selected for the solar PV plant
project is $1,250,000. For this analysis, the cost has been assumed to be
incurred by the project; however other sources of funding may be available.
Operation and maintenance (O&M) costs are incurred on an annual basis and are
the costs associated with keeping the plant in proper working order. Common
tasks associated with annual O&M activities include preventative maintenance,
inspection, and corrective maintenance. O&M costs are often presented as a cost
per installed kilo-Watt ($/kW) to be incurred every year. When presented as a
$/kW cost, it is assumed that this cost will be incurred annually.
Table 4 provides an approximation of capital costs and O&M costs for the
proposed 8MWac system.
Table 4: Proposed solar PV capital, operation, and maintenance costs
 
Solar PV Costs             $/W                    Total
Solar PV Plant Cost        $2.10/WDC; $2.73/WAC   $21,850,000
Site Redevelopment Cost    $0.12/ WDC; $0.13/ WAC $1,250,000
Total Project Capital Cost $2.22/WDC; $2.86/WAC   $23,100,000
                                                 
O&M Cost                   $16/kWAC/year          $128,000/year
 
3.1.4.   Solar Resource Assessment and Energy Production
The annual energy production for the proposed array can be estimated with the
use of the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) Solar Advisor Model
(SAM). SAM uses a collection of input parameters to construct a model of the PV
plant and analyze the energy production characteristics. These input parameters
include: site location and meteorological data, module characteristics,
inverter performance characteristics, solar array dimensions, system losses,
and a collection of financial parameters. Using this information, SAM
constructs a model of the solar arrays and then predicts plant performance over
a typical meteorological year. The basic technical assumptions that were
utilized to estimate the solar resource assessment and annual energy production
from the solar array are provided in Table 5.
Table 5: Solar advisor model solar resource and energy performance assumptions
Modules  Parameters
Modules                                Parameters
Cell material Multi-c-Si               St. Paul, MN Weather Data
Module area 1.9 m²                    Tilt (deg from horizontal) 30
Module capacity 305 DC Watts           Azimuth (deg E of N) 180
Quantity 34,083                        Tracking - Fixed
Total capacity 10.4 DC MW / 8.0 AC MW  Shading - No
Total area 65,473 m²                  Soiling - Yes
                                      DC Losses (%) 3.0
 
Inverters  Annual Results (in Year 1)
Inverters                          Annual Results (in Year 1)
Custom (Inverter Datasheet Model)  Horizontal solar 1,364 kW/m²
Unit capacity 1000 AC kW           Incident solar 1,604 kW/m²
Input voltage 620 DC V             Net to inverter 15,130,000 DC kWh
Quantity 8                         Gross from inverter 14,675,000 AC kWh
Total capacity 8 AC MW             Net to grid 14,456,000 AC kWh
DC to AC Capacity Ratio 1.30       Capacity factor 15.9%
AC losses (%) 1.5                   
 
Figure 2 shows the predicted net AC and DC energy production from the modeled
solar resource. The AC energy levels are indicative of the energy exported to
the grid at the point of interconnect. All system losses, both AC and DC, with
the exception of substation and transmission line losses, have been taken into
account.
Figure 2: Solar advisor model solar energy production results
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1940.png]
3.1.5.   Financial Assumptions and Economics
SAM was used to estimate the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) and estimated
price for the energy from the proposed solar plant project. The project is
assumed to be financed by a developer who would be paid through subscriptions
by consumers where the third party (a tax-paying entity) owns the solar plant
on land leased from the County. Subscriptions with Xcel Energy retail customers
are assumed to be established under the Xcel Energy Solar*Rewards® Community®
solar program. The developer would utilize the federal investment tax credit,
accelerated depreciation, and a combination of debt and equity to fund the
solar project. The key financial assumptions are provided in Table 6. If Xcel
Energy were to own the project, these financial projections would likely need
to be modified.
Table 6: Solar advisor model financial assumptions
 
Project Costs                     Project Debt Parameters
Total installed cost $23,100,000  Debt fraction 57%
Salvage value $809,000            Amount $13,600,000
                                 Rate / Term 25 years, 5%
 
 
Analysis Parameters      Tax and Insurance Rates (% of installed cost)
Project life 25 years    Federal income tax 35%/year
Inflation rate 2.5%      State income tax 7%/year
Real discount rate 8.2%  Sales tax 0%
                        Insurance 0.5%/year
                        Property tax (% of assess. val.) 0%/year
 
 
Financial Targets and Constraints     Incentives
Solution mode Calculate Subscription  Federal ITC 30% (Expires 12-31-16)
Price
Target IRR 10% in Year 25             Depreciation allocations defined. 5 year
                                      MACRS
 
Based upon an assumed IRR of 10% for the project developer and other noted
assumptions, the Project Team estimated a subscription price for the solar
energy of $0.129 cents/kWh (as shown in Table 7). Xcel Energy retail customers
who subscribe to production from the proposed solar garden under individual
subscriptions would receive a bill credit equal to the energy purchased
multiplied by the retail rates.
Table 7: Solar advisor model economic results
 
Solar Economic Results
25-Year Nominal LCOE      13.90 cents/kWh
Solar revenues (year one) $1,865,000
Project 25-year IRR       10%
Subscription price        12.90 cents/kWh1
 
Note:
1. Subscription price does not include additional $0.02/kWh bill credit
provided if RECs are owned by Xcel Energy
3.1.6.   Greenhouse Gas Emission Reductions
Implementing a solar PV array in the Primer Tracer area will result in a
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Electricity offset by the solar output
would be reduced to zero tons of CO2 per year. The estimated greenhouse gas
emission reduction is estimated to be 7,524 tons CO2/year, calculated by
comparing the current Xcel Energy emission rates for the production of
electricity in the Upper Midwest Region (1,041 CO2 lbs/MWh4) as detailed in
Table 8.
4 https://www.xcelenergy.com/staticfiles/xe/Corporate/CRR2013/environment/
emissions-reporting.html
Table 8: Estimated annual carbon dioxide emissions reduction
 
Solar PV Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
Solar Electric Generation             14,456 MWh
Eliminated Electric Utility Emissions 1,041 lbs CO2/MWh
Total CO2 Emissions Savings per Year  7,524 tons CO2/year
 
3.1.7.   Community Solar Garden Program Approach
The modeled subscription rate for solar PV assumes that solar garden developers
would elect to sell the Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) to Xcel Energy, for
subscribers to receive a $0.02/kWh enhanced bill credit. If the developer were
to retain the RECs for this system, the bill credit would decrease by 2 cents/
kWh. The estimated subscription rate is slightly less than the current Xcel
Energy average Residential and General Service bill credits; however that
difference will increase over time if Xcel Energy applicable retail rates
increase and the subscription rate remains fixed. Table 9 shows how this
estimated first year subscription price for the electricity generated by the
solar garden compares to the Xcel Energy bill credit rates for three types of
Xcel Energy customers. It is assumed that the economic benefits of the solar
garden subscription would improve as the electricity rate increases over the
life of the subscription.
Table 9: Solar subscription and Xcel Energy bill credit comparison (REC's
retained by Xcel Energy)
 
Rate Category       Solar Subscription  First Year Bill First Year Savings
                    ($/kWh)             Credit ($/kWh)  (Cost) ($/kWh)
Xcel Energy         $0.1290             $0.1403         $0.0113
Residential
Xcel Energy Small   $0.1290             $0.1378         $0.0088
General Service
Xcel Energy General $0.1290             $0.1146         $(0.0144)
Service
 
For the solar PV project to be developed under the Xcel Energy Solar*Rewards®
Community® solar program, it will be important for the developer to have
several large credit-worthy subscribers secured to allow the project to be
financed at a low cost of debt. This could include the City of Arden Hills,
Ramsey County, the MNARNG, and other credit-worthy businesses in the area. Once
the project has secured a large portion of the revenue stream from project
subscribers, the project can be financed and developed with the potential for
future residents and businesses to join as subscribers in the future. \ process
for developing and preparing the necessary applications for the project will
need to follow the guidelines outlined in the Xcel Energy Solar*Rewards®
Community® solar program5.
5 (2015, 02 23). Retrieved 02 23, 2015, from Xcel Solar Rewards Community:
http://www.xcelenergy.com/Energy_Solutions/Business_Solutions/
Renewable_Solutions/SolarRewards_Community-MN
3.1.8.   Next Steps
In order to capture the 30% Investment Tax Credit associated with community
solar gardens, the proposed system must be in service by December 31, 2016. As
such, implementation of this strategy must commence as soon as possible, and
the following steps should be taken to continue development:
Step 1 - Begin the land redevelopment process and secure funding approval. The
County and the MNARNG, as potential property owners, will play key roles in
this process, as a potential property owner.
Step 2 - Secure a development partner to move the project through necessary
stages of development. This could be either Xcel Energy or another solar
developer, who could be selected by issuing an RFP for prospective developers.
Step 3 - The solar garden developer will need to obtain letters of commitment
from large solar garden subscribers to initiate the necessary business and
financing structure. The County, City, JDA, MNARNG, the school district, and
other partners could work with the selected developer to form an initial
coalition of subscribers for the system.
3.2.   Combined Heat and Power
3.2.1.   Introduction
The vision for TCAAP is that the Thumb, Town Center, and Flex areas could be
served by a CHP energy system located at the TCAAP site or nearby. This
localized energy source would enable achievement of many of the guiding
principles established by the ERAB. The MNARNG has a similar energy vision for
the AHATS site, and the partnership potential for a CHP system is very
attractive. The Project Team recommends that the JDA and County collaborate
with the MNARNG and Xcel Energy to define a preferred initial CHP strategy,
considering the following:
   •   Collaboration between the JDA, the County, Xcel Energy, and the MNARNG
could help identify an operational strategy and location for the initial CHP
that is beneficial for all parties.
   •   Incorporation of a CHP system that meets the energy needs of all three
sites would improve the economic competitiveness of CHP, due to the potential
diversity of usage and load profiles.
   •   Due to regulatory statutes, Xcel Energy has the exclusive authority to
distribute and sell electricity across multiple properties in Arden Hills. If
Xcel Energy is the owner, the CHP system could function as a microgrid system
for the area, providing a local energy source for reliable electric and thermal
energy for TCAAP, RCPW, and the MNARNG in the event of a grid disruption,
meeting the goals of each of the sites.
   •   In the event that Xcel Energy is not the owner of the CHP, the proposed
system may only distribute thermal energy across property lines, unless the
electricity is sold to the Midwest Independent System Operators (MISO), in
which case there would be an additional cost for the use of Xcel's
infrastructure, which may prove to be cost prohibitive depending on the
production cost and market dynamics.
While construction of independent CHP systems on both the TCAAP and AHATS sites
could potentially be feasible, the economics of a connected system would be
much more beneficial to both sites.
However, the current uncertainty regarding the timing and type of TCAAP
development restricts the opportunity to perform a complete evaluation of a CHP
and district energy system for TCAAP at this time. With the unknown development
conditions of TCAAP in mind, the Project Team has evaluated a scenario for CHP
implementation in the Thumb and Town areas of TCAAP based on the assumed energy
loads and envisioning how a CHP system could be implemented in the Thumb.
3.2.2.   Initial Proposed CHP
An initial step toward a more comprehensive microgrid could be a small-scale
CHP system that serves the existing loads of the Thumb and Town areas, as shown
in Figure 3. The initial CHP plant could be located within the corporate campus
area of the Thumb, which would provide the advantage of reducing the up-front
capital cost for the installation of the distribution network providing thermal
energy to the corporate campus and the Town. The CHP plant could be designed to
allow for the integration of multiple fuel sources in the future to further
increase renewable generation and system sustainability. Additionally, the CHP
plant and district heating network, as proposed, could be designed to allow for
expansion to serve additional buildings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1936.png]
Figure 3: Initial potential CHP location and distribution plan north TCAAP
As TCAAP development progresses southward, those additional properties could
also be served from the CHP facility in the Thumb by extending piping to those
buildings in the Spine Road right of way, and expanding the capacity of the
CHP.
In the next stage of CHP development, the design team should carefully analyze
the pros and cons of the CHP application, and work with the JDA, County, and
potential Thumb developers to determine the optimal location and operational
strategy for the initial CHP system. Regardless of the system's initial
configuration and location, the CHP design should allow for expansion to
produce more electricity and thermal energy as energy demand in the area
increases with TCAAP development. Expansion could also enable the development
of a more comprehensive microgrid that would meet the MNARNG's resiliency goals
and the TCAAP energy vision.
3.2.3.   Development Strategy
3.2.3.1.   Load Analysis
Before selecting the appropriate technology and size for a proposed CHP plant,
a careful review of the potential electric and thermal loads must be
considered. The proposed CHP project would be developed to serve the future
electrical load of the Thumb area as well as the combined thermal loads of the
Thumb and the adjacent Town area. A summary of the potential thermal and
electric loads that the initial plant could serve is shown in Table 10.
Table 10: Monthly Projected Energy Usage
 
     Annual Energy Usage Annual Electrical Peak Energy Usage Peak Electrical
                          Usage                               Usage
Town  12,485 MMBtu        2,561,111 kWh     4.06 MMBtu/hr     0.41 MW
Thumb 6,096 MMBtu         4,172,302 kWh     3.33 MMBtu/hr     1.19 MW
 
The monthly aggregated load profiles are presented in Figure 4 and Figure 5.
The Project Team assumed that the load profile for these areas would follow
normal patterns of use for commercial buildings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1934.png]
Figure 4: Monthly site gas usage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1932.png]
Figure 5: Monthly total site electric usage
3.2.3.2.   CHP Technology Selection
Based on a review of the future electric load of the Thumb area and the thermal
loads of the Town and Thumb areas, the CHP plant should have a maximum
generator output no greater than 450 kW. For CHP applications in this size
range, the most efficient and economical technology employed is gas fired
reciprocating engines, with hot water heat recovery. Additionally, due to the
limited heating load available during the summer months, it is generally more
economical to employ a generation technology that has a high simple cycle
efficiency resulting in a production cost lower than the utility's retail
electric rate.
For the proposed initial CHP, the Project Team assumed that a gas- fired
reciprocating engine genset could provide 335 kW of electric power year round
with approximately 1,372 MMBtu/hr of waste heat that would be available
throughout the year. The waste heat would be utilized to offset hot water
production in the existing buildings' boilers during the winter, spring, and
fall. The waste heat from the CHP during the summer months would be exhausted
and the plant would run in simple cycle mode at a production cost lower than
the cost of purchased grid power. In the event that a year-round process
heating load is added in the Thumb, additional thermal energy could be captured
from the CHP and utilized, improving system economics, efficiencies, and
environmental benefits. Figure 6 and Figure 7 provide a representative monthly
dispatch chart showing how the plant would provide power and thermal energy to
the site.
 
In the event that a year round process heating load is added in the Thumb,
additional thermal energy could be captured from the CHP and utilized,
improving system economics, efficiencies, and environmental benefits.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1930.png]
Figure 6: Monthly site thermal energy production by resource
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1928.png]
Figure 7: Monthly site electric energy production by resource
3.2.3.3.   CHP Plant System Components
One new packaged cogeneration unit could meet the energy needs presented above.
Waste heat from the engine cooling water loop and engine exhaust would be
recovered to produce 1,372 MMBtu/hr of hot water at full-load. The hot water
would be delivered to a hot water distribution system to provide heating energy
to the Thumb and Town. The engine cooling water loop would produce 180-185
degree hot water, which would be used to provide the necessary thermal energy
for heating the buildings and heating domestic hot water. A supplementary
radiator located atop the CHP unit would remove heat from the engine cooling
water loop when there is no need for building heating during the summer months.
In addition to the CHP plant, new hot water distribution piping and pumping
would need to be installed to provide hot water supply and return to the
connected buildings from the CHP plant. This distribution piping is assumed to
be direct buried and would be routed as efficiently as possible to each of the
buildings' central mechanical rooms. The district heating building interface,
based on initial site investigations, could be achieved through a direct
connect interface allowing for a low-cost installation at each building. The
distribution configurations shown in Figure 8 are possible layouts for the
initial system, but the actual location of the plant and routing of the pipe
will need to be determined in the next stage of system development.
The full-load electric output of the genset is proposed to be 335kW at 480V.
The genset power is assumed to be electrically interconnected to provide power
to the future facility located at the Thumb, with standby and supplemental
service provided by the electrical grid. The power from the CHP plant would be
delivered to each of the Thumb buildings behind the meter and would offset
retail electric purchases from Xcel Energy at the existing retail rate. For the
economic evaluation, it was assumed the genset would be operated at full-load
with an availability of 95%. A conceptual process diagram of the proposed CHP
plant is provided in Figure 8.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1926.png]
Figure 8: CHP project conceptual process diagram
The thermal needs of the Town are assumed to be met by the CHP system through
the thermal energy distribution system. For the purposes of the economic model,
the Project Team has assumed that Xcel Energy will not own the CHP facility and
the Town will receive electricity from the electric grid. If Xcel Energy were
the owner of the CHP, the initial plant size could be increased to also meet
the electric needs of the Town, as well as the surrounding TCAAP developments.
3.2.4.   Economic Analysis
3.2.4.1.   CHP Plant System Capital and O&M Costs
Estimated costs for the CHP plant were developed based on major equipment
budgetary pricing and a conceptual distribution system layout. The initial CHP
project primarily consists of the CHP plant, the distribution piping connecting
the buildings, and the electric infrastructure required to connect the output
from the engine generator into the Thumb buildings. For the analysis, the
Project Team has assumed that the CHP plant will be located within the Thumb to
minimize the cost of electrical distribution to the corporate campus. A summary
of the costs are provided in Table 11.
Table 11: CHP project initial capital costs
 
CHP Initial Capital Costs
                                    Traditional Scenario CHP Scenario
Heating Plant                        $800,0001            $1,800,000
HW Distribution Piping               $0                   $2,000,000
HW Building Connections              $0                   $120,000
Electric Distribution Infrastructure $0                   $700,000
Total Project Cost                   $800,000             $4,600,000
 
Note:
1.   Includes boiler equipment, mechanical equipment and piping, electrical
connections, controls, civil construction, direct and indirect costs.
The O&M cost difference associated with the proposed CHP project would consist
of a long-term service agreement for the gas fired engine. Service contracts
for small gas engines can be structured on an hourly basis or annual fixed fee
basis. The annual O&M cost assumed for the project is $0.02/kWh which equals
$56,000 per year.
3.2.4.2.   Financial Assumptions and Economics
CHP facilities provide energy savings greater than the traditional scenario of
purchasing power from the local electric utility and generating thermal energy
on-site with gas-fired or oil-fired boilers. The annual life cycle costs of the
traditional scenario were compared to that of the proposed CHP plant to
determine the overall savings provided by the project. At this stage in the
development process, the ultimate owner of the project is yet to be determined
and the capital financing structure and funding source is unknown. For the
purposes of the assessment, the project was assumed to be structured as a
private, non-profit, funded with a cost of capital of 4.7%, financed over 25
years, with the annual debt service paid through energy sales revenues. The
basic economic assumptions for the project are provided in Table 12.
 
CHP facilities provide energy savings over the traditional scenario of
purchasing power from the local electric utility and generating thermal energy
on-site with gasfired or oil-fired boilers.
 
Table 12: CHP project economic assumptions
CHP Economic Assumptions
 Traditional Scenario CHP Scenario
CHP Economic Assumptions
              Traditional Scenario          CHP Scenario
Description    Purchased Grid Power with Gas Gas Engine CHP with District
               Boilers                       Energy
Site           Thumb & Town                  Thumb & Town
Analysis Term  25 years                      25 years
Gas Price      $7.00/MMBtu1                  $5.50/MMBtu2
Electric Price $0.10/kWh                     $0.10/kWh
Escalation     3%                            3%
Project Cost   $800,000                      $4,600,000
O and M Cost3  $0/yr                         $56,000/yr
 
Notes:
1.   Firm commercial gas rate
2.   Interruptible gas rate
3.   Incremental cost difference
The economic assumptions provided above were coupled with the CHP energy
production numbers developed to estimate the annual savings generated by the
CHP project. The annual energy usage, annual utility costs, and economic
performance of the project are provided in Table 13.
Table 13: CHP project economic results
CHP Economic Results
 Traditional Scenario CHP Scenario
CHP Economic Results
                  Traditional Scenario CHP Scenario
Grid Power         4,172,302 kWh        1,364,734 kWh
CHP Power          -                    2,807,568 kWh
Total Power        4,172,302 kWh        4,172,302 kWh
                                       
Boiler Heating     14,865 MMBtu         5,105 MMBtu
CHP Heating        -                    9,760 MMBtu
Total Heating      14,865 MMBtu         14,865 MMBtu
                                       
Electric Costs     $417,000             $136,000
Boiler Gas         $130,000             $35,000
CHP Gas            $ -                  $145,000
CHP O and M1       $ -                  $56,000
Annual Costs       $547,000             $372,000
                                       
CHP Project Cost   $800,000             $4,600,000
                                       
25-Year Cost       $21,520,000          $21,505,000
25-Year Difference $ -                  $15,000
 
Note:
1. Incremental cost difference
3.2.4.3.   Interpretation of the economic analysis
The economics of the CHP system are tied to the energy loads connected to the
system. As shown in Table 13, the annual costs of the initial proposed CHP
operations are significantly reduced from the traditional scenario. The primary
factor contributing to the 25-year cost of the CHP is the capital cost for the
initial construction of the system. If additional energy load was connected to
the initial system, the debt service payments could be spread out across more
energy consumers, and energy rates could be decreased. In order to optimize the
economic return of a CHP system, the remaining capacity of its thermal energy
output (approximately 1 MMBtu/hr) could be utilized. If the thermal demand of
TCAAP development included higher continuous loads (light manufacturing
processes, restaurants, domestic hot water, etc.), the 25-year savings could be
increased by an estimated $900,000.
Additionally, the economic analysis did not take into account any rebates,
grants, or savings for which the project could be eligible. These potential
funding sources could be used to offset the cost of the initial construction,
thus making the initial CHP system more economically attractive. The list of
potential funding sources is provided in Exhibit IV.
3.2.5.   Greenhouse Gas Reduction
One of the advantages of a CHP system is the reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions due to the higher efficiency of the CHP system. Implementation of a
CHP system to meet the energy loads in Section 3.2.2.1 could reduce carbon
dioxide emissions by approximately 20%, as shown in Table 14.
Table 14: Estimated annual carbon dioxide emission reductions
Estimated Annual Carbon Dioxide Emissions Reductions
 Traditional Scenario CHP Scenario
Estimated Annual Carbon Dioxide Emissions Reductions
                                     Traditional Scenario CHP Scenario
Natural Gas Usage                     18,581 MMBtu/yr      32,772 MMBtu/yr
CO2 Emission Rate1                    117 lb/MMBtu         117 lb/MMBtu
CO2  Emissions from Natural Gas Usage 1,087 tons/yr        1,917 tons/yr
                                                          
Electric Usage                        4,172 MWh/yr         1,365 MWh/yr
CO2 Emission Rate1                    1,041 lb/MWh         1,041 lb/MWh
CO2  Emissions from Electricity Usage 2,172 tons/yr        710 tons/yr
                                                          
Total CO2  Emissions                  3,259 tons/yr        2,628 tons/yr
                                                          
Total CO2  Emissions Reduction                            631 tons/yr
 
Note:
1. https://www.xcelenergy.com/staticfiles/xe/Corporate/CRR2013/environment/
emissions-reporting.html
The greenhouse gas emission savings presented in Table 14 are based upon a CHP
operational strategy of meeting the Thumb's electrical needs from a gas-fired
generator. In the event that other renewable energy sources are included in the
CHP solution, the greenhouse gas emission reductions would increase.
3.2.6.   Developing a Microgrid for the Area
While an initial CHP approach might be focused on the current campuses of the
Thumb and the Town, the energy vision adopted by the ERAB includes developing a
resilient energy system for the greater community, including the remainder
TCAAP and the adjacent properties. The initial CHP plant is one implementable
opportunity. However, to achieve the TCAAP energy vision, it will be important
for the partner organizations to develop a plan to expand the scope of the CHP
plant and develop a microgrid for the broader area as TCAAP development
proceeds.
3.2.7.   Suggested Next Steps
As part of the Thumb development, the County and JDA could develop a CHP
strategy for the developer selection process, so that the CHP project, electric
distribution, and thermal distribution systems designs can be integrated into
the development plans. Several of the initial activities that will need to
occur prior to the RFP are listed below:
   •   The ownership and initial project funding strategy for CHP will need to
be established to allow initial project development activities to commence. An
agreement will need to be developed to establish the initial energy system
concept and conduct additional due diligence on the technical, business, and
regulatory issues that are associated with the project. The JDA should work
with Xcel Energy to define Xcel Energy's interest in owning the proposed CHP.
Xcel Energy ownership will provide the benefit of increasing the plant size and
system efficiency as electric and thermal demand grows.
   •   If Xcel Energy is interested in owning a CHP system, the JDA should
collaborate with Xcel Energy to develop an initial CHP plant that could serve
as the foundation of a broader microgrid strategy for TCAAP, AHATS, and the
community. If Xcel Energy is not an owner of the CHP, the initial electric
output could be sized to meet the needs of the Thumb, with thermal energy
distributed to the other sites. Additional electric output could be added on
other sites and integrated into a district energy system as the energy needs of
the future buildings are defined, or the CHP electrical output could be
increased if the developer secured a power-purchase agreement with Xcel Energy.
   •   The JDA should integrate and reserve space within easements and right of
way for the future construction of district energy distribution facilities
during the platting of the development and the design of the Spine Road.
   •   During site marketing, the JDA should emphasize the benefits and
opportunities presented by the incorporation of CHP into the Thumb development,
and could pursue businesses that have coincidental thermal and electric energy
needs. Additionally, prioritizing site marketing to companies with additional
process or domestic hot water load would optimize the efficiency of the CHP
system.
3.3.   Low-Temperature District Energy System
3.3.1.   Introduction
The residential neighborhoods of TCAAP present a unique and highly visible
opportunity to leverage low-grade energy from the treated groundwater as an
energy supply for the neighborhoods, distributed via a low-temperature district
energy system. The proposed system would utilize thermal energy from the TCAAP
Groundwater Treatment station described in section 1.5.4 by transferring energy
from the groundwater to the district energy system. The groundwater, which is
consistently ~52°, can be used to transfer energy to and from the closed-loop
distribution system to meet heating and cooling demand in the buildings, while
not affecting the quality of the treated groundwater. The pumped groundwater is
estimated to have 9.8 MMBtu of energy available. The Hill and Creek
neighborhoods are projected to demand 68% of this energy. Thus, an additional
3.1 MMBtu could be available for utilization in other areas of TCAAP or AHATS.
3.3.2.   System Description
The proposed energy system would require an energy transfer station to be
constructed at, or near, the current pumping location for the groundwater
treatment station. This energy transfer station would consist of a heat
exchanger to separate the groundwater from the system water, pumps to circulate
the distribution loop, controls, metering, and piping.
The existing building that houses the groundwater treatment station was
originally the domestic water treatment plant for the TCAAP site during the
ammunitions manufacturing period. This building was decommissioned, as the
groundwater treatment system is housed in a building addition, and is now
largely vacant. The facility is more than adequate to house the proposed energy
transfer station. The building is owned by the Army, and will remain in the
custody of the Army until the groundwater treatment operations cease. Given
these conditions, there would need to be an agreement between the district
energy district energy business and the Army for the use of this building.
As noted in Section 1.5.3, the operations of the groundwater treatment system
are anticipated to continue for a minimum of 30 years. By the end of this
period, an alternative energy source may need to be identified should the
groundwater pumping be discontinued or unavailable for energy transfer. At that
stage, there would be multiple technologies that could be incorporated:
   •   A separate field of geothermal heat exchange wells could be constructed
in the vicinity of the energy transfer station.
   •   Construction of a solar thermal garden in the vicinity of the energy
transfer station.
   •   Installation of a commercial size heat pump at the energy transfer
station.
   •   Future technologies that are currently unavailable in the market.
The proposed distribution system would consist of two pipes, supply and return,
spanning from the energy transfer station to the homes. To prevent the pipes
from freezing, and to efficiently transfer the energy, these pipes can be
insulated and buried at shallow depths, or uninsulated, and buried at greater
depths. To keep the initial construction costs of the distribution system to a
minimum, the proposed district energy business could construct the distribution
system and service extensions to the homes, in coordination with site
development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1924.png]
Figure 9: Distributed ground source heat pump schematic
A set of two pipes would span between each home and the distribution system,
one delivering water to the home and one returning water to the distribution
system. Each home would be equipped with a water source heat pump unit, powered
by electricity. This would replace the need for traditional forced-air furnaces
and electrically-driven air-conditioners. During the winter months, the heat
pump would take heat from the distribution system water and use it to heat the
air inside the home.
Conversely, during the summer months, the heat pump will take heat from inside
the home and reject it to the distribution system, which is how the home is
cooled. Figure 10 shows how home heat pump systems operate inside the homes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1922.png]
Figure 10: Ground source heat pump operation
3.3.3.   Greenhouse Gas Reduction
One important advantage of a low-temperature district energy system is the
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Carbon dioxide is the primary greenhouse
gas emission that is monitored and measured for the heating and cooling of
buildings. The carbon dioxide emission rates used to calculate the savings of
the low-temperature district energy system are included in Table 15.
Table 15: Carbon dioxide emission rates
 
Carbon Dioxide Emission Rates
Natural Gas1              117 CO2 lb/MMBtu
EPA MROW Emission Factor2 1,536 CO2 lb/MWh
Electric Utility1         1,041 CO2 lb/MWh
 
Notes:
1.   https://www.xcelenergy.com/staticfiles/xe/Corporate/CRR2013/environment/
emissions-reporting.html http://www.epa.gov/climateleadership/documents/
emission-factors.pdf
2.   http://www.epa.gov/climateleadership/documents/emission-factors.pdf
When comparing emission rates between traditional HVAC systems and the proposed
low- temperature district energy system in the Hill and Creek neighborhoods,
carbon dioxide emissions are reduced by almost 30%. The comparison of the
estimated greenhouse gas emissions is shown in Table 16.
Table 16: Estimated annual carbon dioxide emissions reduction
Estimated Annual Carbon Dioxide Emission Reductions for Low-Temperature
District Energy
Estimated Annual Carbon Dioxide Emission Reductions for Low-Temperature
District Energy
Gas Furnace - Heating     15,874 MMBtu/yr  929 tons CO2/yr
Air conditioner - Cooling 836 MMBtu/yr     128 tons CO2/yr
Total Conventional Emissions               1,057 tons CO2 /yr
                                          
Heat Pump - Heating       3562 MMBtu/yr    544 tons CO2/yr
Heat Pump - Cooling       484 MMBtu/yr     74 tons CO2/yr
Pumping Station (kWh)     247,280 MMBtu/yr 129 tons CO2/yr
Total Heat Pump Loop Emissions             747 tons CO2 /yr
                                          
Savings                                    310 tons CO2 /yr
% Emissions Reduction                      29%
 
This calculation does not take into account the opportunities for carbon-
neutral electricity production that would be available to the TCAAP
development. These calculations use the base emissions rate from the electric
grid, published by Xcel Energy for the Upper Midwest service territory. As the
local electricity sources become less dependent on the primary grid, through
implementation of community solar gardens or other technologies, the carbon
dioxide emissions could be further reduced.
3.3.4.   Financial Analysis
The initial cost of the low-temperature district energy system was estimated
based on the Project Team's historical data for installation of piping and
equipment. The pumping station, heat pumps, furnaces, and air conditioning
units were estimated based on major equipment budgetary pricing that is readily
available from manufacturers. The distribution piping was estimated based on
historical data for similar material installations in Minnesota. The low-
temperature of the water allows for flexibility of the piping system
construction. The Project Team evaluated the material costs for a number of
materials and based the estimate on a high-density polyethylene piping system,
due to the material cost and ease of installation. A summary of the initial
capital costs are provided in Table 17.
Table 17: Total system capital cost comparison
Total System Capital Cost Comparison
District Energy Capital Costs Traditional System Capital Costs
Total System Capital Cost Comparison
District Energy Capital Costs     Traditional System Capital Costs
Pump Station           $375,950
Distribution Pipe      $2,527,500 Xcel Energy Infrastructure $0
Service Laterals       $533,200
Domestic Water Heaters $493,000   Domestic Water Heaters     $591,600
Heat Pumps             $2,563,000 High Efficiency Furnaces   $1,005,720
                                  AC Units                   $1,135,872
Total                  $6,493,250 Total                      $2,733,192
 
For the economic analysis, the Project Team assumed that the district energy
facilities at the energy transfer station and the distribution piping would not
be paid for by the TCAAP developer. Typically, the district energy entity pays
for the production and distribution facilities. The Project Team did assume
that the developer would pay for the procurement and installation of the heat
pumps, and hot water heaters in the homes. The Project Team also assumed that
the developer would pass the minimal additional cost of the heat pump
installation on to the homeowner through an increased mortgage amount, and
would be able to use the eco-friendly aspects of the system as a selling point.
The analysis was completed for straight costs, and did not include any rebates
or tax credits that may be applicable for these energy efficient homes. A
summary of the initial costs to be paid by the developer is shown in Table 18.
Table 18: Developer capital cost comparison
Developer Capital Cost Comparison
Heat Pump Capital Costs Traditional System Capital Costs
Developer Capital Cost Comparison
Heat Pump Capital Costs           Traditional System Capital Costs
Domestic Water Heaters $493,000   Domestic Water Heaters   $591,600
Heat Pump Units        $2,563,600 High Efficiency Furnaces $1,005,720
                                  AC Units                 $1,135,872
Total                  $3,056,600 Total                    $2,733,192
                                                         
Per Unit Cost1         $9,102     Per Unit Cost1           $6,930
 
Note:
1. 394 homes based on density projections for Hill and Creek neighborhoods
available at time of publication
The capital costs for the construction of the district energy system are shown
below in Table 19 and are assumed to be financed over a period of 30 years.
Table 19: District energy system capital costs
 
District Energy System Capital Costs
Pump Station Construction          $375,950
Distribution Mainline Construction $2,527,500
Distribution Service Laterals      $533,200
Total                              $3,436,650
 
Note:
1.   Includes engineering and indirect costs for the service laterals to each
home.
The proposed low-temperature district energy system is modeled as a private,
non-profit business, with cost-based energy rates. The model assumptions are
provided in Table 20.
Table 20: Financial assumptions
Financial Assumptions
Financial Assumptions
Energy and Demand Rates                  Escalation Rates
Summer Residential Electricity $ 0.0867  Inflation Rate                 2.0%
Rate ($/kWh)1
Winter Residential Electricity $ 0.0739  Natural Gas Rate Acceleration  3.93%
Rate ($/kWh)1                            (EERC Real)2
Electric Service Charge per    $ 96.00   Electricity Rate Acceleration3 2.53%
Unit Annually1
Sales Tax4                     $ 0.0763  Water and Sewage Acceleration  3.00%
Natural Gas Rate ($/MMBtu)1    $ 8.3983  Cost of Capital - Developer    6%
Natural Gas Service Charge per $ 108.00  Cost of Capital - District     4%
Unit Annual5                             Energy Entity
                                       Payment Periods                30
Equipment Efficiency Unit                                              
Costs
Air Conditioning (SEER5)       14.00     Housing Units                  394
Air Conditioning (EER6)        11.76     High-Efficiency Furnace Unit   $ 2,550
                                         Cost with Install
Air Conditioning COP7          3.45      Natural Gas Water Heater Cost  $ 1,500
                                         with Install
Air Conditioning kW/ton        1.02      Air Conditioner Unit Cost with $ 2,880
                                         Install
High Efficiency Furnace8       92%       Operation and Maintenance      $ 400
                                         Annually per Unit
Heat Pump Cooling EER9         20.30     Heat Pump Unit Cost with       $ 6,500
                                         Install10
Heat Pump Heating COP11        4.10      Hot Water Heater with Heat     $ 1,250
                                         Pump12
                                       Heat Pump Maintenance Per Unit $150
                                         Annually
 
 
Expected Unit Life Expectancy
High-Efficiency Furnace  18-20 Years
Air Conditioner          12-15 Years
Heat Pump                18-20 Years
                         
Franchise Fees/Easements $0
 
Notes:
1.   http://www.xcelenergy.com/staticfiles/xe/Regulatory/Regulatory%20PDFs/
rates/MN/MNResRateCard.pdf
2.   Energy Escalation Rate Calculator - 2% inflation, start date is 2015,
duration is 30 years. Annual energy escalation rate is 1.89% (Real) and 3.93%
(Nominal).
3.   Energy Escalation Rate Calculator - 2% inflation, start date is 2015,
duration is 30 years. Annual energy escalation rate is 0.52% (Real) and 2.53%
(Nominal).
4.   Sales tax not applied to heating due to state heating fuels law.
5.   Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio (Btu/Watt-hr) - the cooling output during
a typical cooling season divided by the total electric energy input during the
same period.
6.   Energy Efficient Ratio (Btu output/Watt input) - the ratio of output
cooling energy (in Btu) to input electrical energy (in W).
7.   Coefficient of Performance - the ratio of output energy (in Btu or W) to
input electrical energy (in the same units).
8.   http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/publications/pdfs/building_america/
highefficiency_gas_furnaces.pdf
9.   http://www.waterfurnace.com/literature/3series/SC2300AL.pdf
10.   http://www.homeadvisor.com/cost/heating-and-cooling/install-a-heat-pump/
#, http://home.costhelper.com/geothermal-heat-pump.html, Estimate for 4-loop
heat pump provided by S&B Geothermal (adjusted for economies of scale and 1
loop unit)
11.   http://www.waterfurnace.com/literature/3series/SC2300AL.pdf
12.   Heat pump to supply DHW to tank, electric element in tank as redundant
source.
Using the energy usage estimates prepared as part of this study, the Project
Team estimated the annual cost of providing heating and cooling to the areas
homes under a traditional scenario (independent high efficiency furnaces and AC
units) and under a low-temperature district energy scenario (energy transfer
station, distribution system, heat pump HVAC units). The life cycle cost
analysis for the low-temperature district energy system, including the costs
covered by the developer, was compared to the traditional scenario. The 30-year
costs include systems operation, maintenance, and equipment replacement, but do
not account for any profit for the district energy business. This analysis is
summarized in Table 21.
Table 21: District energy system life cycle cost comparison for all homes
connected
 
District Energy Life Cycle Cost Comparisons for Connected Homes
                         Initial Cost 30-Year Cost Average Annual Costs Per
                                                    Home
Traditional Service       $ 2,733,192  $20,288,675  $1,715
District Service          $3,056,600   $18,482,181  $1,562
District Service Savings  $(323,408)   $1,806,494   $153
(Cost)
 
As shown, the district system is lower in cost over the-30 year period than a
traditional gas-fired furnace and electric A/C unit; however, it is assumed
that the benefits beyond the 30-year initial agreement would be significantly
greater as the debt payment for the initial system construction is completed.
Lastly, to validate that this system is the optimal means of capturing ground-
source energy, the Project Team compared the life-cycle cost for the low-
temperature district energy system to a scenario where homeowners would install
independent geothermal systems that would serve each home. In this comparison,
both homes would have heat pumps to meet their comfort needs. Because this
would add initial cost to the developer, it was assumed that the developer
would pass this cost along to the home owner in the form of a premium added to
the mortgage amount. This analysis is summarized in Table 22.
Table 22: Independent geothermal loop system life cycle cost comparison
 
Ground-Source Loop System Life Cycle Cost
                         Initial Cost 30-Year Cost Average Annual Costs Per
                                                    Home
Individual Geothermal1    $9,6002      $45,596      $1,521
District Service          $            $46,862      $1,562
District Service Savings  $9,600       $(1,266)     $(41)
(Cost)
 
Notes:
1.   Assumes that home owners would be required to pay a premium to the
developer for the construction of geothermal well field.
2.   Estimate provided by S&B Geothermal, $2,400/well, assumed four wells.
Independent geothermal systems could be built for the residents in TCAAP, and
would be less costly than the district energy system capturing energy from the
treated groundwater. However, the relatively small gains in cost over 30 years
would be offset by the volatility of natural gas markets, inconvenience of
maintaining independent systems in each home, the initial cost of the systems,
and the future flexibility provided by installing district energy
infrastructure.
3.3.5.   Potential Savings Opportunities
Under the assumptions provided in this Framework, the implementation of a low-
temperature district energy system that utilizes energy from the treated
groundwater appears to be technically and financially implementable. The
economic benefits of this system could be improved by realizing one or more of
the following cost reduction opportunities.
   •   The distribution piping is the single largest cost for the
implementation of the low- temperature system. The primary opportunity to
reduce this cost is through coordinating the distribution piping construction
with the construction of the public utilities. This coordinated construction
has been assumed in the financial model.
   Additional savings could be realized if the piping were installed in a joint
trench with the water main, meaning that the distribution piping and water main
would be constructed at the same depth and in the same trench. This would
eliminate the need for a second trench excavation for the distribution piping,
and would only require a marginal increase in the size of the excavation of the
water main trench.
   •   Xcel Energy could partner with the County, JDA, and the City to further
evaluate and promote a neighborhood development that does not utilize natural
gas. This promotion would include providing technical assistance, contributing
electric vehicle charging stations, or promoting the efficiency and low-carbon
possibilities of the neighborhood.
   •   Energy efficiency savings related to micro-hydro, community solar garden
subscription, or other renewable electric generation were not included in the
model for the energy transfer station or customer properties. Utilization of
these technologies could improve the payback time for the system.
Equipment rebates and tax credits were not included into the model, though Xcel
Energy offers rebates on high efficiency equipment and variable frequency
drives, for which the energy transfer station will be eligible. Xcel Energy
also has a number of other energy conservation programs that could be leveraged
to offset initial capital costs of the system. None of these rebates were
assumed in the current model.
•   The Federal Government offers a 30% tax credit to home owners who install a
groundwater heat pump that is applicable from the date of occupancy by the
homeowner for new homes. However, this tax credit is only applicable if the
home is used as a residence by the taxpayer, and is scheduled to end on
December 31, 2016.6 The inherent ambiguity regarding construction date and
owner usage, the Project Team has not included this tax credit in the model.
6 http://energy.gov/savings/residential-renewable-energy-tax-credit
3.3.6.   Implementation Planning and Suggested Next Steps
Implementing a low-temperature district energy system in the residential
neighborhoods of TCAAP can deliver several benefits to the site and
stakeholders, including the following.
   •   An energy system that is more energy efficient than traditional heating
and cooling systems.
   •   Reduced fossil fuel usage and greenhouse gas emissions.
   •   Competitive, stable costs of energy for homeowners.
   •   Xcel Energy could avoid gas pipe distribution infrastructure costs in
the neighborhoods, saving rate payers money.
   •   Installation of a flexible infrastructure network in the neighborhoods
will allow for easier integration of future energy sources or technology
advancements as they become available.
   •   Implementation of this system would establish the TCAAP approach to
sustainable neighborhoods as a national model for energy efficiency and
innovative site development.
For the proposed system to be successfully implemented, it would need to be
constructed as the first homes are being built, so that service can be provided
from the outset of development. To optimize the economic benefits of the
system, every home in the selected neighborhoods should be constructed with a
heat pump HVAC system and be connected to the proposed system. This would
provide the most financeable, cost-effective implementation plan, and also
maximize energy efficiency for TCAAP.
Implementing the low-temperature district energy system requires several areas
of focus, including the following next steps.
3.3.6.1.   Develop the System Business Plan
Before beginning the implementation of the proposed system, a business will
need to be formed to facilitate the distribution of energy to the customers it
will serve. As part of determining the ownership structure, a business plan
should be developed to resolve a number of organizational preferences for the
business. Resolving these items will be important to help guide development of
the proposed system. Among those preferences, the following should be
determined:
   •   The mission of the organization
   •   The organizational structure
   •   Governance of the business
   •   The energy sales rate structure
   •   The system financing strategy
   •   The expected structure of energy service agreements with customers
   •   The engineering strategy
   •   The construction contracting strategy
   •   The system operational strategy
   •   The system management strategy
   •   The energy transfer station location strategy
   •   Permitting and regulatory strategy
   •   Developer outreach and education strategy
   •   Easement and franchise agreement strategy, needs, or restrictions
The City, County and JDA should resolve these items prior to commencing with
the site development RFP process. While all of the items listed above are
important for development, the following items will likely require the most
attention.
Forming the Business
Unless Ramsey County or Arden Hills is the owner of the low-temperature
district energy system, an ownership entity should be developed, based upon the
system mission. The ownership entity will handle the system operations,
maintenance, and billings. The business could be best served by one of the
following structures: Municipally Owned, Private Non-Profit, Private For-
Profit, or a Hybrid Publically-Owned Infrastructure/Private Non-Profit Company.
Each structure has inherent benefits and detriments, which will need to be
evaluated as the business structure is determined.
The private, non-profit model operational structure is the business structure
that was assumed in the financial analysis. This business structure operates
under the governance of local stakeholders and customers. This type of business
model has several advantages, the most prominent being that the rates would be
cost-based, meaning that the rates would cover the cost of operating the system
and debt service, without mark-ups for profit or return on investment.
Developer Outreach and Education
A critical aspect of this system is that each home in the system service area
should be connected to the system. This will require developers to install heat
pump units in each home, instead of traditional forced air furnaces and air
conditioner units. The developers should be properly educated on this
opportunity and this direction should be clearly stated in the RFP language, so
that the developers can understand and implement the strategy from the onset.
Reach Agreement with U.S. Army for use of Existing Building and Treated
Groundwater
The ownership entity will need to negotiate with the Army for the use of energy
from the treated groundwater and the existing building to which the groundwater
treatment station is attached. This agreement will, at a minimum, need to
provide for access to and operation of the energy transfer station equipment.
Ideally, an agreement would include ownership transfer of the building and
groundwater pumping system at the termination of the groundwater treatment
operations, so that the heat pump loop can continue to meet the heating and
cooling needs of the development.
System Financing
Depending upon the preferred ownership structure, the financing strategy for
the system could be very different. If the system is publicly owned, it could
be financed through the public institution or in private markets. If a private,
non-profit, the system could be 100% debt-financed based upon long-
term agreements with homeowners. Under this scenario, the phasing of housing
development may require City or County backing of the debt as not all homes
will be occupied when the system begins operation.
4.   Energy Efficiency Strategies (Demand Side Management)
Given the pressing timeline of near-term infrastructure investments, much of
the Framework is focused on energy supply options for TCAAP and the Arden Hills
community. However, implementation of improved building energy efficiency will
be necessary to achieve the community's low-carbon, resiliency goals. The
following are the leading opportunities for near-term, low energy use
development at the site. Unlike many next steps for energy supply and
infrastructure, the demand-side initiatives will strongly depend on engaging
developers who can help implement the TCAAP energy vision. These
recommendations make use of the truly unique opportunities at TCAAP, which
include:
   •   Availability of a local, renewable ground heat energy source via the
site remediation process.
   •   Advantages of both greenfield development and large scale deployment to
optimize economies of scale.
   •   Focus on replicable designs and technologies to simplify developer
implementation.
   •   Emphasis on actual building performance, beyond prescriptive design
requirements.
   •   Important strategic partnerships with Xcel Energy and the Center for
Sustainable Building Research at the University of Minnesota.
4.1.   Energy Resilient Design and Construction
To meet the energy resilience goals for TCAAP, building design verification and
benchmarking will be needed on an ongoing basis. As development moves forward
it is recommended that the County, the JDA, City Staff, and development
consultants utilize the following building standards, technical resources,
planning tactics, and proposal criteria to attract and streamline energy
efficient development.
4.1.1.   Meeting SB 2030 Guidelines
All commercial developments on the TCAAP site can be measured against the
requirements of Minnesota's Sustainable Buildings 2030 (SB 2030), a performance
based building energy standard developed to incrementally move new construction
to net zero energy design by 2030. The standing program is not only a standard
for design and construction, but an ongoing energy performance benchmarking
program and guideline. The standard is designed specifically for Minnesota's
climate, is administered by the Center for Sustainable Building Research
(CSBR), and is supported by both the State of Minnesota's Division of Energy
Resources and Xcel Energy.
SB 2030 has several advantages as a consistent site standard, as outlined in
the Policy White Paper. To recap:
   •   SB 2030 is designed and tailored for Minnesota buildings.
   •   SB 2030 is a performance based standard, providing guidance for the
design of energy efficient buildings beyond prescriptive requirements, giving
developers site-specific flexibility, however prescriptive guidelines are
available.
   •   It has building use based standards that cover all development types
applicable to TCAAP: commercial, multi-family, and detached residential.
As a comprehensive, performance-based energy standard, SB 2030 looks at all of
the systems in a building and how they collectively impact its efficiency.
Systems that are modeled or calculated under the standard are:
   •   Building Envelope
   •   Equipment Energy Efficiency
   •   Lighting Power Density & Controls
   •   Domestic Hot Water
   •   Mechanical Systems
   •   Use of Renewables
Resources & Benefits
   •   Xcel Energy's Energy Design Assistance Program is a free resource for
designers and developers to help meet some of the SB 2030 requirements and will
help developers navigate rebate opportunities. (Additional assistance is
available when design teams commit to designing at 30% more efficient than
typical design.)
   •   Xcel Energy's custom efficiency program allows large users to obtain
tailored, performance based efficiency assessments and rebates.
On average, SB 2030 will require commercial buildings to be 35 to 45% more
efficient than the new building code (IECC 2012). Table 23 outlines specific
efficiency improvements for a few building types relevant for TCAAP.7
7 For single-family homes and townhomes, SB 2030 will be more efficient than
the residential IECC 2012 code, but not to the extent of commercial building
requirements.
Table 23: SB 2030 (70% benchmark) Energy Efficiency Improvement over Code8
 
Increase in Energy Efficiency Above Commercial Building Code (IECC 2012)
Medium Office Stand-Alone Retail Small Hotel Restaurant Warehouse
42%           29%                50%         55%        60%
8 Analyzed by comparing improvements in ASHRAE 90.1 and applying the 70%
reduction compared to the 1989 baseline by building use type (CEE).
The key way to incentivize use of SB 2030 is to give preference to proposals
designing to these standards during the RFP review process (outlined below).
Development teams would have access to SB 2030 tools and case studies that
outline recommended cost-effective design approaches. During schematic design
and design development phases, the design team will set goals and targets for
the project with guidance from the SB 2030 team. When construction documents
are nearly complete, the SB 2030 team provides a full plan review with course
corrections and feedback to achieve the project targets. After construction,
the SB 2030 team will again work with project stakeholders to initiate the
energy benchmarking and tracking process. The cost to the developer/builder for
all of these program services is approximately $8,000 to $10,000 per commercial
site, a greater value than comparable certification programs that do not
provide review services.
Given the scale and visibility of TCAAP, there are potential adjustments that
can be made to streamline this process for developers.
   •   Targeted education and design guidelines that are site specific and
assist developers to quickly identify what major design features to focus on
for a specific site and building type.
   •   Potential cost buy-down for the upfront cost of the study and review
SB 2030 may face a challenge in that while it is relevant for Minnesota
buildings it does not yet have the market visibility of other national
standards such as LEED. Marketing of the TCAAP site could include a marketing
campaign around the benefits of SB 2030, to increase awareness, acceptance, and
a value reflection in the market. The County or City may also consider sharing
review costs with developers to help grow collaboration and buy-in.
4.3.   Leading Near-Term DSM Opportunities
4.3.1.   Low-Load Residential Development
Section 6.4.1.1 (p. 34-35) of the Policy White Paper outlined the concept of a
residential development featuring low-energy, all electric homes, fed by the
ground source heat for heating and cooling needs. A low-load home would not
require the larger heating and cooling capacity of traditional systems, but
instead could meet residents' comfort needs with smaller capacity systems. A
low-load home does not have to cost significantly more than a traditionally
built home, and can be valued more in the marketplace.9
9 Multiple recent housing market studies have shown that homebuyers are willing
to pay a 9-15% premium for homes that perform more efficiently. (CA Housing
Study 2012; NHBA Market Study 2013)
The Project Team estimates that low-load homes in Minnesota could obtain a
maximum combined space heating and cooling load of less than 10 Btu/hour/square
foot (conditioned floor area).10 The key technologies and strategies include
high levels of building insulation and passive solar design, a tight building
shell, and high efficiency appliances. These homes do not require significant
insulation like a passive house, but are 40% to 50% more efficient than what is
required by the new IECC 2012 code.
10 http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/60712.pdf
The primary opportunity for implementing low-load homes at TCAAP is the
integration of a low- temperature district energy system fed by the treated
groundwater on-site. This energy source could be implemented in homes in the
Creek, Hill and eastern Town residential developments, given their proximity to
the treated ground water. This opportunity deserves significant consideration
since the homes at TCAAP have the unique ability to tap the renewable resource
of the pumped ground water through a district energy system combined with in-
home water-to-air heat pumps.
Incorporation of high-performance technologies that have little to no impact on
the up-front costs, such as efficient appliances and low-flow plumbing, will
help minimize hot water use and help maximize home efficiency. The following is
a summary of the specific technologies and design elements that can be
considered for a low-load, all electric home at TCAAP:
   •   Insulation, air sealing, and passive solar design to reduce space
conditioning load to 10 Btu/hr/square foot
   •   Ground source heat pump technology (electric driven)
   •   High-efficiency appliances such as refrigerators, dishwashers, washer/
dryers (with additional consideration of low water use)
   •   Consideration of heat pump dryers
   •   Propane on localized natural gas stoves and grills
   •   Magnified benefit from rooftop PV electricity or purchase of community
solar shares Some marketing benefits of implementing these solutions include:
   •   Availability of high-tech, low maintenance equipment
   •   Cutting edge all-electric design
   •   True net-zero or net-zero ready potential
   •   Low-cost energy living
Low Load Home Performance Verification
Coordination between ground water system capacity and home design will be
necessary up-front and on an ongoing basis. This will provide developers and
users with the necessary assurance that the designed loads will be compatible
with the capacity of the system. Verification of home energy design and
performance can most easily be achieved by a third-party with design and
construction expertise. The County and JDA could specify building standards to
help homes reach these performance targets, such as SB 2030, which has
standards for single-family homes that could be personalized for TCAAP. This
program could be administered between utility energy-efficiency verification
programs like Energy Star for New Homes and coordination help from the City's
inspection division.
4.3.1.1.   Case Studies
Zero Carbon Residential Development | Bainbridge Island, Washington
Bainbridge Island is a mixed residential development of 24 single-family homes,
rental apartments, senior-living, and condos. Buildings were designed to meet
the criteria of a stringent building certification program, the Living Building
Challenge, and included "ultra-insulated" envelopes, high- efficiency
appliances, and an opt-in opportunity to buy or finance roof-top solar. Mini-
split heat pumps with energy recovery ventilators provide high-efficiency
heating. Additionally, all parking is underground and broader sustainability
innovations are woven in such as walkability, water conservation, and edible
landscapes. All of the single family homes sold out quickly and all home buyers
opted to install solar PV systems.
Low Load Housing Development | Townsend, Massachusetts
A premiere example of low-load homes being built at scale is the 35 single-
family houses on Coppersmith Way in Townsend, MA. These homes, each 1,700
square feet, were built to meet a strict efficiency standard with an additional
cost of approximately $8.40 per square foot (incorporating a $4,550
Massachusetts rebate).11 The resulting thermal load was served by two efficient
"mini-split" systems - one on each floor - and homes continue to be reported by
residents as a comfortable and responsive living environment.
11 Homes achieved a HERS score of 40. The exterior walls were built to R-46,
the basement walls were R-20, the attic was insulated to R- 63 and the under
basement slab was insulated with 2 inches of rigid foam with an R-value of 10.
Carbon Zero Residential Development | Issaquah, Washington
At a built cost of about $375,000 each, the 10 townhome development outside of
Seattle (started in 2008) sold out completely within the first year with
homebuyers showing a willingness to pay $20 to $40 more per square foot than
less efficient homes of similar size and location.12 The neighborhood, similar
to what is being proposed at TCAAP, successfully utilized a community-based
ground source system in combination with in-home heat pumps. The shared walls
between townhomes contributed to reduced heating loads that made it financially
viable. The builder/developer attests that the visible elements of the net zero
energy homes, such as the in-floor radiant heating, heat pump technology, roof-
top solar, and triple pane windows were key to the value that homebuyers saw.
The developer (Ichijo U.S.A.) continuous to build low-load homes and sees ROI
that makes sense in the market.
12 Conversation with Nick Neid, project manager with Ichijo USA, the developer
and builder (February 2015)
Ground Source Heat Pump Housing Development | Kennewick, Washington
SouthCliffe is a 400+ lot residential development in southeastern Washington
that is comprised of low- load homes serviced by a ground source water loop and
heat pumps, very similar to what is being proposed at TCAAP. Heating and hot
water needs of each home are both serviced by this combination of technologies.
The ground source water loop added approximately 5% to the cost of each lot,
but led to immediate monthly energy cost savings. Milo Bauder and Grant Young
were the developers of this project, and have worked with ThermLink in Duluth:
a pioneer in ground source installations and equipment.13
13 http://www.distinctiveprop.com/files/files/soiuthcliffepressrelease.pdf
4.3.2.   Building orientation and passive solar
 
Recommendation:
The process for solar oriented development should be described in residential
and commercial building RFPs and should be integrated as evaluation criteria
for development proposals. It should be evaluated based on lowest total energy
load of the homes or buildings to be sited under one proposal and should
consider street orientation, building orientation, and passive solar building
envelope design elements. As part of the platting process, the County could
plat the land and maximize building orientation prior to sale to developers.
 
The TCAAP Policy White Paper included the recommendations for the TCAAP
subdivision review process to assess the energy implications of street and
building orientation on solar heat gain and loss. Beyond the building envelope,
street orientation, lot and building orientation, and building massing, all
impact the thermal loads of homes and commercial buildings. By jointly
considering these variables prior to the subdivision process, planners and
developers have the opportunity to make tradeoff decisions while still
producing efficient results. Site orientation is potentially a no-cost way to
reduce building energy loads and improve daylighting when considered in site
planning.
In line with solar oriented design, homes should be designed and sited so that
the longest sides of a house face south and southern faces have the greatest
window area.14 This general window orientation is a proven strategy to reduce a
home's heating energy by approximately 4% and cooling costs by 2%, without
affecting any other parts of the design. Figure 11 shows the energy savings
achieved from southern window orientation, assuming that the largest exterior
walls are facing north and south, but without optimizing any other window
characteristics or the window to wall ratio on each side.
14 http://www.energy.ca.gov/title24/2013standards/prerulemaking/documents/
current/Reports/Residential/Water_Heating/
2013_CASE_R_Solar_Ready_Solar_Oriented_Developments_Sept_2011.pdf
Alone, window orientation results in moderate energy savings, but when paired
with improved window insulation, higher solar heat gain coefficients, and
optimum window to wall ratios, the heating energy savings will be 20% to 30%.15
Proper building and window orientation magnify the impact of the remaining
window decision. When aligned, homes with a well-insulated double or triple
pane windows and optimum window to wall ratios, annual energy cost savings for
homes in central Minnesota have been shown to be approximately $300 annually.
15 http://www.efficientwindows.org/downloads/ColdDesignGuide.pdf
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1920.png]
Figure 11: Thermal Load with Respect to House Orientation
The likely locations where street orientation could vary significantly to
accommodate energy implications would be the Creek, the Hill, and the
Transition neighborhood on the periphery of the Town. It is important to
remember that in order to utilize building orientation and passive solar at
TCAAP; two mutually dependent factors are required:
   •   Optimizing street orientation during the subdivision process
   •   Designing homes to take advantage of the passive solar resource
Optimizing orientation during the subdivision process would be appropriate to
solicit during the RFP process. These goals can be included as RFP evaluation
criteria.
4.3.3.   High efficiency commercial buildings
4.3.3.1.   Utilizing SB 2030
As shown in the White Paper, the primary energy loads for TCAAP are estimated
to be in the retail, commercial, and flex areas of the development. Thus DSM
energy conservation measures for these areas of the development will be
paramount for successful achievement of the Energy Vision.
However, until specific use types are more clearly defined during the RFP
process, specific commercial building efficiency strategies are challenging to
define. The Project Team recommends that the JDA establish the SB 2030 process
into the commercial development RFPs, as the SB 2030 process provides an
overarching framework for pursuing high commercial efficiency performance. The
process for how to use SB 2030 is described above.
4.3.4.   Sub-metering
Commercial and multi-family building sub-metering (Policy White Paper, p. 31)
is included as an important consideration because it is a relatively low
additional design cost when considered up front, but has the potential to help
maintain low energy use since tenants directly see and pay for their energy
use.
Sub-metering has been shown to save up to 21% in leased building spaces.16 The
material, software, and labor cost for each sub-meter point ranges from $5,000
to $7,500. Several metering companies provide sub-metering services by owning,
operating, and maintaining the meters. Monthly fees are based on the type of
service needed and the quantity of sub-meters served, but costs per sub-meter
range from $150 to $400.
16 "Tenant Occupants of Green Office Buildings: Driving the Market for
Improving Existing Building Stock" McGraw-Hill Construction and CBRE.
September, 2011. www.cbre.com/EN/aboutus/MediaCentre/2011/Pages/10062011.aspx
Table 24: Value add for sub-metering17
 
Value Add for Sub-Metering                         
Item                       Application Level(s)    Primary Use
Energy Procurement and     Building                Management
billing
Baselining & optimizing    Building; System        Management; Diagnostics
building performance
Project energy measurement System; Circuit         Management; Diagnostics
& verification
Equipment and plug-load    Tenant; Circuit; Device Management; Diagnostics;
diagnostics                                        Utility efficiency programs
Occupant awareness and                             Management; Diagnostics;
behavior change            Tenant; Circuit; Device Utility efficiency programs;
                                                   Research
17 http://www.gsa.gov/portal/mediaId/181031/fileName/Sub-
metering_Business_Case_How_to_calculate_cost-
effective_solutions_in_the_building_context
Table 25: Estimated savings from sub-metering (DOE 2006)18
 
Estimated Savings from Sub-Metering
Action                             Observed Savings
Sub-meter bills allocated to all   2.5% - 5% (improved occupant awareness)
tenants
                                   5% - 15% (improved awareness,
Building tune-up & load management identification of simple O&M
                                   improvements, and load management)
Ongoing commissioning              15% - 45% (improved awareness and
                                   ongoing monitoring & commissioning)
18 FEMP, Guidance for Electric Metering in Federal Buildings. 2006.
www1.eere.energy.gov/femp/pdfs/adv_metering.pdf.
4.3.4.1.   Case Study
Legrand North America | Better Building, Better Plants Challenge19
19 http://www4.eere.energy.gov/challenge/sites/default/files/uploaded-files/
submeter-guide.pdf
Legrand, an international provider of information networks, installed sub-
meters in its 14 largest manufacturing and assembly facilities in North
America.
   •   The Company had to achieve energy savings of 1.5% of total energy
consumption for the dashboard to pay for itself in just 1.5 years. Project ROI
was 83%.
   •   Actions enabled by sub-metering dropped the minimum (baseload) usage by
a factor of two.
   •   The systems empowered Lagrand to engage in conservation competition
across facilities, something that TCAAP businesses could do across the site.
Building sub-metering should be considered by architects and engineers at the
building design stage. While SB 2030 guidelines require minimum sub-metering,
additional sub-metering would offer business opportunities like those
capitalized on at Legrand properties. Once sub-meters are in place, ongoing
energy feedback program opportunities could also be pursued in coordination
with the electric utility.
4.3.6.   Co-location and strategic siting strategies
 
Recommendation:
Attract high energy use businesses and building types through RFP materials and
developer workshops, and help facilitate energy savings opportunities for these
projects through strategic siting.
One opportunity for energy supply alternatives that has been recommended in the
White Paper is the development of a district energy system, possibly fed from a
CHP plant. Planned siting and co-location can bring increased efficiency to a
district system or create opportunities for miniature district systems in areas
that are not connected (e.g. some of the Flex areas).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1918.png]
Figure 12: Building co-location examples
Because of the greenfield advantage, high energy use businesses and building
use types could be motivated to develop at TCAAP because of the future energy
cost savings. For those on the district system, they may be able to benefit
from the efficiency that they bring to the system through lower rates or even
bill credits when they decrease their return temperature.
For businesses that may not be in proximity to a future district energy system,
the County and JDA could facilitate building co-location. Certain project types
can be identified as potential candidates for co-location. Table 26 outlines
business and building types that are high users of hot water or have
concentrated periods of high electricity use. As proposals are reviewed, the
County and JDA should identify projects that are the same use as those listed
in Table 26. Such candidates could be grouped and referred to energy design
experts as to the specific energy benefits that could be achieved through co-
location. For example, a hotel development could be sited adjacent to a
laundromat to make their combined hot water load more even throughout the day
and surface the opportunities to share hot water heating and recovery
equipment.
Table 26: Applicable Business Types for Building Co-Location
Solar Thermal Sharing Opportunities Peak Times Hot Water1
Solar Thermal Sharing Opportunities Peak Times      Hot Water1
Hotels and lodging                  Mornings        31.4 kBtu/SF
Multifamily buildings               Morning/Night   na
Health Care (inpatient)             All Day         48.4 kBtu/SF
Bars and restaurants                Afternoon/Night 40.4 kBtu/SF
Laundromats/cleaning services       Daytime         na
Car washes                          Late afternoons na
Small manufacturing                 Night/All Day   variable
Gardens/Nurseries                                  na
 
Photovoltaics Sharing Opportunities Peak Times Total Electric2
Photovoltaics Sharing Opportunities Peak Times         Total Electric2
Education facilities3               Morning/ Afternoon 11.01 kWh/SF
Offices                             Daytime            17.3 kWh/SF
Health Care (inpatient)             All Day            27.5 kWh/SF
Restaurants                         Night              38.4 kWh/SF
Grocers/Food sales                  All Day            49.4 kWh/SF
Retail (malls in particular)        Afternoon/ Night   22.3 kWh/SF
Data Centers                        All Day            na
 
Notes:
1.   E2A base on historic CBECS 2003 data
2.   E3A base on historic CBECS 2003 data
3.   Education facilities are seasonal, but high demand 9 out of 12 months.
Co-locating buildings does not require the sharing of exterior walls. The
proximity to one another may even render opportunities to create unique outdoor
employee or community spaces. The hot water or heat producers could sell their
excess to adjacent buildings that have use for it at different times of day.
Shared decentralized hot water storage units could even be used in some cases.
Businesses would be interested in this opportunity because it would improve the
efficiency of their consumption, reduce upfront capital equipment and
maintenance costs, and increase comfort.20
20 The Primary Energy Factor (PEF) difference between district heating systems
and Gas-fired heating (0.8/1.3=0.61) http://www.euroheat.org/Files/Filer/
documents/Publications/District%20Heating%20in%20buildings_final.pdf
Co-location opportunities will require coordination on the part of the JDA and
County, but communicating the interest to facilitate co-location upfront for
developers and business will make coordination easier. High energy use project
types may be motivated to propose a project at TCAAP if efforts are being make
to facilitate energy savings. Marketing materials and RFP language that
highlights appropriate co-location building use types can help attract these
projects.
4.3.7.   Streetlights
The City of Arden Hills has included a site-wide requirement for all
streetlights to be "high-efficiency lighting, such as LED lamps" in the TCAAP
Redevelopment Code. This requirement will trigger the inclusion of high
efficiency lights in the development process. Current LED technology saves
approximately 50% to 70% of lighting energy use. A significant cost savings
occurs by additionally reducing maintenance costs, given the longer life of the
bulbs. The City can work with Xcel Energy to utilize any future high efficiency
streetlight program offerings that support this effort in a manner that is
timely and commensurate with current development staging.
4.3.8.   Community participation and education
Community participation and education have been consistently mentioned as
important factors at TCAAP, both to engage the wider Arden Hills community and
to leverage the energy savings potential from facilitating ongoing awareness of
energy use by site tenants and residents. Many details of community engagement
will need to be planned once the site sees its first residents and tenants.
However, certain engagement elements can be planned for or implemented during
the early development stage, including:
   •   A TCAAP or Arden Hills-wide website that tracks energy goals and
performance of buildings at the site, including energy and carbon savings. The
website could promote major metrics and milestones, and issue periodic
challenges (e.g. the "lowest user" challenge).
   •   Community-wide open house or showcase events of leading edge
technologies on the site, especially for housing, that will attract and excite
potential residents (e.g. cook a meal in an all-electric kitchen)
   •   Commissioning of design or signage elements in public spaces that
connect users to the site's energy resiliency goals and their contribution and
participation in those goals. A targeted marketing campaign around community
solar development, as an early symbol of community- driven, low carbon energy
use at the site.
4.4.   Demonstration Opportunities
4.4.1.   Advanced Distribution Grid
TCAAP's greenfield status, combined with the site's forward looking energy
vision, make it an ideal opportunity to pilot and demonstrate advanced
technologies in the electric distribution grid. Many of the opportunities
outlined in this report, such as high solar PV penetration, advanced commercial
building metering, or responsive electric loads, are all facilitated by a
distribution system with increased communications and control functions.
Features that could be piloted at the site might include increased reliability
testing, or load management strategies that rely on advanced metering and
communications throughout the distribution network. Load management-the real-
time increase or reduction of electric demand in response to external signals-
can change customer electricity use in response to signals such as physical
constraints or environmental signals, such as an excess renewable energy
capacity. The results can save customers money and reduce the environmental
impact of their energy use.
By laying the groundwork for an advanced distribution system at TCAAP during
the planning phase, residents and businesses would have access to cutting edge
opportunities such as advanced rate design or real-time load response. Moving
forward on these opportunities would likely require the collaboration of Xcel
Energy, the Public Utilities Commission, and the Minnesota Department of
Commerce, Division of Energy Resources.
4.4.2.   Innovative Energy Technologies
In addition to pilot opportunities at the grid level, TCAAP is ideal for
demonstrating innovative energy technologies at scale. The Project Team
recommends that the JDA and County seek and attract partnerships to demonstrate
proven technologies and strategies. While the technologies may be proven, TCAAP
offers scalable and living demonstration opportunities, where an apartment,
house, or street of homes could serve as a living lab. Additionally, as a cold
climate site that can attract multiple partners, there is great opportunity to
demonstrate the synergies that can exist between multiple innovative
technologies and design strategies. This might include piloting new in-road
luminescent street or pedestrian path lighting products in conjunction with
high efficiency overhead LED street lighting or homes that have on-site
electric storage and remote controlled appliances/electronics that communicate
with each other.
The following case studies outline how demonstration opportunities can make
economic sense for developers, the partnerships that brought opportunities to
life, and key technologies that could be demonstrated at scale.
4.4.3.   Technology Demonstration: Case Studies
4.4.3.1.   Builders Leading with Home Connectivity | Standard Pacific Homes, KB
Homes, TruMark Co.
A number of leading home builders in the U.S. are capitalizing on the benefits
of developing homes that are connected - to the internet, to smart phones,
cars, on-site renewables, thermostats, lighting, and other home electronics and
appliances. Basic network capabilities are being installed in homes as a new
standard feature and then buyers can specify additional features they want
making buyer costs incremental and personalized. Control capability for
homeowners may range from remote control of lights and programmable
thermostats, to automatic shutoff of leaky faucets and geofencing capabilities
as users approach home. Networks and devices need to achieve this have dropped
significantly in price and developers are starting to see these home features
as low-cost ways to improve market value. Costs to developers start around $200
and top out around $2,000.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1916.png]
Figure 13: Geofencing enabled demand-side management
Examples of Potential Demonstration Technologies:
   •   Smart home appliances (e.g. Samsung)
   •   In-home network hubs, software and apps (e.g. SmartThings)
   •   Smart switches, plugs, and plug switching capabilities (e.g. Belkin
WEMO)
   •   Connect light bulbs (e.g. Philips Hue)
   •   In-home energy storage/fuel cells and car-to-car charging (e.g. Honda's
Home Energy Management System21)
   •   In-home zoned temperature controls (e.g. Honeywell)
21 http://www.hondasmarthome.com/
4.4.3.2.   Net Zero Energy Commercial Building Envelopes | Guardian Industries
Detroit, MI
Guardian Industries, a glass and building products manufacturer demonstrated a
PV spandrel panel system on its new Science and Technology Center in suburban
Detroit. The 12,000 square foot building showcases a cutting edge building
panel system that brings solar power generation capability to the vertical
surfaces of one or two story commercial buildings. The panels convert sunlight
in to electricity at an efficiency of 17% allowing each square foot of panel to
produce eight watts of power. Builder
Turner Construction also incorporated Guardian's own transparent PV glass to
demonstrate ease of integration into the panel system. Eligible for federal
modified accelerated cost-recovery System depreciation and a first year federal
tax credit of 30% (available through 2017), the 2014 built project expects to
achieve 100% payback in two years.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1914.png]
Figure 14: Building integrated PV panel systems
Examples of Potential Demonstration Technologies:
   •   Building integrated photovoltaic panel systems (e.g. BISEM)
   •   Photovoltaic or electrochromatic glass (e.g. Guardian Ecoguard glass)
Vehicle & Storage Integration Demonstration | SMUD Sacramento, CA
Many major automakers have been working with Sumitomo Electric to demonstrate
the value of a cloud-based communication system between electric vehicles and
utilities.22 The communication software allows the utility to ask charging cars
if they want to temporarily stop charging, based on how much charge a user has
programmed in to the charger. Users can opt into this program to receive
discounted electricity rates or other incentives while the utility would see
less stress on the grid and achieve greater service reliability.23 Most
recently this two-way communication system was demonstrated at the Sacramento
Municipal Utility District's (SMUD) Service Center.
22 http://www.epri.com/Press-Releases/Pages/EPRI,-Utilities,-Automakers-to-
Demonstrate-Technology-Enabling.aspx
23 http://www.af.mil/News/ArticleDisplay/tabid/223/Article/554343/af-tests-
first-all-electric-vehicle-fleet-in-california.aspx
There are opportunities to demonstrate these grid benefits and customer
incentives in Minnesota at TCAAP. The integration of these communication
capabilities into the grid could be demonstrated across multiple individual EV
users or a fleet (from a future TCAAP business or other TCAAP neighbors such as
Ramsey County or AHATS). The synergy of additional technologies, such as on-
site electric storage and renewables and in-home DC power access could be
incorporated as part of such a grid integration project. Such an effort could
be achieved in partnership with Xcel Energy with the opportunity for the
University of Minnesota or other third-parties to play a role in research and
community learning.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1912.png]
Figure 15: Integrating electric vehicles & storage with utility communication
software
Examples of Potential Demonstration Technologies:
   •   Cloud-based communication software for a utility (e.g. Sumitomo
Electric)
   •   Electric vehicles (e.g. Honda, BMW, Nissan)
   •   Intelligent electric vehicle integration software (e.g. Nuvve, EURISCO)
   •   On-street charging stations (e.g. AeroVironment EV Solutions)
4.5.   Recommended Development Request for Proposal Language
In order to embed the energy resilience principals of TCAAP into the fabric of
the site, it is recommended that the JDA incorporate evaluation language as
part of the Request for Proposal (RFP) for all commercial development projects.
The language below presents conservation guidelines as criteria by which each
proposal could be evaluated. In the cases where it is possible to provide
direct incentives or funnel state economic development fund to developers,
these standards could be made requirements for these resources.
4.5.1.   Energy Resilience Proposal Evaluation Criteria
Sustainable Buildings 2030 Design Standards - HIGHLY RECOMMENDED
Commercial and residential development proposals will be evaluated based on a
demonstrated commitment to building to meet or exceed the State of Minnesota's
Sustainable Building 2030 (SB 2030) energy standards. Proposals should
highlight design and constructing team experience in developing high-
performance buildings and sites. Proposals should also outline preliminary
strategies and processes that will be used to meet higher energy performance.
This would include:
   •   Early design phase energy modeling to inform building orientation,
daylighting, passive solar heating, and building envelope decisions
   •   Specification of high efficiency lighting, operator controls, and
mechanical systems/district energy connection
   •   Integration of tenant and equipment level sub-meters that will monitor
ongoing building performance and opportunities for demand response
Further Sub-metering - RECOMMENDED
Beyond meeting SB 2030, it is recommended that all commercial buildings on the
TCAAP site be equipped with local sub-metering. Proposals should describe
generally the plans for installing circuit or equipment level sub-meters within
each tenant space (e.g. individual building or tenant building systems such as
lighting or venting) and power monitoring systems to inform behavior and
ongoing commissioning efforts.
Innovative Energy Demonstrations & Partnerships - RECOMMENDED
The RFP should state the interest in TCAAP servings as a national model and
demonstrating proven energy innovations that will help make renewables, energy
efficiency, and energy awareness more visible at TCAAP.
   •   Proposals may describe a unique energy technology to be incorporated at
the building or site level.
   •   Proposals that layout collaboration opportunities with other TCAAP
developers or the community will receive additional consideration (e.g.
building co-location interest)
Advanced Metering - RECOMMENDED
This infrastructure will help track and report detailed building performance
data to building operators and the utility. It would also allow for the
potential of rate programs that give building owners more control of their
energy costs and savings (dynamic pricing). All electric utility meters should
have two- way, real-time communication capabilities. Xcel Energy could work
with developers to help specify and install any advanced meters, and the site
development partners could help Xcel Energy obtain the necessary regulatory
approvals for piloting these installations.
Solar Oriented Development -- RECOMMENDED
While SB 2030 guidelines will encourage building orientation and site planning
that optimizes load minimizing solar heat gains, developers that show intent to
incorporate passive solar design will be given additional consideration or even
site location preference. This may include conceptual drawings, plans, and
other documentation that show how building orientation, building massing,
window placement, and site landscaping will utilize passive solar heating and
achieve solar access for immediate or future on-site renewables.
5.   Schedule
5.1.   Overall TCAAP Development Schedule
The development schedule that is currently proposed is likely to begin in 2016
with the construction of the interchanges of County Hwy 96 and County Road H
with the Spine Road. The Spine Road construction is also expected to begin in
2016. Currently, site development is projected to begin with the residential
and retail areas in the northern region of TCAAP in late 2016 or early 2017.
Development is expected to progress southward from the Town and Creek
neighborhoods as the market allows. The Thumb area is being actively marketed
by the JDA at this time, and could be developed as soon as the right proposal
is received from the development community. The current development plan is
included in the appendix as Exhibit III.
5.2.   Integrating with the TCAAP Development Schedule
Given the development timeline in section 5.1, development of the concepts
presented in this Framework will need to follow varying schedules, as provided
below.
5.2.1.   Future Thermal Energy Grid
While the most cost-effective time to install thermal energy grids is in
coordination with initial site development, this is likely not feasible given
the uncertainty of when and what will be developed at TCAAP. Alternatively, a
corridor for future energy infrastructure (i.e. district energy piping) could
be preserved in the engineering and construction plans for the Spine Road. The
Project Team is in discussions with Ramsey County staff to include that
corridor in the Spine Road design.
5.2.2.   Community Solar
The proposed community solar garden is technically not located on the TCAAP
site, rather it is recommended for the Primer Trace site. As such, TCAAP
development will not necessarily have an impact on the schedule for this
opportunity. Rather, the community solar garden will need to be completed and
in service by December 31, 2016 to be eligible for the 30% income tax credits,
assuming they are not extended. If the tax credit is not needed in the
developer's business model, this schedule is driven more by market conditions
than the TCAAP development schedule.
5.2.3.   Low-Temperature District Energy
Construction of the low-temperature district energy system in the residential
neighborhoods will need to coincide with development in order to be ready to
serve the initial neighborhood development, avoid any unnecessary developer
costs, and minimize the cost of pipe installation. RFPs are likely to be issued
in late 2015, so the business plan for this system will need to be fully
developed in early to mid- 2015.
5.2.4.   Combined Heat and Power
Development of the initial CHP system is more directly related to the needs of
the existing buildings than to the development timeline of TCAAP. Therefore,
construction of the initial CHP system should be coordinated with the MNARNG's
plans for site expansion, so that the proposed future buildings could be served
by the system from the initial construction and unnecessary equipment costs can
be avoided. Connection to the other buildings should be completed at this time
to take advantages of the economies of scale and optimize thermal energy
capture. Expansion of the CHP system to serve development of TCAAP should
coincide with that development, and the JDA should engage early with selected
developers to identify how the CHP system can be expanded to meet their
buildings' needs.
5.2.5.   Demand-Side Management
The JDA should work with partner organizations to develop greater comprehension
of SB 2030 guidelines by hosting informational gatherings for the development
companies that are interested in the TCAAP site. Builders and contractors
familiar with the SB 2030 process could be asked to provide insight and
feedback about the process. Developer education will build developer acceptance
and understanding of process to make the site more attractive.
The JDA should also assess current residential market potential in Twin Cities
region by conducting market research and outreach on all-electric, low load
home concept. This will help to assuage developer and future resident concerns
about unfamiliar technologies and utility structure.
The JDA should lastly work with the site marketing team to market energy
conservation concepts to potential developers, builders, and tenants, focusing
on the business opportunities available through these concepts.
6.   Next Steps and Conclusion
6.1.   Next Steps
To achieve the TCAAP energy vision and achieve sustainable benefits for the
City and the surrounding community, the JDA will need to begin implementation
on each of the individual opportunities presented in this Framework. The
Project Team recommends the following immediate actions related to each
opportunity.
6.1.1.   Partnerships
Continue partnership discussions with the MNARNG, Xcel Energy, the University
of Minnesota Center for Sustainable Building Research, and other stakeholders
as development of the site and the various energy opportunities progress.
6.1.2.   Solar PV
Develop an RFP for the development of a solar array on the Primer Tracer site.
The RFPs could be sent to Xcel Energy and local community solar developers. In
parallel to the site development RFP process, the County and the MNARNG should
begin the process needed to secure the Primer Tracer land for a solar
development.
6.1.3.   Combined Heat and Power
As part of the developer selection process, the JDA should work with
prospective developers to identify opportunities for serving those buildings'
electric and thermal energy needs with a CHP facility. The JDA and County
should also coordinate with the MNARNG and Xcel Energy to define an initial CHP
facility that can serve the current loads in the area, align with the energy
goals of the MNARNG, and be expanded in the future to meet the emerging TCAAP
energy loads as they occur.
6.1.4.   Low-Temperature District Energy System
The JDA should develop the business plan for the proposed low-temperature
district energy system and form the operational organization in preparation for
the site development request for proposals. In addition, the County should work
with the Army and the appropriate regulatory authorities to obtain approval to
extract energy from the treated ground water, and utilize the existing pump
house for the low-temperature district energy distribution loop. Lastly, the
JDA should continue collaboration with Xcel Energy to explore a neighborhood
that is independent of the natural gas system, through district energy and
electric grid services.
6.1.5.   Demand-Side Management
The JDA should adopt the energy savings design standards it would like to
incorporate into the site development RFP process, both for commercial and
residential developments. The JDA should also inform developers on the various
energy efficiency opportunities that are available to them by developing
informational and educational material for prospective developers. Lastly, the
JDA should collaborate with developers and Xcel Energy to identify
opportunities for an advanced distribution grid and meters, building co-
location, and passive-solar design deployment.
6.1.6.   Infrastructure Planning
The County should develop a utility coordination program that enables cost-
effective implementation of initial utilities and infrastructure on the site,
while allowing for future infrastructure to be added as opportunities come
available. The County should also incorporate solar orientation into the
platting process.
6.1.7.   Funding Pursuits
The JDA should identify the funding opportunities that it could be the most
successful in pursuing, and collaborate with the City, County, MNARNG and other
stakeholders, as appropriate, to develop funding requests for each selected
opportunity. In parallel, the stakeholders should develop and implement an
outreach campaign to inform decision makers on the energy opportunities that
are available at TCAAP.
6.1.8.   RFP Development
The JDA and the County should include energy planning in the development of
RFPs for the site, and through negotiations and discussions with individual
developers. Opportunities for co-location, waste energy capture, energy
efficiency improvements, district energy integration, and other options
discussed in the White Paper and the Framework should be discussed with
developers throughout TCAAP development process to achieve the energy vision.
6.2.   Conclusion
The ERAB has adopted a very forward-thinking vision for the TCAAP site. This
will be achievable through strategic partnerships with Xcel Energy, the MNARNG,
the University of Minnesota Center for Sustainable Building Research,
environmentally conscious citizens, and developers who see the economic and
environmental value of the TCAAP energy vision. Through these partnerships,
TCAAP will be uniquely poised to be the national model for the development of
integrated energy systems.
The first steps toward achieving the energy vision include implementing energy
supply options that focus on efficiency, reliability, scalability, and
sustainability, such as the low-temperature district energy system in the
residential neighborhoods and the community solar garden at the Primer Tracer
site. These specific opportunities have been shown to be financially beneficial
and financeable.
Developing a CHP approach that meets the needs of current buildings in the
area, and is expandable in the future as development proceeds, provides a
platform for establishing a resilient TCAAP microgrid in the future.
Implementing a demand-side management strategy that focuses on building
performance through the development RFP process will build a resilient
community for energy use. Focusing on improving performance in the buildings to
reduce, or even eliminate, the energy needs of the buildings will provide an
economically attractive environment as building owners are able to take
advantage of the financial savings realized by the increased efficiency,
compared to traditional energy expenditures.
Exhibit I - Partnership Opportunities Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1910.png]
Exhibit II - Demand Side Management Recommended Roles Matrix
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1950.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1948.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1946.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1944.png]
 
Exhibit III - TCAAP Land Use Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1908.png]
 
Exhibit IV - Funding Source Matrix
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1906.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1904.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e56332567ec4c0683db5001812987fa7198a54c4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1902.png]
Exhibit V - Definitions
Air Handling Unit (AHU) - A central unit consisting of a blower, heating and
cooling elements, filter racks or chamber, dampers, humidifier, and other
central equipment in direct contact with the airflow. This does not include the
ductwork through the building.
Active solar - As an energy source, energy from the sun collected and stored
using mechanical pumps or fans to circulate heat-laden fluids or air between
solar collectors and a building.
Alternating Current (AC) - An electric current that reverses its direction at
regularly recurring intervals. AC is the form in which electric power is
delivered to businesses and residences.
Alternative-rate Energy Efficiency program assistance - An Energy Efficiency
(demand-side management) program assistance that offers special rate structures
or discounts on the consumer's monthly electric bill in exchange for
participation in Energy Efficiency programs aimed at cutting peak demands or
changing load shape. These rates are intended to reduce consumer bills and
shift hours of operation of equipment from on-peak to off-peak periods through
the application of time-differentiated rates. For example, utilities often pay
consumers several dollars a month (refund on their monthly electric bill) for
participation in a load control program. Large commercial and industrial
customers sometimes obtain interruptible rates, which provide a discount in
return for the consumer's agreement to cut electric loads upon request from the
utility (usually during critical periods, such as summer afternoons when the
system demand approaches the utility's generating capability).
Arden Hills Army Training Site (AHATS) - A military training area of Minnesota
National Guard and the Minnesota Department of Military Affairs that is
directly adjacent to the Rice Creek Commons Project to the east.
ASHRAE Bin temperature data - Temperature frequency in 5 F intervals available
from American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers.
Boiler - A device for generating steam for power, processing, or heating
purposes; or hot water for heating purposes or hot water supply. Heat from an
external combustion source is transmitted to a fluid contained within the tubes
found in the boiler shell. This fluid is delivered to an end-use at a desired
pressure, temperature, and quality.
British Thermal Unit (Btu) - The amount of heat required to raise the
temperature of one pound of water 1 degree Fahrenheit. The Btu is a small
amount of heat equivalent to the heat released by a burning matchstick. For
district heating systems, heat is often measured in million Btus (MMBtu) which
is equivalent to one million Btu's.
Building Commissioning - a building performance quality assurance process that
begins during design and continues through construction, occupancy, and
operations. Commissioning ensures that the new building operates initially as
intended by design and that building staff are prepared to operate and maintain
its systems and equipment.
Capacity - The maximum output, commonly expressed in megawatts (MW), that
generating equipment can supply to system load, adjusted for ambient
conditions.
Chiller - Any centrally located air conditioning system that produces chilled
water in order to cool air. The chilled water or cold air is then distributed
throughout the building, using pipes or air ducts or both. These systems are
also commonly known as "central chillers," "centrifugal chillers,"
"reciprocating chillers," or "absorption chillers." Chillers are generally
located in or just outside the building they serve. Buildings receiving
district chilled water are served by chillers located at central physical
plants.
Chilled Water - The product of a Chiller that is distributed through a building
or, in the case of a District Cooling system, other adjacent buildings for the
purposes of air conditioning.
Coefficient of Performance (COP) - Ratio of work or useful output to the amount
of work or energy input, both represented in the same unit. Used generally as a
measure of the energy-efficiency of chillers and heat pumps.
Combined Heating and Power (CHP) - A plant designed to produce both heat and
electricity from a single heat source.
Conservation - A reduction in energy consumption that corresponds with a
reduction in service demand. Service demand can include buildings-sector end
uses such as lighting, refrigeration, and heating; industrial processes; or
vehicle transportation. Unlike energy efficiency, which is typically a
technological measure, conservation is better associated with behavior.
Examples of conservation include adjusting the thermostat to reduce the output
of a heating unit, using occupancy sensors that turn off lights or appliances,
and car-pooling.
Constant Air Volume (CAV) - A system designed to provide a constant air flow.
This term is applied to HVAC systems that have variable supply-air temperature
but constant air flow rates. Most residential forced-air systems are small CAV
systems with on/off control.
Consumer (energy) - Any individually metered dwelling, building, establishment,
or location using natural gas, synthetic natural gas, and/or mixtures of
natural and supplemental gas for feedstock or as fuel for any purpose other
than in oil or gas lease operations; natural gas treating or processing plants;
or pipeline, distribution, or storage compressors.
Cooling Degree Days - A degree day is the difference in temperature between the
outdoor mean temperature over a 24-hour day and a given base temperature.
Cooling degree days occur when the outdoor mean temperature is above 65 F.
Cubic Feet per Minute (CFM) - A common means of assigning quantitative values
to volumes of air or fluid in transit.
Customer conversion - The equipment in a customer building mechanical room that
transfers thermal energy from the district heating system to the building
systems to allow the heat to be distributed throughout the building. The
customer conversion usually consists of heat exchangers, pumps, piping, control
sensors, and control valves to enable heat to be efficiently transferred from
the higher temperature district heating system to the lower temperature
building system.
Daylighting - Designing buildings to maximize the use of natural daylight to
reduce the need for electricity.
Demand-Side Management (Energy Efficiency) - A utility action that reduces or
curtails end-use equipment or processes. Energy Efficiency is often used in
order to reduce customer load during peak demand and/or in times of supply
constraint. Energy Efficiency includes programs that are focused, deep, and
immediate such as the brief curtailment of energy-intensive processes used by a
utility's most demanding industrial customers, and programs that are broad,
shallow, and less immediate such as the promotion of energy-efficient equipment
in residential and commercial sectors.
Demand-side management costs - The costs incurred by the utility to achieve the
capacity and energy savings from the Demand-Side Management Program.
Differential temperature (dT, delta T) - The difference between the supply
temperature and return temperature of the district heating water delivered to
users. This is an indication of the amount of energy delivered to the customer.
Direct Current (DC) - The unidirectional flow of electric charge. Direct
current is produced by sources such as batteries, thermocouples, and solar
cells. The electric current flows in a constant direction, distinguishing it
from alternating current (AC).
Distributed Control System (DCS) - A control system of an energy production
plant and process wherein control elements are not only located in central
location but are also distributed throughout the system with each component
sub-system controlled by one or more controllers so the intelligence is
distributed across the sections of the system.
Distribution - The delivery of energy to retail customers.
District energy - A thermal energy delivery system that connects energy users
with a central production facility.
Diversified load - The actual peak load on an energy system. The diversified
load is less than the sum of the peak loads of individual users due to the
difference in time of day that each individual user realizes their peak load.
Distribution system - The underground piping network that delivers hot water
from an energy production facility to the customer buildings. Hot water is
circulated through this distribution system using pumps that are located at the
production facility.
Domestic hot water - Potable water that is heated for use in faucets, showers,
laundry, and similar uses.
Energy Conservation Measure (ECM) - This includes building shell conservation
measures, HVAC conservation measures, lighting conservation measures, any
conservation measures, and other conservation measures incorporated by the
building. However, this category does not include any Energy Efficiency program
participation by the building. Any Energy Efficiency program participation is
included in the Energy Efficiency Programs.
Energy Transfer Station - Equipment installed at the point of customer
connection to the district energy system. The energy transfer station is
utilized to transfer and measure the thermal energy delivered from the district
energy distribution network to the customer's building(s) or other thermal
loads.
Energy Usage Intensity - The quantity of total energy that a building consumes
per square foot per year. Energy is usually expressed in terms of thousand
British thermal units (KBtu/SF/year).
Energy Utilization Index (EUI) - Measure of the total energy consumed in
cooling or heating of a building or facility in a period, expressed as British
thermal unit (Btu) per (cooled or heated) gross square foot.
Equivalent Full Load Hours - Annual energy usage divided by the peak capacity
used.
Fixed Operations and Maintenance (FOM) - Costs other than those associated with
capital investment that do not vary with the operation, such as maintenance and
payroll.
Fuel Cell CHP - Electrochemical power generation process generating both
electricity and thermal energy suitable for making steam or hot water.
Geothermal energy - Hot water or steam extracted from geothermal reservoirs in
the earth's crust. Water or steam extracted from geothermal reservoirs can be
used for geothermal heat pumps, water heating, or electricity generation.
Geothermal plant - A plant in which the prime mover is a steam turbine. The
turbine is driven either by steam produced from hot water or by natural steam
that derives its energy from heat found in rock.
Green Spine - The corridor through the Rice Creek Commons development that will
be designated green space for the use of stormwater management, recreational
trails, and parks.
Greenhouse gases (GHG) - Those gases, such as water vapor, carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide, methane, hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and
sulfur hexafluoride, that are transparent to solar (short- wave) radiation but
opaque to long-wave (infrared) radiation, thus preventing long-wave radiant
energy from leaving Earth's atmosphere. The net effect is a trapping of
absorbed radiation and a tendency to warm the planet's surface.
Ground Source Heat Pump - A heat pump in which the refrigerant exchanges heat
(in a heat exchanger) with a fluid circulating through an earth connection
medium (ground or ground water). The fluid is contained in a variety of loop
(pipe) configurations depending on the temperature of the ground and the ground
area available. Loops may be installed horizontally or vertically in the ground
or submersed in a body of water.
Heat pump - Heating and/or cooling equipment that, during the heating season,
draws heat into a building from outside and, during the cooling season, ejects
heat from the building to the outside. Heat pumps are vapor- compression
refrigeration systems whose indoor/outdoor coils are used reversibly as
condensers or evaporators, depending on the need for heating or cooling.
Heating Degree Days - A degree day is the difference in temperature between the
outdoor mean temperature over a 24-hour day and a given base temperature.
Heating degree days occur when the outdoor mean temperature is below 65 F.
Heat exchanger - A pressure vessel that contains plates or tubes and allows the
transfer of heat through the plates or tubes from the district heating system
water to the building heat distribution system. A heat exchanger is divided
internally into two separate circuits so that the district heating system water
and the building heat distribution system fluids do not mix.
Heating coil - A heating element made of pipe or tube that is designed to
transfer heat energy to a specific area or working fluid.
Hot water supply and return lines - The district heating system piping that
distributes hot water for heating purposes to customers (supply) and returns
the cooler water to the Plant for reheating (return).
Kilowatt (kW) - A unit of power equal to one thousand Watts (W)
Kilowatt-hour (kWh) - A measure of electricity defined as a unit of work or
energy, measured as 1 kilowatt (1,000watts) of power expended for 1 hour. One
kWh is equivalent to 3,412 Btu.
Load - The amount of energy used by a customer. Typically refers to the Peak
Load on the system.
Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE) - The present value of the total cost of
building and operating a generating plant over its economic life, converted to
equal annual payments. LCOE is determined by dividing the project's total cost
of operation by the energy generated.
Medium temperature hot water - Thermal heat transferred via hot water at a
temperature between 190 °F and 250 °F.
Megawatt (MW) - One million Watts (W)
Megawatt-hour (MWh) - One thousand kilowatt-hours
Microgrid - A group of interconnected loads and distributed energy resources
within clearly defined electrical boundaries that act as a single controllable
entity with respect to the grid and can connect and disconnect from the grid to
enable it to operate in both grid-connected or island-mode.
Million BTU (MMBTU) -One million British Thermal Units (BTU). One MMBTU is
equivalent to 293.07 kWh.
Net Present Value (NPV) - The difference between the present value of the
future cash flows from an investment and the amount of investment. Present
value of the expected cash flows is computed by discounting them at the
required rate of return. A zero net present value means the project repays
original investment plus the required rate of return. A positive net present
value means a better return, and a negative net present value means a worse
return, than the return from zero net present value.
Non-diversified load - The sum of the peak loads of individual users. This is a
theoretical maximum system peak load.
Normalized - Adjusted annual data of monthly building usage values measured on
different monthly heating degree scales to a common scale prior to averaging.
N+1 Redundancy - A measure of system component redundancy to provide backup in
the event of failure of any one component. N+1 refers to the number of units
installed to carry normal load plus one additional unit as backup. For example,
if a system has three chillers to achieve the total design load, each is rated
at 33% of the total load, or N=3. For this example, an N+1 system will have a
total of four chillers of 33% capacity for a total installed capacity of 133%
with one chiller providing backup in the event of failure of any one chiller.
Operations and Maintenance (O&M) - The activities related to the performance of
routine, preventive, predictive, scheduled, and unscheduled actions aimed at
preventing equipment failure or decline with the goal of increasing efficiency,
reliability, and safety.
Outside Air Temperature (OAT) - A measure of the air temperature outside a
building. The temperature and humidity of air inside and outside the building
are used in enthalpy calculations to determine when outside air can be used for
free heating or cooling.
Passive solar heating - A solar heating system that uses no external mechanical
power, such as pumps or blowers, to move the collected solar heat.
Peak load/ Peak demand- The maximum load during a specified period of time
Photovoltaic and solar thermal energy - Energy radiated by the sun as
electromagnetic waves (electromagnetic radiation) that is converted at electric
utilities into electricity by means of solar (photovoltaic) cells or
concentrating (focusing) collectors.
PSI - An abbreviation for pounds per square inch. PSI is a unit of pressure
measurement.
Rice Creek Commons (RCC) - The name of the land development project that is
being led by Ramsey County, as the land owner, on the site formerly known as
the Twin Cities Army Ammunitions Plant (TCAAP).
Recommissioning - A type of commissioning that occurs within an existing,
operating building to identify ways the building operation is sub-optimal. The
decision to recommission may be triggered by a change in building use or
ownership, the onset of operational problems, or some other need. Renewable
energy resources - Energy resources that are naturally replenishing but flow-
limited. They are virtually inexhaustible in duration but limited in the amount
of energy that is available per unit of time. Renewable energy resources
include biomass, hydro, geothermal, solar, wind, ocean thermal, wave action,
and tidal action
Resiliency - The ability to withstand disruptions to the regional or national
energy grids or significant volatility to the market price for energy sources.
Return on Investment (ROI) - The earning power of assets measured as the ratio
of the net income (profit less depreciation) to the average capital employed
(or equity capital) in a company or project. Expressed usually as a percentage,
return on investment is a measure of profitability that indicates whether or
not a company is using its resources in an efficient manner. For example, if
the long-term return on investment of a company is lower than its cost-of-
capital, then the company will be better off by liquidating its assets and
depositing the proceeds in a bank.
Seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) - Ratio of the cooling output divided
by the power consumption. It is the Btu of cooling output during its normal
annual usage divided by the total electric energy input in watt hours during
the same period. This is a measure of the cooling performance for rating
central air conditioners and central heat pumps.
Service line/service piping/customer connection - The segment of the district
heating distribution system that extends from the main lines to the inside of
the customer building. The service line is typically sized to meet the peak hot
water flow requirements for the individual building served by the piping.
Square Foot (SQ FT or ft2) - Unit of measure to quantify the footprint area of
a customer building, used to estimate the Load of a building based on the usage
of the building.
Source Energy - The total amount of raw fuel that is required to operate an
energy-using device or facility. Source energy includes all transmission,
delivery, and production losses, thereby enabling a complete assessment of
energy efficiency in a building. On the other hand, "Site Energy" is the amount
of heat and electricity consumed by a building as reflected in utility bills.
Solar cooling - The use of solar thermal energy or solar electricity to power a
cooling appliance.
Solar Photovoltaic Systems (PV) - Systems that directly convert sunlight into
electricity either for use locally or for delivery to the electric grid.
Solar Thermal - Systems that directly convert sunlight into heat, generally for
domestic hot water though they can also be used to produce space heating.
Substation - Facility equipment that switches, changes, or regulates electric
voltage.
Sustainability - Meeting the needs of the present generation without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
Therm - One hundred thousand (100,000) Btu
Thermal energy - Energy that is generated and measured in the form of heat.
Thermal Energy Storage - The storage of heat energy during utility off-peak
times at night, for use during the next day without incurring daytime peak
electric rates.
Thumb - That portion of the Rice Creek Commons development that is at the
extreme northwest of the site, and is separated from the remainder of the site
by Rice Creek.
Transit Oriented Development (TOD) - Land development that takes into account
transportation choices as a means of reducing oil and other energy use.
Typically it would combine public transit with walkable, mixed-use communities,
and approaches to minimize the impact of individual vehicles and commuting.
Waste Heat Recovery - An energy conservation system whereby some space heating
or water heating is done by actively capturing byproduct heat that would
otherwise be ejected into the environment. In nonresidential buildings, sources
of waste heat include refrigeration/air-conditioner compressors, manufacturing
or other processes, data processing centers, lighting fixtures, ventilation
exhaust air, and the occupants themselves. Not to be considered is the passive
use of radiant heat from lighting, workers, motors, ovens, etc., when there are
no special systems for collecting and redistributing heat.
Water source heat pump - A type of (geothermal) heat pump that uses well
(ground) or surface water as a heat source. Water has a more stable seasonal
temperature than air thus making for a more efficient heat source.
Variable Air Volume (VAV) - An HVAC system that has a stable supply-air
temperature, and varies the air flow rate to meet the temperature requirements.
Compared to constant air volume (CAV) systems, these systems conserve energy
through lower fan speeds during times of lower temperature control demand.
Variable frequency drive - an electronic controller that controls the speed of
an electric motor by modulating input frequency and voltage to match motor
speed to the specific demands of the work being performed.
Chapter 14 - Property Maintenance Code
(IPMC rewritten with permission from ICC)
1400.01   Administration.
   Subd. 1   General.
      A.   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code of the City of Arden Hills, hereinafter referred to as "this Code."
      B.   Scope. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all existing
residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and
constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation,
protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards,
and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators
and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for
administration, enforcement and penalties.
      C.   Intent. This Code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent,
which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare in so far as they are
affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises.
Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall
be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as
required herein.
      D.   Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code.
   Subd. 2   Applicability.
      A.   General. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in Section
1400.01 Subd. 1. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this Code
specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
      B.   Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this Code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or
premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good
working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except
for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are
in progress. The requirements of this Code are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner
or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises.
      C.   Application of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the current additional of the Minnesota State
Building Code. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set
aside any provision of the City of Arden Hills Zoning Code.
      D.   Existing Remedies. The provisions in this Code shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary.
      E.   Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Code shall
be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
      F.   Historic buildings. The provisions of this Code shall not be
mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings
when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe
and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
      G.   Referenced Codes and Standards. The codes and standards referenced
in this Code shall be those that are listed in the current addition of the
Minnesota State Building Code and considered part of the requirements of this
Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur
between provisions of this Code and the current addition of the Minnesota State
Building Code, the provisions of the current addition of the Minnesota State
Building Code shall apply.
      H.   Requirements Not Covered by Code. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or
equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this Code, shall be determined by the code official.
   Subd. 3   Property Maintenance Inspection.
      A.   General. The Building Official shall be known as the Code Official.
      B.   Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the chief
appointing authority of the jurisdiction; and the code official shall not be
removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on
specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.
      C.   Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code
official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy code official, other
related technical officers, inspectors and other employees.
      D.   Liability. The code official, officer or employee charged with the
enforcement of this Code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby
be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted
against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this
Code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until
the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Code; and any officer of the
department of property maintenance inspection, acting in good faith and without
malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its
provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official
duties in connection therewith.
      E.   Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be
approved by an annual ordinance of the Arden Hills City Council.
   Subd. 4   Duties and Powers of Code Official.
      A.   General. The Code official shall enforce the provisions of this
Code.
      B.   Rule-Making Authority. The code official shall have authority as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the
provisions of this Code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate
requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such
rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance
requirements specifically provided for in this Code, or of violating accepted
engineering methods involving public safety.
      C.   Inspections. The code official shall make all of the required
inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be
certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert
opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise,
subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
      D.   Right of Entry. The code official is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by
law.
      E.   Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification
when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this
Code.
      F.   Notices and Orders. The code official shall issue all necessary
notices or orders to ensure compliance with this Code.
      G.   Department records. The code official shall keep official records of
all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of
this Code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as
the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence,
unless otherwise provided for by other regulations.
   Subd. 5   Approval.
      A.   Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this Code, the code official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the code
official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict
letter of this Code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the
intent and purpose of this Code and that such modification does not lessen
health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting
modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.
      B.   Alternative Materials, Methods and Equipment. The provisions of this
Code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Code,
provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material
or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that
the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the
provisions of this Code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for
the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code
in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
      C.   Required Testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this Code, or evidence that a material or
method does not conform to the requirements of this Code, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official
shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance
at no expense to the jurisdiction.
         1.   Test Methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this Code or
by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted
test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve appropriate
testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
         2.   Test Reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code
official for the period required for retention of public records.
      D.   Material and Equipment Reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been
reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working
condition and approved.
   Subd. 6   Violations.
      A.   Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of
this Code.
      B.   Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a notice of
violation or order in accordance with Section
1400.01 Subd. 7.
      C.   Prosecution of Violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice
of violation or order served in accordance with Section
1400.01 Subd. 7 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as
determined by the local municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a
strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the
code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any
action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate.
      D.   Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate a provision of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished as a misdemeanor offense. Each day upon
which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
      E.   Abatement of Violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from
instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an
illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or
premises.
   Subd. 7   Notices and Orders.
      A.   Notice to Person Responsible. Whenever the code official determines
that there has been a violation of this Code or has grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in
Section
1400.01 Subd 7.B. and Section
1400.01 Subd 7.C. to the person responsible for the violation as specified in
this Code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section
1400.01 Subd 8.C.
      B.   Form. Such notice prescribed in Section
1400.01 Subd 7.A. shall be in accordance with all of the following:
         1.   Be in writing.
         2.   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.
         3.   include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued.
         4.   include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this Code.
         5.   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
         6.   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance
with Section
1400.01 Subd. 6.C.
      C.   Method of Service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
if a copy thereof is:
         1.   Delivered personally;
         2.   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address; or
         3.   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure affected by such notice.
      D.   Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall
be as set forth in Section
1400.01 Subd. 6.D.
      E.   Transfer of Ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a
notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied
with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and
notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and
fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections
or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
   Subd. 8   Unsafe Structures and Equipment.
      A.   General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official
to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is
found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of
this Code.
         1.   Unsafe Structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete
collapse is possible.
         2.   Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable
liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to
life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or
structure.
         3.   Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for
human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe,
unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or
lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination,
         4.   Unlawful Structure. Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is
one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted
under this Code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
      B.   Closing of Vacant Structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit
for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on
the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed
and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement
by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
      C.   Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with Section
1400.01 Subd 7.C. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed
on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in
Section
1400.01 Subd 7.B.
      D.   Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to
comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official
shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word
"Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
         1.   Placard removal. The code official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or
removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official shall
be subject to the penalties provided by this Code.
      E.   Prohibited Occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded
by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any
person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded
equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall
let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be
liable for the penalties provided by this Code.
   Subd. 9   Emergency Measures.
      A.   Imminent Danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and
life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual
or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any
structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of
toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous
equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and
require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall
cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as
follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the
Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure
except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs,
removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
      B.   Temporary Safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code,
whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to
an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be
done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure
temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official
deems necessary to meet such emergency.
      C.   Closing Streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official
shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having
jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to
unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
      D.   Emergency Repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code
official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible.
      E.   Costs of Emergency Repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the
jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such
costs.
      F.   Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition
directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this Code.
   Subd. 10   Demolition.
      A.   General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises
upon which is located any structure, which in the code official's judgment is
so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that
it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to
repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's
option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such
structure.
      B.   Notices and Orders. All notices and orders shall comply with Section
1400.01 Subd 7.
      C.   Failure to Comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the
structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public
agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such
demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
      D.   Salvage Materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished
and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract
or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable
materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after
deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly
remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of
expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto,
subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned
over, the report shall so state.
   Subd. 11   Appeal.
      A.   Application for Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal to
the Arden Hills City Council or its designee, a decision of the Building
Official or a notice or order issued under this Code. An application for appeal
shall be based upon a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder, has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this Code do not fully apply or the requirements of this Code are adequately
satisfied by other means.
1400.02   Definitions.
   Subd. 1   General.
      A.   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall,
for the purposes of this Code, have the meanings shown in this Section.
      B.   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
      C.   Terms Defined in Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this
Code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Fire
Code, International Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code, International
Mechanical Code or the ICC Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
      D.   Terms Not Defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
      E.   Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises,"
"building," "rooming house," "rooming unit" "housekeeping unit" or "story" are
stated in this Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by
the words "or any part thereof."
   Subd. 2   General Definitions.
      ∙   Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.
      ∙   Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.
      ∙   Bedroom. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
      ∙   Code Official. The official who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative.
      ∙   Condemn. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
      ∙   Dwelling Unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
      ∙   Easement. That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a
said lot or lots.
      ∙   Exterior Property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
      ∙   Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
      ∙   Garbage. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      ∙   Guard. A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes
the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
      ∙   Habitable Space. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
      ∙   Housekeeping Unit. A room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking
and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and
bathtub or shower.
      ∙   Imminent Danger. A condition which could cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
      ∙   Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
      ∙   Inoperable Motor Vehicle. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the
public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under
its own power.
      ∙   Labeled. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has
been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
      ∙   Let for Occupancy or Let. To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to
a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
      ∙   Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
      ∙   Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
      ∙   Openable Area. That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
      ∙   Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure
or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
      ∙   Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property;
or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of
such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
      ∙   Person. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
      ∙   Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way,
including any structures thereon.
      ∙   Public Way. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
      ∙   Rooming House. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling.
      ∙   Rooming Unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for
cooking purposes.
      ∙   Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
      ∙   Sleeping Unit. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also
include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or
kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a
dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
      ∙   Strict Liability Offense. An offense in which the prosecution in a
legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its
case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was
prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to
do.
      ∙   Structure. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
      ∙   Tenant. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not
the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
      ∙   Toilet Room. . A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a
bathtub or shower.
      ∙   II.   Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
      ∙   Wormanlike. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
      ∙   Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
1400.03   General Requirements.
   Subd. 1   General.
      A.   Scope. The provisions of this Section shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment and exterior property.
      B.   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except
as otherwise provided for in this Code. A person shall not occupy as owner-
occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this Section. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part
of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control.
      C.   Vacant Structures and Land. All vacant structures and premises
thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and
sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
   Subd. 2   Exterior Property Areas.
      A.   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained
in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of
the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition.
      B.   Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Exception: Approved retention
areas and reservoirs.
      C.   Sidewalks and Driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and
maintained free from hazardous conditions.
      D.   Reserved.
      E.   Rodent Harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.
      F.   Exhaust Vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
      G.   Accessory Structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
      H.   Motor Vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no
inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any
premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly,
disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of
vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or
similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
      I.   Defacement of Property. No person shall willfully or wantonly
damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on
any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or
graffiti.
      J.   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface
to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
   Subd. 3   Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs.
      A.   Reserved.
   Subd. 4   Exterior Structure.
      A.   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
      B.   Protective Treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces,
other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking
and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and
masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter
of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and
water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to
inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall
be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains
shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by
oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
      C.   Premises Identification. Buildings shall have approved address
numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street
or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke
width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
      D.   Structural Members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
      E.   Foundation Walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
      F.   Exterior Walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
      G.   Roofs and Drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free
from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates
a public nuisance.
      H.   Decorative Features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra
cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in
good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
      I.   Overhang Extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not
limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
      J.   Stairways, Decks, Porches and Balconies. Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
      K.   Chimneys and Towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in
good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
      L.   Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
      M.   Window, Skylight and Door Frames. Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
         1.   Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes.
         2.   Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall
be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
      N.   Insect Screens. During the period from May 1 to November 1, every
door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products
to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and
every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in
good working condition. Exception: Screens shall not be required where other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
      O.   Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and
sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors
shall be in accordance with Section
1400.07 Subd. 2.C.
      P.   Basement Hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
      Q.   Guards for Basement Windows. Every basement window that is openable
shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved
protection against the entry of rodents.
      R.   Building Security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units,
room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to
provide security for the occupants and property within.
         1.   Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress
is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall
have a lock throw of not less than 1 inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be
installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good
working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be
considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
         2.   Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6
feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide
access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device.
         3.   Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let
shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
   Subd. 5   Interior Structure.
      A.   General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in
a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming
house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or
two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary
condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
      B.   Structural Members. All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
      C.   Interior Surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and
doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling,
chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered.
Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions
shall be corrected.
      D.   Stairs and Walking Surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony,
porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and
good repair.
      E.   Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
      F.   Interior Doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within
its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and
securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer
of the attachment hardware.
   Subd. 6   Handrails and Guardrails.
      A.   General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more
than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open
portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking
surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below
shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or
more than 42 inches (1067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the
tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards
shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing,
balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. Exception: Guards shall
not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.
   Subd. 7   Rubbish and Garbage.
      A.   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
      B.   Disposal of Rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers.
         1.   Rubbish Storage Facilities. The owner of every occupied premises
shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
         2.   Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in
operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first
removing the doors.
      C.   Disposal of Garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
         1.   Garbage Facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one
of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling
unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants
in each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage
container.
         2.   Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage
shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof
containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials
until removed from the premises for disposal.
   Subd. 8   Extermination.
      A.   Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and
rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
      B.   Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
      C.   Reserved.
      D.   Multiple Occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas
of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of
an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant
shall be responsible for extermination.
      E.   Reserved.
1400.04   Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations.
   Subd. 1   General.
      A.   Scope. The provisions of this Section shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a
structure.
      B.   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another
person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
Section.
      C.   Alternative Devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the International Building Code shall be permitted.
   Subd. 2   Light.
      A.   Habitable Spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one
window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The
minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the
floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a
window of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm)
from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room,
such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court
and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area for the room. Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without
exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed
opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of
the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The
exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
      B.   Common Halls and Stairways. Every common hall and stairway in
residential occupancies, other than in one-and two-family dwellings, shall be
lighted at all times with at least a 60 watt standard incandescent light bulb
for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or equivalent illumination,
provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet
(9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including
exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the
building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of 1
footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.
      C.   Other Spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions,
and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances,
equipment and fixtures.
   Subd. 3   Ventilation.
      A.   Habitable Spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one
openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be
equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section
1400.04 Subd. 2.A. Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the
outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to
the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the
interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The
ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being
ventilated.
      B.   Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by
Section
1400.04 Subd. 3.A., except that a window shall not be required in such spaces
equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the
outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
      C.   Cooking Facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of
occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory
unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present
in the rooming unit or dormitory unit. With the exception of the following:
         1.   Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.
         2.   Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be
considered cooking appliances.
      D.   Process Ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious
fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system
shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
      E.   Clothes Dryer Exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
   Subd. 4   Occupancy Limitations.
      A.   Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming
units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate
from other adjoining spaces.
      B.   Minimum Room Widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall
not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a
clear passageway of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and
appliances or counterfronts and walls.
      C.   Minimum Ceiling Heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors,
laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have
a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm). With the exception of
the following:
         1.   In one-and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less
than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more than 6 inches (152 mm)
below the required ceiling height.
         2.   Basement rooms in one-and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height
of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm) with not less than 6 feet 4 inches
(1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
         3.   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar
purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear
ceiling height of at least 7 feet (2134 mm) over not less than one-third of the
required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only
those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524
mm) or more shall be included.
      D.   Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room
shall comply with the requirements of Sections
1400.04 Subd. 4.D.(1) through
1400.04 Subd. 4.D.(5).
         1.   Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square
feet (11.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5
m2).
         2.   Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only
means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as
the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. Exception: Units that
contain fewer than two bedrooms.
         3.   Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at
least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one
water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an
adjacent story.
         4.   Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not
be used for sleeping purposes.
         5.   Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation,
room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this Section; the
plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of Section
1400.05; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of
Section
1400.06; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Section
1400.07.
      E.   Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall
not create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the
life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.
      F.   Efficiency Unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an
efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements:
         1.   A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear
floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m2). A unit occupied by three
occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet (29.7
m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by Items 2
and 3.
         2.   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less
than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this Code
shall be provided.
         3.   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
         4.   The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
      G.   Food Preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation
purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve
foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for
the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for
temporary storage.
1400.05   Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements.
   Subd. 1   General.
      A.   Scope. The provisions of this Section shall govern the minimum
plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
      B.   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with
the requirements of this Section.
   Subd. 2   Required Facilities.
      A.   Dwelling Units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or
shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a
sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room
as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly
into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not
be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
      B.   Rooming Houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.
      C.   Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not
provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having
access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.
      D.   Employees' Facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory
and one drinking facility shall be available to employees.
         1.   Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking
fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink
or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or
bathrooms.
   Subd. 3   Toilet Rooms.
      A.   Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall
not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common
or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
      B.   Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing
not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or
passageway.
      C.   Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have
access from within the employees' working area. The required toilet facilities
shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees' working
area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of
500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or
combined employee and public facilities. Exception: Facilities that are
required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in
adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not
exceed a travel distance of 500 feet (152 m) from the employees' regular
working area to the facilities.
      D.   Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor
shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such
floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   Subd. 4   Plumbing Systems and Fixtures.
      A.   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing
fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe,
sanitary and functional condition.
      B.   Fixture Clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances
for usage and cleaning.
      C.   Plumbing System Hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in
a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of
inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage,
improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code
official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
   Subd. 5   Water System.
      A.   General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot
or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International
Plumbing Code.
      B.   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink
faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in
place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an
approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
      C.   Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to
provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in
sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function
properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
      D.   Water Heating Facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly
installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to
be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility
at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater
shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied
room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An
approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve
discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
   Subd. 6   Sanitary Drainage System.
      A.   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either
a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
      B.   Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
   Subd. 7   Storm Drainage.
      A.   General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and
other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.
1400.06   Mechanical and Electrical Requirements.
   Subd. 1   General.
      A.   Scope. The provisions of this Section shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
      B.   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this Section.
   Subd. 2   Heating Facilities.
      A.   Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in
structures as required by this Section.
      B.   Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the International
Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to
meet the requirements of this section. Exception: In areas where the average
monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C)
shall be maintained.
      C.   Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
heat during the period from September 30 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of
not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
With the exception of the following:
         1.   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall
be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
         2.   In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-
1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
      D.   Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from September 30 to April 1 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied. With the exception of the following:
         1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
         2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
      E.   Room Temperature Measurement. The required room temperatures shall
be measured 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and 2
feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.
   Subd. 3   Mechanical Equipment.
      A.   Mechanical Appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid
fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be
capable of performing the intended function.
      B.   Removal of Combustion Products. All fuel-burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. Exception: Fuel-
burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.
      C.   Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall
be maintained.
      D.   Safety Controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment
shall be maintained in effective operation.
      E.   Combustion Air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel
and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be
provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
      F.   Energy Conservation Devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line
thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed
unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
   Subd. 4   Electrical Facilities.
      A.   Facilities Required. Every occupied building shall be provided with
an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and
Section
1400.06 Subd. 5.
      B.   Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve
as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance
with the ICC Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire,
120/240 volt, single phase electrical service having a rating of not less than
60 amperes.
      C.   Electrical System Hazards. Where it is found that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and
lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or
for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.
   Subd. 5   Electrical Equipment.
      A.   Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
      B.   Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at
least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground
fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one
receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter protection.
      C.   Luminaries. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room,
kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at
least one electric luminaire.
   Subd. 6   Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters.
      A.   General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained
in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certification of inspection
shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the
escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the building operator. The inspection and tests
shall be performed at not less than the periodical intervals listed in ASME
A17.1, Appendix N, except where otherwise specified by the authority having
jurisdiction.
      B.   Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least
one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is
occupied. Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing.
   Subd. 7   Duct Systems.
      A.   General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and
shall be capable of performing the required function.
1400.07   Fire Safety Requirements.
   Subd. 1   General.
      A.   Scope. The provisions of this Section shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior
premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
      B.   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain
such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
Section.
   Subd. 2   Means of Egress.
      A.   General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be
provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of
egress shall comply with the International Fire Code.
      B.   Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the
International Fire Code shall be unobstructed.
      C.   Locked Doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable
from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys,
special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that
permitted by the International Building Code.
      D.   Emergency Escape Openings. Required emergency escape openings shall
be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of
construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings
shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or
tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over
emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening
size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and
such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use
of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal
operation of the escape and rescue opening.
   Subd. 3   Fire Resistance Ratings .
      A.   Fire-Resistance-Rated Assemblies. The required fire-resistance
rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions
and floors shall be maintained.
      B.   Opening Protectives. Required opening protectives shall be
maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be
maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not
be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
   Subd. 4   Fire Protection Systems.
      A.   General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire,
actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof
shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with
the International Fire Code.
      B.   Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated
in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following
locations:
         1.   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
         2.   In each room used for sleeping purposes.
         3.   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings
or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed in other groups in accordance with the International Fire Code.
      C.   Power Source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated
as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary
power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a
commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms
shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and
without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection. Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated
in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not
served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings
undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior
wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic,
crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building
wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
      D.   Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in
dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate
all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in
all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
With the exception of the following:
         1.   Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind.
         2.   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
   Based on copyrighted material owned by International Code Council.
   Portions Copyright © 2006 International Code Council. All rights reserved.
Chapter 15 - Erosion and Sediment Control
Section 1500 - Purpose and Scope
1500.01   Purpose.
   The purpose of this regulation is to control or eliminate soil erosion and
sedimentation within the City of Arden Hills. The regulation establishes
standards and specifications for conservation practices and planning activities
which minimize soil erosion and sedimentation and work to protect the City's
natural resources for the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
1500.02   Scope.
   Except as exempted by the definition of the term "land disturbance activity"
in Section
1510.01, any person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, state
agency, or political subdivision thereof proposing land disturbance activity
within the City shall apply to the Public Works Director or appointed designee
(herein called "PWD") for the approval of the Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan. No land shall be disturbed until the Plan is approved by the PWD and
conforms to the standards set forth in this article.
Section 1510 - Definitions
1510.01   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms have the meanings
given them in this section:
      ∙   Best Management Practices (BMP). Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly
or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance
systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage.
         ∙   Non-structural BMP: Practices that focus on preserving open space,
protecting natural systems, and incorporating existing landscape features such
as wetlands and stream corridors to manage storm water at its source. Other
practices include clustering and concentrating development, minimizing
disturbed areas, and reducing the size of impervious areas.
         ∙   Structural BMP: a physical device that is typically designed and
constructed to trap or filter pollutants from runoff, or reduce runoff
velocities.
      ∙   Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment
having the following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less
than 18 percent over a distance for 50 feet or more shall not be considered
part of the bluff):
         ∙   Part or all of the topographic feature is located in a shoreland
area;
         ∙   The slope rises at least twenty five (25) feet above the ordinary
high water level of the waterbody;
         ∙   The grade of the slope from the toe, or bottom, of the bluff to a
point twenty five (25) feet or more above the ordinary high water level
averages thirty percent (30%) or greater; and
         ∙   The slope must drain toward the waterbody.
      ∙   Certificate of Completion. The certificate issued after the final
inspection of the site has been completed, temporary erosion control has been
removed and the site has been fully restored.
      ∙   Clearing and grubbing. The cutting and removal of trees, shrubs,
bushes, windfalls and other vegetation including removal of stumps, roots, and
other remains in the designated areas.
      ∙   Erosion. Any process that wears away the surface of the land by the
action of water, wind, ice, gravity and/or land disturbance activities. Erosion
can be accelerated by the activities of man and nature.
      ∙   Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (Plan) is a plan which includes a
set of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to control
surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site during
the period in which pre-construction and construction related land
disturbances, fills, and soil storage occur, and before final improvements are
completed, all in accordance with the specific requirements set forth in
Section 1520. This Plan shall also include permanent measures and Best
Management Practices to control post-construction surface runoff and sediment.
      ∙   Erosion and sediment control practice specifications and erosion and
sediment control practices. The management procedures, techniques, and methods
to control soil erosion and sedimentation as officially adopted by the City.
      ∙   Excavation. The mechanical removal of earth material.
      ∙   Fill. The deposit of soil or other earth materials placed by
artificial means.
      ∙   General Storm Water Permit. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's
(MPCA) general National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
construction storm water permit covering anyone conducting a land disturbing
activity which disturbs one (1) or more acres of total land area.
      ∙   Grading. Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
      ∙   Land Disturbance Activity. Any land change greater than 2,500 square
feet or 50 cubic yards, or land change on a parcel of land located within 1,000
feet of a shoreland area or adjacent to a surface water that may result in soil
erosion from wind, water and/or ice and the movement of sediments into or upon
waters or lands of the city, including but not limited to construction,
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land.
Land Disturbance Activity does not mean the following:
         ∙   Minor land disturbance activities such as home gardens and an
individual's home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work;
         ∙   Additions or modifications to existing single-family dwellings or
accessory structures that will result in creating under 2,500 square feet of
exposed soil and/or impervious surface;
         ∙   Construction, installation and maintenance of electric, telephone,
and cable television utility lines or individual service connection to these
utilities, except where a minimum of 2,500 square feet of land disturbance can
be anticipated;
         ∙   Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or
silvicultural crops;
         ∙   Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and
other kinds of posts, bollards or poles; and
         ∙   Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property and emergency
repairs. However, if the land disturbing activity would have required an
approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan except for the emergency, then the
land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the
requirement of the PWD when applicable.
(Amended 11/27/23)
      ∙   Outfall. The point source where a storm sewer system discharges from
a pipe, ditch, or other discrete conveyance to receiving waters, or to a storm
sewer system owned and operated by another party.
      ∙   Permittee. A person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, state agency or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land
disturbance activity who submits an application to the PWD for a permit
pursuant to this ordinance.
      ∙   Phasing. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the
stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next.
      ∙   Ramsey Conservation District. The Ramsey Soil and Water Conservation
District.
      ∙   Rice Creek Watershed District. An organization which oversees the
activities in the Rice Creek watershed as defined by Minnesota Statutes,
Sections 103B,and 103D.
      ∙   Runoff. Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the
ground surface.
      ∙   Sediment. Solid mineral or organic material that, in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its original site by air, water,
gravity, or ice, and has been deposited at another location.
      ∙   Sedimentation. The process or action of depositing sediment, caused
by erosion.
      ∙   Site. The entire area of land on which the land disturbance activity
is proposed in the permit application.
      ∙   Site Plan. A plan or set of plans showing the details of any land
disturbance activity of a site including but not limited to the construction
of: structures, open and enclosed drainage facilities, stormwater management
facilities, parking lots, driveways, curbs, pavements, sidewalks, bike paths,
recreational facilities, ground covers, plantings, and landscaping.
      ∙   Shoreland. The land located within the following distances from
protected waters:
         ∙   One thousand (1,000) feet from the ordinary high water mark of a
lake, pond, or flowage;
         ∙   Three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream, or the landward
extent of a flood plain on such rivers or streams, whichever is greater; and,
         ∙   The practical limits of shorelands may be less than the statutory
limits where the limits are designated by natural drainage divides at lesser
distances, as shown on the official map of the City.
      ∙   Stabilization. The use of measures which protect soil from the
erosion forces of wind, rain and flowing water.
      ∙   Steep Slope. Land where agricultural activity or development is
either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and
the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county
soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and
construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Where specific information is not available, steep
slopes are lands having average slopes over twelve percent (12%), as measured
over horizontal distances of fifty (50) feet or more, that are not bluffs.
      ∙   Surface Water or Waters. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
wetlands, reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways,
watercourses, and irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or
private.
      ∙   Utility. The owner/operator of any underground facility including an
underground line, facility, system, and its appurtenances used to produce,
store, convey, transmit, or distribute communications, data, electricity,
power, heat, gas, oil, petroleum products, water (including stormwater), steam,
sewage and other similar substances.
      ∙   Watercourse. Any natural or improved stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, gutter, culvert, drain, gully, swale, or wash in which
waters flow either continuously or intermittently.
      ∙   Watershed. A region draining to a specific river, river system, or
body of water.
      ∙   Wetlands. A lowland area such as a marsh, that is saturated with
moisture, as defined in Sec. 404, Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1987, or the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991.
Section 1520 - Erosion and Sediment Control Plans and Review
1520.01   Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
   Subd. 1   Required. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan must be submitted
to the PWD for every project involving a land disturbance activity. No building
permit, site plan approval, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land
disturbing activities shall be issued and no earth disturbing activity shall
commence until approval of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
   Projects coordinated by Ramsey County or Mn/DOT do not require a permit;
however, the PWD shall be notified of the project and be provided a copy of the
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, as well as an estimated schedule for
commencement and completion. The PWD shall notify the designated contact if
erosion control measures should fail or require maintenance with the
expectation that the deficiencies will be corrected.
   If no permit has been obtained, a stop work order may be issued on the
construction and a fine may be issued in an amount equal to twice the required
permit fee. A completed Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and permit
application shall be submitted before construction will be allowed to resume.
   Obtaining a permit does not exempt the Permittee from obtaining permits
required by other governmental agencies.
   Subd. 2   Application Fee. The Permittee shall submit an application fee as
specified on the City's Fee Schedule as adopted and revised annually by the
City Council by ordinance. The fee is non-refundable and shall cover any review
costs accrued within one (1) year of the date of payment.
   Subd. 3   Criteria. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall minimize
soil erosion or sediment from damaging adjacent land. A Permittee engaged in a
Land Disturbance Activity shall submit an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
that will minimize soil erosion or sediment from damaging adjacent land, bodies
of water, watercourses or wetlands to the PWD for approval.
   The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall address the following criteria:
      A.   Conform to the natural limitations presented by topography and soil
so as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
      B.   Stabilize all exposed soils and soil stockpiles;
      C.   Establish permanent vegetation;
      D.   Prevent sediment damage to adjacent properties and other designated
areas;
      E.   Schedule of erosion and sediment control practices;
      F.   Use of temporary sedimentation basins;
      G.   Stabilization of steep slopes and bluffs;
      H.   Control the storm water leaving a site;
      I.   Stabilize all waterways and outlets;
      J.   Protect storm sewers and outfalls from the entrance of sediment,
debris and trash;
      K.   Control waste, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck
washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste that may adversely impact water
quality;
      L.   When working in or crossing water bodies, take precautions to
contain sediment;
      M.   Re-stabilize utility construction areas as soon as possible;
      N.   Protect paved roads from sediment and mud brought in from access
routes;
      O.   Dispose of temporary erosion and sediment control measures;
      P.   Maintain all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control
practices; and,
      Q.   Removal of sediment from streets at the end of each day
   Subd. 4   Plan Content. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan content shall
include the following unless waived by the PWD:
      A.   Contact information for the Permittee;
      B.   Address of site where the land disturbing activity is proposed;
      C.   Signature(s) of the owner(s) of the site or an authorized
representative;
      D.   Project description including the nature and purpose of the land
disturbing activity and the amount of grading involved;
      E.   Phasing of construction and timeline;
      F.   Existing and proposed site conditions, including topography,
vegetation, and drainage;
      G.   Adjacent areas, neighboring streams, lakes, wetlands, residential
areas, roads, etc., which might be affected by the land disturbing activity;
      H.   Soil data including soil names, mapping units, erodibility;
      I.   Critical erosion areas, which are areas on the site that have
potential for serious erosion problems;
      J.   Erosion and sediment control measures to be used on the site, both
during and after the construction process;
      K.   Temporary and Permanent stabilization to show how the site will be
stabilized during and after construction (is completed), including
specifications;
      L.   Storm water management to show how storm runoff will be managed,
including methods to be used if the development will result in increased peak
rates or volume of runoff;
      M.   Maintenance and schedule of regular inspections and repair of
erosion and sediment control structures; and,
      N.   Any calculations that were made for the design of such items as
sediment basins, diversions, waterways, and other applicable practices.
      O.   A land disturbance activity equal to or greater than one (1) acre is
required to comply with the conditions of the NPDES/SDS Construction Stormwater
General Permit, Part IV – Construction Activity Requirements.
1520.02   Review of Permit Application
   Subd. 1   General. The PWD shall review the Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan to ensure compliance with the erosion and sediment control practice
specifications and erosion and sediment control practices.
   Subd. 2   Permit Approval. If the PWD determines that the Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan meets the requirements of this ordinance, the PWD shall
issue a permit, valid for a specified period of time that authorizes the land
disturbance activity contingent on the implementation and completion of the
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
   Subd. 3   Permit Denial. If the PWD determines that the Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan does not meet the requirements of this article, the PWD shall not
issue a permit for the land disturbance activity. The Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan must be resubmitted for approval before the land disturbance
activity begins. No land use and building permits shall be issued until the
Permittee has an approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
1520.03   Escrow Requirement.
   After approval of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, the PWD may require
the Permittee to escrow a sum of money sufficient to ensure the installation,
completion, maintenance, inspection, and enforcement of the Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan and practices. Escrow amounts shall be set by Ordinance
in the City fee schedule. Inspection fees shall be drawn from the escrow. Six
months after final inspection, the remaining escrow shall be returned to the
Permittee. (Amended 11/27/23)
1520.04   Modification of Plan.
   An approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan may be modified upon
submission of an application for modification to the PWD and subsequent
approval by the PWD. In reviewing such application, the PWD may require
additional reports and data.
Section 1530 - Implementation and Maintenance
1530.01   Implementation and Maintenance of Plan.
   All storm water pollution controls noted on the approved Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan shall be installed before commencing the land disturbing
activity and shall not be removed without PWD approval or approval of a
Certificate of Completion. Noncompliance with the Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan shall constitute grounds for an order from the PWD to halt all
construction.
1530.02   Implementation.
   The plan implementation shall incorporate the following:
   Subd. 1   Existing vegetation shall be retained whenever feasible.
   Subd. 2   Land shall be disturbed in increments of workable size such that
adequate erosion and sediment control can be provided and maintained as
construction progresses. The area exposed shall be stabilized in conformance
with best management practices and with the maintenance requirements in the
NPDES General Construction Permit. Soil stabilization measures should be
selected to be appropriate for the time of year, site conditions, and estimated
duration of use.
   Subd. 3   The location of areas not to be disturbed shall be identified with
flags, stakes, signs, silt fence, etc. before construction begins.
   Subd. 4   Down-gradient sediment controls shall be in place before up-
gradient land disturbing activity begins.
   Subd. 5   All storm drains, inlets and outfalls shall be protected until all
sources of potential discharge are stabilized.
   Subd. 6   Temporary stockpiles shall have effective sediment control and
cannot be placed in surface waters or storm water conveyance systems.
   Subd. 7   Vehicle tracking from the site shall be minimized with the use of
stone pads, concrete or steel wash racks, or equivalent systems.
   Subd. 8   Street sweeping shall be used if BMPs are not adequate to prevent
sediment from being tracked into the street.
1530.03   Responsibility.
   The Permittee shall be responsible for proper operation and maintenance of
all stormwater pollution controls and soil stabilization measures in
conformance with best management practices and with the maintenance
requirements in the NPDES General Construction Permit. The Permittee is
responsible for the operation and maintenance of temporary erosion at the site.
The Permittee is responsible until another Permittee has assumed control over
all areas of the site that have not been finally stabilized or the site has
undergone final stabilization, and has received an approved Certificate of
Completion. The Permittee is responsible for maintenance, clean-up and all
damages caused by flooding of the site or surrounding area due to in-place
erosion or sediment control.
Section 1540 - Enforcement
1540.01   Erosion and Sediment Control Permit Enforcement.
   If the PWD determines that erosion and sedimentation control is not being
implemented or maintained according to the approved Plan, the Permittee will be
notified and provided with a list of corrective work to be performed.
Notification may be given by personal delivery upon the Permittee, or an
officer, partner, manager or designated representative of the Permittee, or by
e-mail or facsimile by sending such notice to the e-mail address or facsimile
number provided by the Permittee. Upon the receipt of a Non-Compliance Notice
from the PWD, the Permittee shall undertake a corrective action.
   Subd. 1   Types of Corrective Actions.
      A.   Violations Contained on the Construction Site. Permittee shall
complete clean-up and restoration within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of
the Non-Compliance Notice.
      B.   Violation Impacting Adjoining Property. Permittee shall develop and
complete a clean-up and restoration plan within forty-eight (48) hours of
receipt of a Non-Compliance Notice unless the affected adjoining property owner
refuses Permittee access to the adjoining property. In all cases, clean-up and
restoration shall be completed within seven (7) days of receipt of the Non-
Compliance Notice, unless an extension is granted by the PWD.
      C.   Violations Impacting Streets, Wetlands, or Water Bodies. Permittee
shall develop and implement a clean-up and restoration plan immediately upon
receipt of a Non-Compliance Notice.
   Subd. 2   Failure to Comply. If Permittee fails to implement the Plan or
complete any required corrective action in a timely manner, the City may pursue
one or more of the remedies specified herein. All costs incurred by the City
shall be paid by Permittee. Escrow funds may be used by the City for this
purpose and, if such funds do not adequately cover the City's cost, the
Permittee shall reimburse the City for any deficiency before continuing work on
the construction site. The City may:
      A.   Withhold the scheduling of inspections and/or the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
      B.   Issue a stop work order, ceasing all land disturbance activity on
the site until such time as corrective measures are completed to the
satisfaction of the PWD.
      C.   Revoke any permit issued by the City to the Permittee for the Site.
      D.   Direct the correction of the deficiency by City forces or by a
separate contract.
      E.   Obtain a Compliance Order from the appropriate court.
APPENDIX A
   This Procedural Manual is not adopted as part of the Zoning Code but has
been adopted by resolution. Amendments to this Procedural Manual will therefore
be made by subsequent resolutions.
DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIOUS LAND USE PROCEDURES
   See Arden Hills Zoning Code, Subdivision Ordinance, and Sign Code for
Specific Descriptions
   A.   A SITE PLAN REVIEW is required for various procedures requiring City
approval as follows:
      1.   New Development or Additions in any Business, Industrial or Multiple
Family zoning districts.
      2.   Re-Use of business or industrial buildings that requires more
parking than the previous use.
      3.   Reorganization of parking, drives and entrances in any Business,
Industrial or Multiple Family Zoning districts.
      4.   Zoning District Change (preliminary site development plan)
      5.   Variances
      6.   Conditional Use Permit
      7.   Planned Unit Development
      8.   Substantive changes, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, to
approved Site Plans or existing developed sites
   B.   REZONING is required to change the zoning district classification if
the proposed use of a building or site is not allowed in the existing zoning
district classification.
   C.   A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT is required for uses classified as uses
allowed by Conditional Use Permit in the Zoning district in which the property
is located.
   D.   VARIANCES are required when a proposed development does not meet the
specific provisions of the zoning district in which the property is located.
Usually variances pertain to dimensional or numerical requirements but may
apply to other requirements as well. Variances to allow uses that are not
allowed in a zoning district are prohibited.
   E.   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD) are allowed in any zoning district with
the approved plan serving as the new development regulations and thereby
superceding the strict provisions of the zoning code.
   F.   ZONING CODE AMENDMENTS are required when an applicant seeks to classify
a specific use as allowable (either as a permitted or conditional use) in a
district that otherwise does not allow it. It may also be used to permanently
change other requirements of the Zoning Code.
   G.   SIGN PERMITS are required for some types of signs.
   H.   PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS are required for any unplatted parcel of
land into two or more lots or tracts any of which is less than five acres for
the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development.
   I.   MINOR SUBDIVISION OF UNPLATTED TRACTS OF LAND may be allowed by an
abbreviated platting procedure when the tract is small in size, surrounding
conditions are well defined and no new streets and no variances are required.
   J.   DIVISION OR CONSOLIDATION OF PLATTED LOTS into one or more lots may be
allowed by an abbreviated platting procedure when no variances are required.
SITE PLAN REVIEW
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with City Planner before plans are
finalized.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to City.
      3.   Planner prepares written review of application for Planning
Commission and City Council (City Attorney, Engineer, Building Inspector and
Fire Chief may also prepare reviews depending on issues involved in
application).
      4.   Planning Commission reviews proposal and makes recommendation to
City Council. A Public Hearing, is not required but neighboring property owners
may be invited to meeting for response to proposal.
      5.   City Council reviews application and takes action.
      6.   City Staff processes Conditional Use Permit.
      7.   Required and Proposed Setbacks
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Construction Plans, i.e. plans to be submitted for building permits shall be
submitted for all Site Plan Reviews. Some requirements may be waived for
modifications to substantially developed sites or for new sites depending on
complexity of proposal.
   Location Map
   Blank map provided by City and Applicant fills in entire property for which
the application is being made.
   Ownership Report
      1.   Record Owners of the property;
      2.   Applicant if different than Owner;
      3.   Addresses and phone numbers of Owner and Applicant;
      4.   Owners and addresses of all property within 350 feet of the boundary
of the property.
   Survey   
      1.   The date, north point, map scale, name and address of the applicant,
owner, operator, surveyor, engineer and designer, including their license
numbers and seals;
      2.   A correct boundary survey and legal description of the subject
property made and certified to by a registered Land Surveyor indicating total
acreage of site;
      3.   Depiction of all watercourses, lakes, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops, power transportation poles and lines, gas lines, single trees with a
diameter of eight (8) inches or more as measured three (3) feet above the base
of the trunk, and any other significant existing features;
      4.   Delineation of topography of subject property with contour intervals
of not more than two (2) feet and supplemental of one (1) foot in extremely
flat areas, the data for which shall be derived from the fifth general
adjustment of 1929;
      5.   The location, right-of-way width, dimensions and names of existing
or dedicated streets or other public lands, permanent buildings and structures,
easements, section and corporate lines within the subject property and within a
distance of one hundred (100) feet from the property boundaries;
      6.   Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of all benchmarks;
      7.   Location of all monuments existing at the time of the survey, and
those which the surveyor shall have located at the corners of the subject
property;
      8.   Reference to and relations of municipal, township, county or section
lines to lines of the subject property by distances, angles, radii, internal
angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs; and
      9.   Boundary lines of adjoining property within one hundred (100) feet,
identifying owners.
   Site Plan (Construction Plans)
      1.   Boundaries with dimensions and angles and ties to Section Lines
      2.   Existing and proposed topography
      3.   Existing buildings on the site and within 100 feet;
      4.   Proposed buildings, additions or demolitions;
      5.   Existing and proposed curbs, curb cuts and driveways; curb and
driveway cross-sections
      6.   Existing and proposed parking and loading facilities; parking lot
cross-sections
      7.   Trash and waste storage facilities
      8.   Pedestrian circulation system with cross-section
      9.   Screening (fences, walls, landscaping, and berms) with construction
details
      10.   Tabulation of pertinent site data to aid in evaluating compliance
with zoning requirements
   Lighting Plan (Construction Plans)
      1.   Location of all exterior lighting fixtures
      2.   Illumination pattern and data on lighting fixtures
      3.   Details of lighting fixtures
      4.   Relationship to lighting on abutting properties
   Drainage Plan (Construction Plans)
      1.   Existing and proposed drainage facilities
      2.   Calculations to determine sizing of pipes, structures and water
storage areas.
      3.   Gradients and invert elevations of surface drainage and pipes
      4.   Erosion control measures
      5.   Storm drainage easements
   Utilities Plan (Construction Plans)
      1.   Existing and proposed sanitary sewer and water systems
      2.   Elevations, gradients and sizing of all components
      3.   Utilities easements
   Landscape Plan (See "Landscape Plan" procedures and Design Requirements)
      1.   Location, size and species of all proposed plant materials
      2.   Locations, size and species of all existing plant materials over 4"
in diameter proposed to satisfy landscape requirements
      3.   Table of plant materials
      4.   Planting details
   Signage Plan (See "Sign Permits" procedures for Submission and Design
Requirements)
      1.   Location of all signs - wall mounted signs shall be shown on
building elevations - with setbacks
      2.   Diagrams of sign copy with dimensions and color
      3.   Dimensions of all signs including sign structures and mounting
systems
      4.   Height of all signs
      5.   Sign illumination system
      6.   Structural Plans showing materials, fabrication and mounting system
   Building Plans (Construction Plans)
      1.   Elevation drawings, sections or illustrations indicating the
architectural treatment of all proposed buildings and structures
      2.   Floor plans of all proposed buildings and structures;
      3.   Type of use, number of employees, users or occupants expected;
      4.   Type, location and treatment of exterior mechanical devices, such as
vents, exhaust fans, air conditioners and elevators;
      5.   Type of exterior building materials;
      6.   Exterior colors of all building components;
      7.   Outline specifications.
   Identification of all Variances is Required
REZONING
   NOTE:   If proposed rezoning is not consistent with the Arden Hills
Comprehensive Plan, the applicant shall submit an application for Comprehensive
Plan Amendment concurrently with the application for rezoning. See items under
"Written Statement" requirements below.
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with City Planner before plans are
finalized.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to City.
      3.   Planner prepares written review of application for Planning
Commission and City Council (City Attorney, Engineer, Building Inspector and
Fire Chief may also prepare reviews depending on issues involved in
application).
      4.   Planning Commission holds Public Hearing, reviews proposal and makes
recommendation to City Council.
      5.   City Council reviews proposal and takes action.
      6.   City Staff processes permits.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Location Map
   Blank map provided by City and Applicant fills in entire property for which
the application is being made.
   Ownership Report
      1.   Record Owners of the Property;
      2.   Applicant if different than Owner;
      3.   Addresses and phone numbers of Owner and Applicant;
      4.   Owners and addresses of all property within 350 feet of the boundary
of the property.
   Site Plan
      1.   Boundaries with dimensions and angles and ties to Section Lines
      2.   Existing and proposed topography
      3.   Existing buildings on the site and within 100 feet
      4.   Proposed buildings, additions or demolitions
      5.   Existing curbs, curb cuts and driveways
      6.   Existing and proposed parking and loading facilities
   Written Statement
      1.   Conformity with Comprehensive Plan;
      2.   Substantive changes that have occurred making zoning change
necessary;
      3.   Demonstration showing that the change is superior to the current
Zoning and/or Comprehensive Plan;
      4.   Development conditions or priorities that make the existing Zoning
and/or Comprehensive Plan impractical.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT/INTERIM USE PERMIT
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with City Planner before plans are
finalized.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to City.
      3.   Planner prepares written review of application for Planning
Commission and City Council (City Attorney, Engineer, Building Inspector and
Fire Chief) may also prepare reviews depending on issues involved in
application.
      4.   Planning Commission holds public hearing, reviews proposal and make
recommendation to City Council.
      5.   City Council conducts additional hearings (optional), reviews
application and takes action.
      6.   City Staff processes Conditional Use Permit.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Some requirements may be waived depending on complexity of proposal.
Applications for principal uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit will
ordinarily include all or most of the following Submission Requirements;
applications for accessory uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit will
ordinarily require only those items that have a direct bearing on the
application.
   Location Map
   Blank map provided by City and Applicant fills in entire property for which
the application is being made.
   Ownership Report
      1.   Record Owners of the property;
      2.   Applicant if different than Owner;
      3.   Addresses and phone numbers of Owner and Applicant;
   Owners and addresses of all property within 350 feet of the boundary of the
property.
   Survey
      1.   The date, north point, map scale, name and address of the applicant,
owner, operator, surveyor, engineer and designer, including their license
numbers and seals;
      2.   A correct boundary survey and legal description of the subject
property made and certified to by a registered Land Surveyor indicating total
acreage of site;
      3.   Depiction of all watercourses, lakes, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops, power transportation poles and lines, gas lines, single trees with a
diameter of eight (8) inches or more as measured three (3) feet above the base
of the trunk, and any other significant existing features;
      4.   Delineation of topography of subject property with contour intervals
of not more than two (2) feet and supplementals of one (1) foot in extremely
flat areas, the data for which shall be derived from the fifth general
adjustment of 1929;
      5.   The location, right-of-way width, dimensions and names of existing
or dedicated streets or other public lands, permanent buildings and structures,
easements, section and corporate lines within the subject property and within a
distance of one hundred (100) feet from the property boundaries;
      6.   Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of all benchmarks;
      7.   Location of all monuments existing at the time of the survey, and
those which the surveyor shall have located at the corners of the subject
property;
      8.   Reference to and relations of municipal, township, county or section
lines to lines of the subject property by distances, angles, radii, internal
angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs; and
      9.   Boundary lines of adjoining property within one hundred (100) feet,
identifying owners.
   Site Plan
      1.   Boundaries with dimensions and angles and ties to Section Lines
      2.   Existing and proposed topography
      3.   Existing buildings on the site and within 100 feet
      4.   Proposed buildings, additions or demolitions
      5.   Existing curbs, curb cuts and driveways
      6.   Existing and proposed parking and loading facilities
      7.   Trash and waste storage facilities
      8.   Tabulation of pertinent site data to aid in evaluating compliance
with zoning requirements
      9.   Pedestrian circulation system
      10.   Screening (fences, walls, landscaping, berms)
   Lighting Plan
    1.   Location of all exterior lighting fixtures
      2.   Illumination pattern and data on lighting fixtures
      3.   Details of lighting fixtures
      4.   Relationship to lighting on abutting properties
   Drainage Plan
      1.   Existing and proposed drainage facilities
      2.   Calculations to determine sizing of pipes, structures and water
storage areas
      3.   Gradients of surface drainage and pipes
      4.   Erosion control measures
      5.   Storm drainage easements
   Utilities Plan
      1.   Existing and proposed sanitary sewer and water systems
      2.   Elevations, gradients and sizing of all components
      3.   Utilities easements
   Landscape Plan (see "Landscape Plan" procedures for Design Requirements)
      1.   Location, size and species of all proposed plant materials
      2.   Locations, size and species of all existing plant materials over 4"
in diameter proposed to satisfy landscape requirements
      3.   Table of plant materials
      4.   Planting details
   Signage Plan (see "Sign Permits" Procedures for Submission and Design
Requirements)
      1.   Location of all signs - wall mounted signs shall be shown on
building elevations - with setbacks
      2.   Diagrams of sign copy with dimensions and color
      3.   Dimensions of all signs including sign structures and mounting
systems
      4.   Height of all signs
      5.   Sign illumination system
      6.   Structural Plans showing materials, fabrication and mounting system
   Building Plans
      1.   Elevation drawings, sections or illustrations indicating the
architectural treatment of all proposed buildings and structures
      2.   General floor plans of all proposed buildings and structures;
      3.   Type of use, number of employees, users or occupants expected;
      4.   Type, location and treatment of exterior mechanical devises, such as
vents, exhaust fans, air conditioners and elevators;
      5.   Type of exterior building materials;
      6.   Exterior colors of all building components;
      7.   Outline specifications.
VARIANCE
   A.      CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with City Planner before plans are
finalized.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to City.
      3.   Planner prepares written review of application for Planning
Commission and City Council (City Attorney, Engineer, Building Inspector and
Fire Chief may also prepare reviews depending on issues involved in
application).
      4.   Planning Commission reviews proposal and makes recommendation to
City Council. A Public Hearing is not required but neighboring property owners
may be invited to meeting for response to proposal.
      5.   City Council reviews application and takes action.
      6.   City Staff processes permits.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Location Map
   Blank map provided by City and Applicant fills in entire property for which
the application is being made.
   Ownership Report
      1.   Record Owners of the property;
      2.   Applicant if different than Owner;
      3.   Addresses and phone numbers of Owner and Applicant;
      4.   Owners and addresses of all property abutting or across the street
from the property for which a Variance is proposed.
   Site Plan
   Sufficient detail to clearly show the conditions and difficulties that make
a Variance necessary. The nature of the requested Variance will dictate the
types of documentation required. Documentation required could include building
plans, elevations, sections and site plan features including those itemized in
the Site Plan Review Procedure.
   Written Statement
      1.   Conditions that create a hardship and would prohibit reasonable
development without a Variance;
      2.   Conditions on the property that create a hardship that are not
present on similar sized lots in the same district;
      3.   Relationships with abutting property will not be adversely affected
by the Variance.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
   I. PUD CONCEPT PLAN (OPTIONAL)
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant meets with City Staff to clarify and determine PUD
requirements and discuss applicant's concept.
      2.   Applicant submits PUD Concept Plan to City.
      3.   Planning Commission holds informal discussion with applicant and
advises Council of its discussion.
      4.   City Council continues discussion with applicant.
      5.   Applicant submits PUD Master Plan to City.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Location Map
   Blank map provided by City and Applicant fills in entire property for which
the application is being made.
   Ownership Report
      1.   Record Owners of the property;
      2.   Applicant if different than Owner;
      3.   Addresses and phone numbers of Owner and Applicant;
   Site Plan
      1.   Property boundary line
      2.   Existing topography
      3.   Existing buildings on the site and within 100 feet
      4.   Proposed land uses with land use intensity
      5.   Required rezoning
      6.   Proposed generalized circulation and parking
      7.   Tabulation of pertinent site data to aid in evaluating compliance
with zoning requirements
      8.   Generalized pedestrian circulation and plaza system
   Potential screening requirements
   Drainage Plan
      1.   Existing and generalized proposed drainage facilities
      2.   Potential ponding areas
   Structural Plans
   Sketches or illustrations indicating the architectural treatment of all
proposed buildings and structures
   Subdivision Design Standards (if a subdivision of the site is proposed)
      1.   Generalized layout of proposed lots, parcels and streets
      2.   Typical cross-sections of proposed streets & trails
      3.   Designation of public and/or private streets
   Written Statement
      1.   The size of the development tract;
      2.   The nature of the applicant's interest therein;
      3.   The development concept;
      4.   The density or intensity of land use to be allocated to the various
parts of the area to be developed;
      5.   The period of time within which the development tract will be
developed and a generalized staging schedule;
      6.   The potential modifications in zoning districts, zoning regulations,
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the development tract; and
      7.   The reasons why, in the developer's opinion, the modifications from
the strict application of the zoning and subdivision requirements otherwise
applicable to the development tract and the planned unit development in general
would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the City's
Comprehensive Development Plan and the general purpose and intent of this Code.
   II. PUD MASTER PLAN
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant meets with City Staff to clarify and determine PUD
requirements and discuss applicant's proposal.
      2.   Applicant submits PUD Master Plan to City.
      3.   Planning Commission conducts public hearing(s) on Master Plan and,
if required, on any zoning changes, and recommends action to the City Council.
      4.   City Council conducts additional hearings (optional), reviews
applications and takes action.
      5.   If approved, City Staff adds PUD District and changes underlying
zoning, if required, to the zoning map. The PUD Master Plan, as approved,
including all applicable documents, is adopted as the Code governing
development of the PUD property.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Location Map
   Blank map provided by City and Applicant fills in entire property for which
the application is being made.
   Ownership Report
      1.   Record Owners of the property;
      2.   Applicant if different than Owner;
      3.   Addresses and phone numbers of Owner and Applicant;
      4.   Owners and addresses of all property within 350 feet of the boundary
of the property.
   Survey
      1.   The date, north point, map scale, name and address of the applicant,
owner, operator, surveyor, engineer and designer, including their license
numbers and seals;
      2.   A correct boundary survey and legal description of the subject
property made and certified to by a registered Land Surveyor indicating total
acreage of site;
      3.   Depiction of all watercourses, lakes, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops, power transmission poles and lines, gas lines, single trees with a
diameter of eight (8) inches or more as measured three (3) feet above the base
of the trunk, and any other significant existing features;
      4.   Delineation of topography of subject property with contour intervals
of not more than two (2) feet and supplementals of one (1) foot in extremely
flat areas, the data for which shall be derived from the fifth general
adjustment of 1929;
      5.   The location, right-of-way width, dimensions and names of existing
or dedicated streets or other public lands, permanent buildings and structures,
easements, section and corporate lines within the subject property and within a
distance of one hundred (100) feet from the property boundaries;
      6.   Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of all benchmarks;
      7.   Location of all monuments existing at the time of the survey, and
those which the surveyor shall have located at the corners of the subject
property;
      8.   Reference to and relations of municipal, township, county or section
lines to lines of the subject property by distances, angles, radii, internal
angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs; and
   Boundary lines of adjoining property within one hundred (100) feet,
identifying owners.
   SITE PLAN
      1.   Boundaries with dimensions and angles and ties to Section Lines
      2.   Existing and schematic proposed topography
      3.   Existing buildings on the site and within 100 feet
      4.   Proposed footprints of buildings, additions or demolitions
      5.   Existing curbs and driveways
      6.   Existing and proposed parking layout and loading facilities
      7.   Tabulation of pertinent site data to aid in evaluating compliance
with zoning requirements
      8.   Pedestrian circulation and plaza system
      9.   Screening (fences, walls, landscaping, berms)
   LIGHTING PLAN
      1.   Location of all existing and proposed exterior lighting fixtures
      2.   Illustrations of lighting fixtures
   DRAINAGE PLAN
      1.   Existing and proposed drainage facilities
      2.   Calculations to determine approximate sizing of pipes, structures
and water storage areas
      3.   Approximate gradients of surface drainage and pipes
   UTILITIES PLAN
      1.   Existing and schematic proposed sanitary sewer and water systems
      2.   General elevations, gradients and sizing of all components
   LANDSCAPE PLAN
      1.   Schematic Plan including earth forms, berms, topography.
      2.   General locations, size and species of proposed plant materials.
   SIGNAGE PLAN
      1.   General location of all signs
      2.   General diagrams of sign copy with dimensions and color
      3.   Height of all free-standing signs and location on building
elevations of wall-mounted signs
   STRUCTURAL PLANS
      1.   Elevation drawings, sections or illustrations indicating the
architectural treatment of all proposed buildings and structures
      2.   General floor plans of all proposed buildings and structures;
      3.   Type of use, number of employees, users or occupants expected;
      4.   Type, location and treatment of exterior mechanical devises, such as
vents, exhaust fans, air conditioners and elevators;
      5.   Type of exterior building materials;
      6.   Exterior colors of all building components;
      7.   Outline specifications.
   PLANNING COMPONENTS (some or all may be waived on sites under 5 acres)
      1.   Land Use Component
      2.   Traffic and Parking Component
      3.   Population Component
      4.   Subdivision Design Component
      5.   Services and Facilities Component
      6.   Construction Order Component
      7.   Contractual Component
      8.   Additional Components
   Subdivision Design Features (if a subdivision of the site is proposed)
      1.   Layout of Proposed Lots, Blocks and Streets with identifying Numbers
and Names;
      2.   Trails and Pedestrian Ways;
      3.   Utility and Drainage Easements;
      4.   Typical cross-sections of proposed streets & trails
      5.   Profiles of streets, sewers and waterlines;
      6.   Minimum front, side and rear yard setback lines;
      7.   Areas for parks, drainage purposes and public use;
      8.   Appraisal of fair market value;
      9.   Sufficiently accurate angular and linear dimensions to determine
minimum lot areas;
      10.   Tabulation of blocks, lots, street length and area, parks and
trails.
   WRITTEN STATEMENT
      1.   The size of the development tract;
      2.   The nature of the applicant's interest therein;
      3.   The density of land use to be allocated to the parts of the area to
be developed;
      4.   The function, ownership and manner of maintenance of common open
space;
      5.   The feasibility of proposals for the disposition of sanitary waste
and storm water;
      6.   The period of time within which the development tract will be
developed and a staging schedule;
      7.   The required modifications in zoning districts, zoning regulations,
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the development tract; and
   The reasons why, in the developer's opinion, the modifications from the
strict application of the zoning and subdivision requirements otherwise
applicable to the development tract and the planned unit development in general
would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the City's
Comprehensive Development Plan and the general purpose and intent of this Code.
   III. PUD FINAL PLAN (See Site Plan Review Procedure)
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant submits Final PUD Plan for elements that are to be
developed imminently. A Final PUD Plan will be submitted for each stage of
development/construction.
      2.   Planning Commission reviews Final PUD Plan and recommends action to
the City Council.
      3.   City Council reviews and takes action on the Final PUD Plan.
      4.   Applicant applies for building permits.
      5.   City Staff processes permits.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS (See Site Plan Review Submission Requirements)
ZONING CODE AMENDMENT
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with City Planner before plans are
finalized.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to City.
      3.   Planner prepares written review of application for Planning
Commission and City Council. (City Attorney, Engineer, Building Inspector and
Fire Chief may also prepare reviews depending on issues involved in
application).
      4.   Planning Commission holds a Public Hearing, reviews proposal and
makes recommendation to City Council.
      5.   City Council reviews proposal and takes action.
      6.   City Staff processes Code Amendments.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
      1.   Proposed Code amendment;
      2.   Statement describing reasons why amendment is necessary and in the
public interest.
   SIGN PERMITS
   A.   APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF SIGNS
      1.   Signs not requiring a Sign Permit. The following signs shall not
require a sign permit:
         a.   Public signs
         b.   Personal identification signs
         c.   Window signs
         d.   Temporary signs
            1.   Real Estate Signs
            2.   Political Signs
            3.   Garage Sale signs
            2.   Signs requiring a Sign Permit. The following signs shall be
allowed only after the City Staff has issued a sign permit. Planning Commission
review and Council approval shall not be required:
               a.   Business signs
               b.   Construction signs
               c.   Directional signs (max. of 2 per site)
               d.   Informational Signs (max. 2 per site)
               e.   Advertising signs (Billboards)
      3.   Signs Requiring Planning Commission Review and Council Approval. The
following signs shall require Planning Commission review and council approval
before a permit is issued:
         a.   Area identification signs
         b.   Institutional Signs
         c.   Street Directory signs
         d.   Directional signs (if more than 2 per site)
         e.   Informational signs (if more than 2 per site)
         f.   Flags containing logos, symbols or names of a private business or
institution
         g.   Groupings of three or more flags, including national and state
flags
         h.   Sign plans for:
            1.   Multiple occupancy business and industrial structures
            2.   Shopping Centers
            3.   Office and industrial parks
            4.    Planned Unit Developments consisting of two (2) or more
structures
      4.   Signs Requiring Conditional Use Permit. The following signs shall
require a Conditional Use Permit:
         a.   Roof Signs
         b.   Wall Graphics
         c.   Signs not specifically permitted by this Code
      5.   Signs Requiring Council Approval Only. The following temporary signs
and advertising devices shall require City Council approval without Planning
Commission review:
         a.   Special event signs and advertising devices
         b.   Emergency temporary signs
   B.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with Zoning Administrator and determines
appropriate review procedure as outlined above.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to City.
      3.   Zoning Administrator follows appropriate procedure as follows:
         a.   No sign permit required
            1.   Zoning Administrator consults with other City Staff members as
required and reviews proposed sign to determine compliance with Sign Code.
            2.   If all requirements are met, Zoning Administrator informs
applicant that sign may be installed according to the plans submitted.
         b.   Sign Permit required, no Planning Commission review or Council
approval.
            1.   Zoning Administrator consults with other City Staff members as
required and reviews proposed sign to determine compliance with Sign Code.
            2.   If all requirements are met, Zoning Administrator issues Sign
Permit to applicant.
         c.   Signs Requiring Planning Commission, Review and Council Approval
before Sign Permit is Issued.
            1.   Planner prepares written review of application for Planning
Commission and City Council.
            2.   Planning Commission reviews proposal and makes recommendation
to City Council.
            3.   City Council reviews proposal and takes action.
            4.   City Staff processes permits.
         d.   Signs Requiring a Conditional Use Permit.
            1.   Planner prepares written review of application for Planning
Commission and Council
            2.   Planning Commission holds public hearing, reviews proposal and
makes recommendation to Council.
            3.   City Council reviews application and takes action.
            4.   City Staff processes permits.
   C.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Location Map
    Blank map provided by City and Applicant fills in entire property for which
the application is being made.
   Ownership Report
      1.   Record Owners of the Property;
      2.   Applicant if Different from Owner;
      3.   Addresses and phone numbers of Owner and Applicant.
      4.   For signs requiring Conditional Use Permit: List of names and
addresses of all property owners within 350 feet.
   Survey
   As required for individual requests.
   SITE PLAN
      1.   Site boundary drawn to scale.
      2.   Site elements that affect sign; may include:
         (a)   Location of building(s)
         (b)   Parking and drives
         (c)   Landscaping
         (d)   Elevations (or topography)
      3.   Sign Location
      4.   Required and proposed sign setbacks.
   SIGNAGE PLAN
      1.   Location of all signs (wall-mounted signs shall be shown on building
elevation(s) with setbacks.
      2.   Diagrams of sign copy with dimensions and color.
      3.   Dimensions of all signs including sign structures and mounting
systems.
      4.   Height of all signs.
      5.   Sign illumination system.
      6.   Structural Plans showing materials, fabrication and mounting system.
   IDENTIFICATION OF ALL VARIANCES IS REQUIRED
PRELIMINARY PLAT (PLAN)
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with City Planner before plans are
finalized.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to City.
      3.   Planner prepares written review of application for Planning
Commission and City Council (City Attorney, Engineer, Building Inspector and
Fire Chief may also prepare reviews depending on issues involved in
application).
      4.   Planning Commission holds Public Hearing, reviews proposal and makes
recommendation to City Council.
      5.   City Council reviews proposal and takes action. Council may hold
additional Public Hearing(s)
      6.   Applicant prepares Final Plat documents of all or a portion of the
site. (See Final Plat Review Procedures and Submission Requirements.)
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Location Map
   Blank map provided by City and Applicant fills in entire property for which
the application is being made.
   Ownership Report
      1.   Record Owners of the property;
      2.   Applicant if different than Owner;
      3.   Addresses and phone numbers of Owner and Applicant;
      4.   Owners and addresses of all property within 350 feet of the boundary
of the property.
   Survey
      1.   The date, north point, map scale, name and address of the applicant,
owner, operator, surveyor, engineer and designer, including their license
numbers and seals;
      2.   A correct boundary survey and legal description of the subject
property made and certified to by a registered Land Surveyor indicating total
acreage of site;
      3.   Depiction of all watercourses, lakes, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops, power transportation poles and lines, gas lines, single trees with a
diameter of eight (8) inches or more as measured three (3) feet above the base
of the trunk, and any other significant existing features;
      4.   Delineation of topography of subject property with contour intervals
of not more than two (2) feet and supplementals of one (1) foot in extremely
flat areas, the data    for which shall be derived from the fifth general
adjustment of 1929;
      5.   The location, right-of-way width, dimensions and names of existing
or dedicated streets or other public lands, permanent buildings and structures,
easements, section and corporate lines within the subject property and within a
distance of one hundred (100) feet from the property boundaries;
      6.   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other
underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of one hundred (100)
feet beyond the tract. Such data as grades of streets, invert elevations and
locations of catch basins and manholes shall also be shown.
      7.   Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of all benchmarks;
      8.   Location of all monuments existing at the time of the survey, and
those which the surveyor shall have located at the corners of the subject
property;
      9.   Reference to and relations of municipal, township, county or section
lines to lines of the subject property by distances, angles, radii, internal
angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs; and
      10.   Boundary lines of adjoining property within one hundred (100) feet,
identifying owners.
   Subdivision Design Features
      1.   Proposed name of subdivision;
      2.   Layout of Proposed Lots, Blocks and Streets with Identifying Numbers
and Names;
      3.   Trails and Pedestrian Ways;
      4.   Utility and Drainage Plans and Easements;
      5.   Typical cross-sections of proposed streets and trails
      6.   Profiles of streets, sewers and waterlines;
      7.   Minimum front, side and rear yard setback lines;
      8.   Areas for parks, drainage purposes and public use;
      9.   Appraisal of fair market value;
      10.   Sufficiently accurate angular and linear dimensions to determine
minimum lot areas;
      11.   Tabulation of blocks, lots, street length and area, parks and
trails.
   WRITTEN STATEMENT
      1.   Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential
buildings with number of proposed dwelling units; type of business or industry
so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards or
congestion of population.
      2.   Proposed protective covenants, if any.
   IDENTIFICATION OF ALL VARIANCES REQUIRED
FINAL PLAT
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with City Planner before plans are
finalized.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to City.
      3.   Planner, City Attorney and Engineer prepare written review of
application for Planning Commission and City Council (Building Inspector and
Fire Chief may also prepare reviews depending on issues involved in
application).
      4.   Planning Commission reviews proposal and makes recommendation to
City Council. A Public Hearing is not required.
      5.   City Council reviews Final Plat and takes action, directing Staff to
prepare Development Agreement.
      6.   Staff prepares Development Agreement; Park Dedication is determined;
and all documents are prepared for final City approval.
      7.   City Council reviews all documentation and takes action.
      8.   City Staff processes permits.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   The final plat shall be prepared by a registered surveyor and shall conform
to all state and county requirements and the requirements of the subdivision
design features below.
   Subdivision Design Features
      1.   Name of subdivision.
      2.   Identification of all lots and blocks by consecutive numbers.
      3.   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
      4.   The date, north point, map scale, name and address of the applicant,
owner, operator, surveyor, engineer and designer including their license
numbers and seals.
      5.   A correct boundary survey and legal description of the subject
property made and certified to by a registered Land Surveyor indicating total
acreage of site.
      6.   Accurate angular, linear and curvature dimensions and data for all
lot lines, angles and street centerlines;
      7.   Accurate location and depiction of all monuments;
      8.   Accurate plan and legal description of all areas to be dedicated to
the public and all easements for public access or use;
      9.   Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments
currently due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full.
      10.   Certification by a Registered Surveyor;
      11.   Execution by all owners and mortgage holders;
      12.   Blanks for required signatures and dates.
MINOR SUBDIVISION/LOT SPLIT OR CONSOLIDATION
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with City Planner before plans are
finalized.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to City.
      3.   Planner, Attorney and Engineer prepare written review of application
for Planning Commission and City Council (Building Inspector and Fire Chief may
also prepare reviews depending on issues involved in application).
      4.   Planning Commission reviews proposal makes recommendation to City
Council. A Public Hearing is not required but owners of abutting property may
be invited to meeting for informal discussion.
      5.   City Council reviews application and takes action.
      6.   City Staff processes permits.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Location Map
   Blank map provided by City and Applicant fills in entire property for which
the application is being made.
   Ownership Report
      1.   Record Owners of the property;
      2.   Applicant if different than Owner;
      3.   Addresses and phone numbers of Owner and Applicant;
      4.   Owners and addresses of all property within 350 feet of the boundary
of the property.
   Survey
   A plot plan or survey drawn to scale by a Registered Surveyor, showing site
dimensions and the location of all buildings on and within 100 feet of the
property.
   Subdivision Design Features
      1.   Layout of Proposed Lots, Blocks and Streets with Identifying Numbers
and Names;
      2.   Trails and Pedestrian Ways;
      3.   Utility and Drainage Easements;
      4.   Minimum front, side and rear yard setback lines;
      5.   Areas for parks, drainage purposes and public use;
      6.   Appraisal of fair market value;
      7.   Tabulation of blocks, lots, street length and area, parks and
trails.
      8.   Accurate angular, linear and curvature dimensions for all lot lines,
angles and street centerlines;
      9.   Accurate location and depiction of all monuments;
      10.   Accurate plan and legal description of all areas to be dedicated to
the public and all easements for public access or use;
      11.   Certification by a Registered Surveyor;
      12.   Execution by all owners and mortgage holders.
      13.   Blanks for required signatures and dates.
LANDSCAPE PLAN
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
   In the submission requirements for some development proposals (such as Site
Plan Review, Conditional Use Permit and Planned Unit Development) the following
landscape plan requirements shall be followed in addition to the submission
requirements for "Landscape Plan" as defined in each type of application.
   B.   LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
      1.   General. Name and address of developer, owner, and contact person;
name and address of state-registered landscape architect, or state-certified
nurseryperson; date of plan preparation; date and description of all revisions;
name of project or development.
      2.   Landscape plan. Scale drawing of proposed landscaping for the site
based upon a survey of property lines with:
"   indication of scale and north point;
"   name and alignment of proposed and existing adjacent on-site streets;
"   location of all proposed and existing utility easements and rights-of-way;
"   location of existing and proposed buildings, parking areas; water bodies;
proposed sidewalks and trails.
"   existing and proposed topographic contours at two-foot intervals;
"   details of proposed planting beds and foundation plantings;
"   delineation of both sodded and seeded area;
"   location and identification of proposed landscape or manmade materials used
to provide screening from adjacent and neighboring properties;
"   location and identification of existing trees;
"   details of fences, tie walls, planting boxes, retaining walls, berms and
other landscape improvements in legible scale;
"   location of landscape islands and planter beds with identification of plant
materials used.
      3.   Planting schedule. A table containing the common names and botanical
names, size of plant materials, root specifications, quantities, and special
planting instructions.
   C.   LANDSCAPE DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
      1.   See Section 1225.05 Subd. 1 for Minimum Landscape Requirements and
Landscape Design Specifications
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
   Where a Tree Preservation Plan is required by City Code, the city shall
review the plan for compliance with the Tree Preservation Ordinance. The
submission requirements for a Tree Preservation Plan are as follows.
   B.   TREE PRESERVATION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
      1.   General. Name and address of developer, owner, and contact person;
name and address of state-registered landscape architect, or state-certified
nurseryperson; date of plan preparation; date and description of all revisions;
name of project or development.
      2.   Tree Preservation Plan. Scale drawing for the site based upon a
survey of property lines with:
"   indication of scale and north point;
"   name and alignment of proposed and existing adjacent on-site streets;
"   location of all proposed and existing utility easements and rights-of-way;
"   location of existing and proposed buildings, parking areas; water bodies;
proposed sidewalks and trails.
"   existing and proposed topographic contours at two-foot intervals;
"   Size, species, and location of all existing significant trees and woodlands
located within the area to be platted or within the parcel of record. These
significant trees and woodlands should be identified in both graphic and
tabular form
"   Identification of all significant and woodlands proposed to be removed.
These significant trees and woodlands should be identified in both graphic and
tabular form;
"   Size, species, and location of all replacement trees proposed to be planted
on the property in accordance with the tree replacement schedule and mitigation
requirements; and
"   Identified measures to protect significant trees and woodlands during
construction;
   C.   TREE PRESERVATION REQUIREMENTS
      1.   See Section 1225.055 for Tree Preservation and Mitigation
Requirements
COVERED PORCH ENCROACHMENTS AND COVERED PORCH ENCROACHMENT DESIGN GUIDELINES
   A.   CITY REVIEW PROCEDURE
      1.   Applicant reviews proposal with City Planner before plans are
finalized.
      2.   Applicant submits application and submission documents to the City.
      3.   Community Development Director or their designee reviews application
and review the findings to determine compliance with City regulations
      4.   The Community Development Director or their designee provides a
written review of application to the City Building Official and the applicant.
      5.   If the Community Development Director or their designee has approved
the porch addition the applicant may submit an application for a building
permit.
   B.   SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
   Written Statement
      1.   The applicant shall provide a written description of the proposed
covered front porch encroachment including; the general style and form of the
porch, roof materials, exterior wall materials, floors and interior materials,
ceiling materials, column materials, spindle and railing materials, and base
materials, to provide an accurate description of the proposed covered front
porch encroachment and demonstrate compliance with the City's covered porch
encroachment design guidelines.
   Other Considerations
      1.   Photographs showing the location of the proposed covered porch
encroachment.
      2.   Elevations or renderings of the proposed covered porch encroachment.
      3.   Other plans, as appropriate to request.
   Survey
   The applicant shall provide the City with a survey showing the property
lines, existing setbacks and proposed setbacks so that City staff may determine
if the proposed covered porch encroachment is compliant with City Covered Front
Porch Encroachment Design Guidelines and Zoning Code Regulations. Surveys shall
include the following:
      1.   The date, north point, map scale, name and address of the applicant,
owner, operator, surveyor, engineer and designer, including their license
numbers and seals;
      2.   A correct boundary survey and legal description of the subject
property made and certified to by a registered Land Surveyor indicating total
acreage of site;
      3.   Depiction of all watercourses, lakes, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops, power transportation poles and lines, gas lines, single trees with a
diameter of eight (8) inches or more as measured three (3) feet above the base
of the trunk, and any other significant existing features;
      4.   Delineation of topography of subject property with contour intervals
of not more than two (2) feet and supplemental of one (1) foot in extremely
flat areas, the data for which shall be derived from the fifth general
adjustment of 1929;
      5.   The location, right-of-way width, dimensions and names of existing
or dedicated streets or other public lands, permanent buildings and structures,
easements, section and corporate lines within the subject property and within a
distance of one hundred (100) feet from the property boundaries;
      6.   Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of all benchmarks;
      7.   Location of all monuments existing at the time of the survey, and
those which the surveyor shall have located at the corners of the subject
property;
      8.   Reference to and relations of municipal, township, county or section
lines to lines of the subject property by distances, angles, radii, internal
angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs; and
      9.   Boundary lines of adjoining property within one hundred (100) feet,
identifying owners.
   Site Plan
   Sufficient detail to clearly show the conditions of the property, the
location of the proposed porch, and the area surrounding the proposed porch.
This may be shown on the survey or included as a separate document. Plans
should be drawn to scale (engineer's or architect's scale) not less than ¼ inch
to one foot; and the scale shall be listed on the plans. Please also include
the following:
      1.   Principal building location(s), dimensions and setbacks.
      2.   Accessory building location(s), dimensions and setbacks.
      3.   Calculation of total building coverage.
      4.   Calculation or impervious/hard surface coverage.
      5.   Driveway and sidewalk location.
      6.   Fences and retaining walls.
      7.   Shoreland boundaries, if applicable (including official OHW
elevation).
      8.   Wetland boundaries, if applicable.
   Drainage Plan
      1.   Existing and generalized proposed drainage facilities
      2.   Potential ponding areas
   Structural Plans
      1.   Sketches or illustrations indicating the architectural treatment of
the proposed covered porch encroachment.
COVERED FRONT PORCH DESIGN GUIDELINES
   General Form
   The form of your porch addition is the outer shape created by the exterior
walls and roof. The form of the addition should be appropriate and compatible
to the form of your existing home.
   Base of the Porch
   The base of the porch is not open, the base shall be either a masonry
perimeter foundation, providing for proper drainage; or be screened by a solid
fascia consistent with the front of the home or lattice with openings no larger
than 2 inches by 2 inches and painted to be consistent with the front of the
home.
   Ceilings
   Open-air porches must have ceilings of durable grade materials such as
beadboard or painted or stained wood.
   Columns
   Structural columns should be clad in finish grade, wood trim or be a
decorative shape that is compatible with the design of the existing house. The
columns should be expressed on the exterior of the porch to help articulate the
porch façade.
   Exterior Walls
   The exterior walls are considered to be those exterior surfaces from the
floor line to the ceiling of the porch. This surface is to be at least 65
percent open and no more than 35 percent solid. The open surfaces are to be
open air or occupied by screens, and/or screen doors. The solid surfaces are to
be exterior materials that are consistent or complementary in color, texture,
and quality to those of the front of the existing home. Solid surfaces may only
include columns, spindles, and railings; solid walls (even partial) are
prohibited.
   Floors
   Open-air porches must have floors of durable exterior grade materials such
as concrete, painted or stained solid wood, high quality composite materials,
or brick.
   Railings
   The height and spacing of railing must meet the requirements of the
International Building Code. Acceptable railing materials are painted or
stained wood, high quality composite materials, and painted metal. The design
of the railing assembly should be compatible with the details of the existing
house.
   Roofs
   The roof or your porch addition should be properly proportioned in shape and
pitch to the rooflines of the existing house. Roofing materials should match as
closely as possible to the materials of the existing home.
   Landscaping
   Integrating your porch addition into your yard is as important as its
integration to the house. Plant materials and landscape features should
transition the porch into your yard, providing a visual base. Landscaping could
also be placed along the entry path.
