CITY OF AURORA, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-7 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
   
10.21   Payment into City Treasury of fines and penalties
   
10.22   Act otherwise unlawful
 
   
10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
   
Appendix A: Notice of code violation
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“city code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances”
or “this code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do
not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Aurora, Minnesota, acting by or through its duly
authorized representative.
      CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK-TREASURER.  The person duly appointed by the
City Council and acting in that capacity.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. 
         (a)   This city code as modified by amendment, revision and adoption
of new titles, chapters or sections.
         (b)   This codification of the ordinances of the City of Aurora,
Minnesota, shall henceforth be known as the “city code” and cited thus: “City
Code, Sec. ____.”
      CONVICTION. Either of the following accepted and recorded by the Court:
         (a)   A plea of guilty; or
         (b)   A verdict of guilty by a jury or a finding of guilty by the
Court.
      COUNCIL and CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Aurora,
Minnesota.
      COUNTY. St. Louis County, Minnesota.
      CRIME. Conduct which is prohibited by ordinance and for which the actor
may be sentenced to imprisonment or fine.
      EX OFFICIO MEMBER. A person who is not counted for the purpose of
determining a quorum and has no right to vote, but shall have the right and
obligation (within his or her discretion) to speak to any question coming
before the board, commission or other deliberative body of which he or she is a
member.
      INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of
the lateral curb line or, if no curb, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways or streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MISDEMEANOR. The crime for which a sentence of not more than 90 days or a
fine of not more than $1,000, or both, may be imposed.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      ORDINANCE. An ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of Aurora,
Minnesota.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PETTY MISDEMEANOR. An offense which does not constitute a crime and for
which a sentence of a fine of not more than $300 may be imposed.
      POLICE OFFICER and PEACE OFFICER. Every officer, including special
police, authorized to direct or regulate traffic, keep the peace and appointed
or employed for the purpose of law enforcement.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PREMISES. Any lot, piece or parcel of land within a continuous boundary,
whether publicly or privately owned, occupied or possessed.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property not included within the definition of
public property or public place.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY and PUBLIC PLACE. Any place, property or premises
dedicated to public use, owned by the city, occupied by the city as a lessee or
occupied by the city as a street by reason of an easement, including but not
limited to streets, parks or parking lots so owned or occupied.
      ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two or more separate
roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall refer to the ROADWAY separately
but not to all ROADWAYS collectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      STREET.  The entire area dedicated to public use or contained in an
easement or other conveyance or grant to the city, and shall include but not be
limited to roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys and other public property
between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
(1989 Code, § 1.02)
      WRITTEN/IN WRITING. Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection. The City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code,
all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code
was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code,
all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in existence at
the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention expressed in
the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, the County
Sheriff or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any provision
of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall have the authority to
administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority,
certain individuals designated within the code or by the Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer or City Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce
the provisions specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a
citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of
the code.
   (C)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and any city official or
employee designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty
under this code may, with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner
of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any
premises, inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with
this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, peace officer or any employee or official
charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a
showing that probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant
from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant
before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This
warrant shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as
a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable
cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable.
Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a
particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or any other authorized
city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code
enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being
complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit
the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination
of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice
shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
the property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner,
resident or other person in control of the property shall be given an
opportunity to appear before the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to object
to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer’s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or
special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 10.21 PAYMENT INTO CITY TREASURY OF FINES AND PENALTIES.
   All fines, forfeitures and penalties recovered for the violation of any
ordinance, charter, rule or regulation of the city shall be paid into the City
Treasury by the Court or officer thereof receiving the moneys. Payment shall be
made in the manner, at the time and in the proportion provided by law.
(1989 Code, § 1.06)
§ 10.22 ACT OTHERWISE UNLAWFUL.
   The city code does not authorize an act or omission otherwise prohibited by
law.
(1989 Code, § 1.04)
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code
and the enforcement powers granted in §
10.20, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a
majority of the members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.
The resolution may not proscribe administrative penalties for traffic offenses
designated by M.S. § 169.999, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended
to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost-effective and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on
the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.
   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the
code, other than those penalties established in the code or in statutes that
are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time by resolution of
a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before
the violation occurred.
   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer or other person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision
of this code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class
mail to the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving
notice may request the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the
violation directly to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer within 14 days of
the notice of the violation. A sample notice is contained in Appendix A to this
chapter. In the sole discretion of the person giving the notice of the alleged
violation, the time for payment may be extended an additional 14 days, whether
or not requested by the person to whom the notice has been given. In addition
to the administrative penalty, the person giving notice may request in the
notice to the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan to correct the
situation resulting in the alleged violation and may provide that, if the
alleged violator corrects the situation resulting in the alleged violation
within the time specified in the notice, the payment of the administrative
penalty will be waived.
   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due,
the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may request to
appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the
penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to
withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because
the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no
appeal from the decision of the Council.
   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating
the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its Attorney, may
bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance,
rather than requesting the payment of an administrative penalty, even if a
penalty for the particular violation has been established by Council
resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested
correction of the situation resulting in the violation is completed, no
criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including state statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including state statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of
this code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
To: (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
From: (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
Re: Alleged violation of Section _____ of the City Code, relating to (give
title of section)
Date: (Date of notice)
   I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §                 
of the City Code relating to      
                                                                                                                                    
 .
   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in
the amount of $         for this violation.
   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay
it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.
   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due
date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay the
administrative penalty.
   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by
                        (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.
   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to
institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to
contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the
Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to
renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Council.
   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate criminal
proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the Council, or any city
official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at
equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money
order to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
Signed:                                                               
      (Name and Title of person giving notice)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   City seal
§ 11.01 CITY SEAL.
   All contracts to which the city is a party shall be sealed with the city
seal. The seal shall be kept in the custody of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer and affixed by him or her. The official city seal shall be a circular
disc having engraved thereupon “City of Aurora” and any other words, figures or
emblems as the Council may, by resolution, designate.
(1989 Code, § 2.05)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY DEPARTMENTS
      
33.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
35.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
      
36.   CITY POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Authority and purpose
   
30.02   Biannual elections and terms of office
Meetings
   
30.15   Council meetings
   
30.16   Special meetings
   
30.17   Council procedure at regular meetings
   
30.18   Rules of procedure for appeals and other hearings
 
   
30.99   General penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to authority granted by statute, this chapter of the city code is
enacted so as to set down for enforcement the government and good order of the
city by and through the Council.
(1989 Code, § 2.01)
§ 30.02 BIANNUAL ELECTIONS AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   Pursuant and in accordance with M.S. § 205.07, as it may be amended from
time to time, the general election for the city shall be held biannually on the
first Tuesday after the first Monday of November of each even-numbered year.
The terms of the Council members shall be four years, with the term of the
office of the Mayor to be two years.
(1989 Code, § 2.60) (Ord. 6, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994; Ord. 106, passed 10-3-
2024)
MEETINGS
§ 30.15 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held once a month at a time
established by resolution of the Council at the organizational meeting in
January of each year. The place of the meeting shall be in the Council Chambers
in the City Hall unless otherwise designated by action of the Council. Special
and adjourned meetings shall also be held in the Council Chambers. In the event
that any regular meeting falls on a holiday, then the meeting shall be held on
an alternate date to be set by the Council.
(1989 Code, § 2.02)
§ 30.16 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or by any two
other members of the Council by writing filed with the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer stating the time, place and purpose of the meeting. Notice of a
special meeting shall be given by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to
each member of the Council by mailing a copy of the filing to all members who
did not sign or issue the call at least three days prior to the time stated
therein, or by personal service at least 72 hours prior to the projected time
of meeting. Special meetings may be held without prior written notice to the
Council when all Council members are present at the meeting or consent thereto
in writing. Any consent shall be filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer prior to the beginning of the meeting. Any special meeting attended
by all Council members shall be a valid meeting for the transaction of any
business that may come before the meeting. Meetings of the Council which are
adjourned from time to time shall not be subject to the foregoing notice
requirements; nor shall special meetings which, in the judgment of the Council,
require immediate consideration to meet an emergency require the notice, but
may be called by telephone communication or any other expeditious means. Notice
to the public and to news media shall be given as required by statute.
(1989 Code, § 2.03) (Ord. 5, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994)
§ 30.17 COUNCIL PROCEDURE AT REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare the following
items:
      (1)   An agenda for the forthcoming meeting;
      (2)   A report from the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer on
administrative activities of the preceding month;
      (3)   A compiled list of all claimants who have filed verified accounts
claiming payment for goods or services rendered the city during the preceding
month;
      (4)   A copy of all minutes to be considered; and
      (5)   Copies of other proposals, communications or other documents as the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer deems necessary or proper for advance
consideration by the Council.
   (B)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall forthwith cause to be
mailed or delivered to each member of the Council copies of all the documents.
Robert’s Rules of Order (Newly Revised) shall govern all Council meetings as to
procedural matters not set forth in the city code.
   (C)   The order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Roll call;
      (3)   Pledge of allegiance;
      (4)   Consent agenda;
      (5)   Approval of minutes;
      (6)   Approval of receipts, claims, and payroll;
      (7)   Correspondence;
      (8)   Travel and training requests;
      (9)   Appearances/public forum;
      (10)   Reports from staff members;
      (11)   Community comments;
      (12)   Reports from boards and commissions;
      (13)   Reports from Councilors;
      (14)   Report from Mayor;
      (15)   Old business;
      (16)   New business;
      (17)   Next scheduled meeting; and
      (18)   Adjournment.
   (D)   Matters inappropriate for consideration at a meeting, or not in the
order specified, shall not be considered except with the unanimous consent of
the members of the Council, or scheduled public hearings or bid lettings at the
time stated in the notice.
   (E)   All claims for payment must be filed at or before 12:00 noon on the
Friday preceding the regular Council meeting at which it is to be considered.
(1989 Code, § 2.05) (Ord. 84, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 30.18 RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS.
   The Council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure to be
followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to be held before the
Council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and determine questions
therein presented. The rules of procedure shall be effective 30 days after
adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and maintaining order and
decorum in the proceedings.
(1989 Code, § 2.07)
§ 30.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
Title III when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1989 Code, § 2.99)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Right to administrative appeal
Officials
   
31.15   City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
   
31.16   Deputy City Clerk
   
31.17   Salaries of Mayor and Council members
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.
   (A)   If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or any other city official, or any Board or
Commission not having within its structure an appellate procedure, the
aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing before the Council upon serving
a written request therefor upon the Mayor and City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer at least five days prior to any regular Council meeting. The request
shall contain a general statement setting forth the administrative decision to
be challenged by the appellant.
   (B)   At the hearing the appellant may present any evidence he or she deems
pertinent to the appeal, but the city shall not be required to keep a verbatim
record of the proceedings.
   (C)   The Mayor, or other officer presiding at the hearing, may, in the
interest of justice or to comply with time requirements and on his or her own
motion or the motion of the appellant, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
or a member of the Council, adjourn the hearing to a more convenient time or
place, but the time or place shall be fixed and determined before adjournment
so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening.
(1989 Code, § 2.06)
OFFICIALS
§ 31.15 CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK-TREASURER.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 412.591, as it may be
amended from time to time, the offices of the Clerk and Treasurer shall be, and
hereby are, combined in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and thereafter the
duties of the Treasurer and Clerk shall be performed by the Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   In conformance with the laws of this state, there shall be an annual
audit of the city’s financial affairs by the State Auditor or a public
accountant in accordance with minimum procedures prescribed by the State
Auditor.
(1989 Code, § 2.08)
§ 31.16 DEPUTY CITY CLERK.
   (A)   Position created. The position of Deputy City Clerk is hereby created.
   (B)   Delegation of duties. A portion of the bookkeeping duties, as may be
determined from time to time, performed by the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, is hereby delegated to the Deputy City Clerk.
   (C)   Bond. The Deputy City Clerk shall furnish a fidelity bond conditioned
on the faithful exercise of his or her duties. In lieu of the individual bond
the Council may provide for a blanket bond, furnished by a surety company
authorized to transact business in this state, and covering the position and
duties of the finance officer. Premiums on either of the bonds shall be paid
from city funds.
(1989 Code, § 2.09)
§ 31.17 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   Salaries of the Mayor and Council are hereby fixed as follows, which amounts
are deemed reasonable.
   (A)   The monthly salary of the Mayor shall be $300.
   (B)   The monthly salary of each Council member shall be $200.
   (C)   The salaries provided for herein shall be effective January 7, 2002.
(1989 Code, § 2.11) (Ord. 155, eff. 10-10-1990; Ord. 38, 2nd Ser., passed 10-2-
2001)
CHAPTER 32: CITY DEPARTMENTS
Section
   
32.01   Departments generally
   
32.02   Fire Department
   
32.03   Legal Department
   
32.04   Public Works Department
   
32.05   Public Works Department
§ 32.01 DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Appointment.  All department heads and employees shall be appointed by
the Council. All appointments shall be for an indeterminate term.
   (B)   Compensation. All wage and salary scales shall be fixed and determined
by the Council.
   (C)   Table of organization and lines of responsibility. The Council may by
resolution adopt, amend and from time to time revise a table of organization
and define lines of responsibility and authority for the efficient governmental
organization of the city.
   (D)   Budgetary information. The heads of all departments shall, prior to
July 1 in each year, file with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer the
projected financial needs of his or her department for the ensuing year. The
projections shall include information as to maintenance and operation of
equipment, new equipment, personnel and any other information as may be
requested by the city.
(1989 Code, § 2.20)
§ 32.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   A Volunteer Fire Department under the control of the Council is hereby
established. The size, composition and remuneration shall all be established by
resolution of the Council, which may be changed from time to time by subsequent
resolution. The Council shall also establish written rules and regulations of
the Department, a copy of which shall be distributed to each of its members.
The members of the Department shall elect their own Chief, Assistant Chief and
other officers subject to confirmation and approval by the Council.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have general superintendence of
the Fire Department and the custody of all property used and maintained for the
purposes of the Department. He or she shall see that the same are kept in
proper order and that all rules and regulations and all provisions of the laws
of the state and ordinances of the city relative to a Fire Department and to
the prevention and extinguishment of fires are duly observed. He or she shall
superintend the preservation of all property endangered by fire and shall have
control and direction of all persons engaged in preserving the property.
   (C)   In case of the absence or disability of the Chief for any cause, the
Assistant Chief shall exercise all the powers, perform all the duties and be
subject to all the responsibilities of the Chief.
   (D)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall make and file any reports as
may be requested by the Council.
(1989 Code, § 2.21)
§ 32.03 LEGAL DEPARTMENT.
   A Legal Department is hereby established. The Council shall appoint a City
Attorney, who shall be head of the Legal Department, together with any
assistants as may be necessary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
The City Attorney shall perform the duties required of him or her by law or
referred to him or her by the Council. It shall be the official duty of the
City Attorney to act as revisor of ordinances.
(1989 Code, § 2.22)
§ 32.04 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   A Public Works Department is hereby established. The head of this Department
shall be the Director of Public Works. The water, sewerage and sanitation
utilities, the city streets, parks and cemetery shall be under the Director’s
direct supervision and control and the Director shall oversee the refuse pickup
operation.
(1989 Code, § 2.23) (Ord. 5, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994)
§ 32.05 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   A Public Works Department is hereby established. The head of this Department
shall be the Public Works Director. The city streets shall be under his or her
supervision and control and he or she shall oversee the refuse pickup
operations.
(1989 Code, § 2.24)
CHAPTER 33: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
33.01   Boards and commissions generally
   
33.02   Library Board
   
33.03   Recreation Board
   
33.04   Human Rights Liaison
   
33.05   Planning Commission
   
33.06   Board of Adjustments and Appeals
§ 33.01 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.
   All board and commission appointments authorized by ordinance or resolution
shall be made by the Council. The term of each appointee shall be established
and stated at the time of his or her appointment, and terms of present board
and commission members may be reestablished and changed so as to give effect to
this section. New appointees shall assume office on the first day of the first
month following their appointment and qualification, or on the first day of the
first month following the expiration of the prior term and qualification,
whichever shall occur last; provided, however, that all appointees to board and
commissions shall hold office until their successor is appointed and qualified.
All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as for an expired term, but
the appointment shall be effective immediately when made and only for the
unexpired term. All appointed board and commission members shall serve without
remuneration, but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties when the expenses have been authorized by the
Council before they were incurred. The Chairperson and the Secretary shall be
chosen from and by the board or commission membership at its first regular
meeting in December of each year to serve for the next calendar year. Any board
or commission member may be removed by the Council for misfeasance, malfeasance
or non-feasance in office and his or her position filled as any other vacancy.
Each board and commission shall hold its regular meeting at a time established
and approved by the Council. Except as otherwise provided, this section shall
apply to all boards and commissions.
(1989 Code, § 2.30)
§ 33.02 LIBRARY BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment and composition.  A Library Board composed of seven
members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the city, is hereby
established. Three members shall hold office for one year, two for two years
and two for three years. A Library Board member shall not be eligible to serve
more than three consecutive three-year terms. All appointments for a full term
shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of the Council, and a member may
be removed in the same manner for misconduct or neglect. Appointments to fill
vacancies for an unexpired term shall be made by the Council. No more than one
Council member shall be a member of the Board. Members shall receive no
compensation for their services but may be reimbursed for actual and necessary
travel expenses incurred in the discharge of Board duties and activities. This
division (A) shall become effective from and after its passage and publication
on May 12, 2011.
   (B)   Duties. The duties of the Board are as follows:
      (1)   To annually elect from its membership a President, Secretary and
any other officers as it deems necessary; adopt rules and regulations for the
government of the library and conduct of its business; appoint a qualified
Library Director and other staff as necessary, establish compensation of
employees and remove them for cause;
      (2)   To pay into the City Treasury all money received for the library
and interest thereon, which shall be credited to the Library Fund and kept
separate from the other money of the city, and paid out only upon approval of
the Board;
      (3)   To have exclusive control of library grounds and rooms, the
construction of library buildings, and to lease rooms for library use if it
finds it to be necessary or desirable; and
      (4)   To annually report to the Council receipts and their sources,
disbursements and for what purposes, the number of library materials on hand,
purchased and loaned, and other information it deems advisable; and to file the
information with the State Department of Education not later than April 1 of
each year.
   (C)   Title to property. All property given, granted, conveyed, donated,
devised or bequeathed to, or otherwise acquired by, the city for a library
shall vest in and be held in the name of the city, and any conveyance, grant,
donation, devise, bequest or gift made to, or in the name of, the library or
Library Board shall be deemed to have been made directly to the city.
(1989 Code, § 2.31) (Ord. 60, 2nd. Ser., passed 5-3-2011)
§ 33.03 RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Recreation Board is hereby
established. The Board shall be composed of seven members who shall serve
staggered three-year terms.
   (B)   Duties. The Recreation Board shall have the duty to make
recommendations to the Council in all matters relating to city parks and
community recreation.
(1989 Code, § 2.32)
§ 33.04 HUMAN RIGHTS LIAISON.
   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Human Rights Liaison is hereby
established. The Liaison shall consist of three members to be appointed by the
Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the Council and shall serve
staggered three-year terms. Members of the Liaison shall be appointed with due
regard to their fitness for the efficient dispatch of the functions, powers and
duties vested in and imposed upon the Liaison. Any person appointed to fill a
vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which his or her
predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of the
term. Upon the expiration of his or her term of office, a member shall continue
to serve until his or her successor is appointed and shall have qualified. The
members of the Liaison shall serve without compensation and may be removed from
office for cause by the Mayor. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall
serve as ex officio member.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of the Liaison is to secure for all citizens
equal opportunity in employment, housing, public accommodations, public
services and education and full participation in the affairs of the city by
assisting the State Department of Human Rights in implementing the State Act
Against Discrimination being M.S. §§ 363A.01 et seq., and by advising the city
on long-range programs to improve community relations in the city.
   (C)   Powers and duties. In fulfillment of its purpose, the Liaison’s duties
and responsibilities shall be to:
      (1)   Adopt bylaws and rules for the conduct of its affairs including the
election, assumption of duties and definition of responsibilities of officers
and committees;
      (2)   Draft a memorandum of agreement with the State Department of Human
Rights for the purpose of determining regulatory and enforcement procedures;
      (3)   Enlist the cooperation of agencies, organizations and individuals
in the city in an active program directed to create equal opportunity and
eliminate discrimination and inequalities;
      (4)   Formulate a human relations program for the city to give increased
effectiveness and direction to the work of all individuals and agencies
addressing themselves to planning, policy making and educational programming in
the area of civil and human rights;
      (5)   Advise the Mayor, the Council and other agencies of the government
on human relations and civil rights problems; and
      (6)   Act in an advisory capacity with respect to planning or operation
of any city department on issues of civil and human rights, and recommend the
adoption of any specific policies or actions as are needed to provide for full
equal opportunity in the city; and develop in cooperation with the State
Department of Human Rights any programs of formal and informal education as
will assist in the implementation of the State Act Against Discrimination being
M.S. §§ 363A.01 et seq. and provide for the Liaison’s assumption of leadership
in recognizing and resolving potential problem areas in the city.
(1989 Code, § 2.34)
§ 33.05 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission is provided for in §
153.021.
(1989 Code, § 2.35)
§ 33.06 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS.
   The Board of Adjustments and Appeals is provided for in §
153.022.
(1989 Code, § 2.36)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
34.01   Policy and purpose
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   Establishment of emergency management organization
   
34.04   Powers and duties of Director
   
34.05   Local emergencies
   
34.06   Emergency regulations
   
34.07   Emergency management a government function
   
34.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics
 
   
34.99   Penalty
§ 34.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile
action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in
order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with
those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to
protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and
property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be
necessary:
   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for
city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters.
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters.
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other
political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the
carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions.
   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended
from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of the state
shall establish a local organization for emergency management.
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is
likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which traditional
sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair
or prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services,
police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. Emergency
management includes those activities sometimes referred to as “civil defense”
functions.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-
level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city
departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating
city- level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization
provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state, and local
jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures
implementation of federal and state program requirements.
§ 34.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management
organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the City
Emergency Management Director, called the Director. The Director shall be
appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be removed by the
Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary as established by
the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director
shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction
and control of the Council. The emergency management organization shall conform
to and be consistent with, where applicable, all state and federal
requirements, including the National Incident Management System framework found
at 44 CFR part 201, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 34.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual
aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal
emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt
with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the Council for its
action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources,
industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to
determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish
the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards, and
sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions
subject to the approval of the Mayor.
   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the
emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the Council
for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty
of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to
perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may
be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall coordinate the
emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be
consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal
government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and
other political subdivisions within the state.
   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director
shall institute training programs, public information programs and conduct
practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure
prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a disaster
occurs.
   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city's emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department or
agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning
and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization
of the facilities of the department or agency.
   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and
agencies affected, assist in he organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.
   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall
coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within
the city and assist in establishing and conducting
training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in the
several services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and regulations issued
by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.
§ 34.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her
legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days
except by or with the consent of the Council. Any order, or proclamation
declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of
the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional
disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance thereunder.
   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency
unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions.
However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services
in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor
or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate regulations,
consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting: the
conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair,
maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire, and safety regulations, drills or practice periods required for
preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect
public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies.
   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall
be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so
limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer. A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection
during business hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their
availability for inspection at the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s Office
shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other
headquarters of the city or at other places in the affected area as the Council
shall designate in the resolution. By resolution, the Council may modify or
rescind a regulation.
   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If
not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after
its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates,
whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the
period of time and to the extent conflict exists.
   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S.
§ 12.37, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding any
statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its Council,
acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting
the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency
assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may exercise these powers in
the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time-
consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the
performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of
supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and
expenditure of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of
resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and
rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby
declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not
affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise
be entitled under this resolution or under the worker's compensation law, or
under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or
compensation under any act of Congress.
§ 34.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than official
acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Lodging Tax
   
35.01   Recitals
   
35.02   Definitions
   
35.03   Imposition of tax
   
35.04   Collections
   
35.05   Exemptions
   
35.06   Advertising no tax
   
35.07   Payment and returns
   
35.08   Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands
   
35.09   Refunds
   
35.10   Failure to file a return
   
35.11   Administration of tax
   
35.12   Examine records
   
35.13   Unlawful acts
   
35.14   Use of proceeds
   
35.15   Appeals
   
35.16   Late payments; penalties
 
   
35.99   Penalty
LODGING TAX
§ 35.01 RECITALS.
   The State Legislature has authorized the imposition of a tax upon lodging at
a hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court or other use of space by a
transient. The Council finds that the imposition of this tax would provide
funding for a convention and tourism bureau to promote the city as a tourist
and convention center.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 1)
§ 35.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   LODGING. The furnishing for a consideration of LODGING by a hotel, motel or
rooming house except where the LODGING shall be for a continuous period of 30
days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms by religious,
educational or nonprofit organizations shall not constitute LODGING for
purposes of this section.
   OPERATOR. A person who provides lodging to others or any officer, agent or
employee of the person.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging, whether
paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services
rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge
itself.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 2)
§ 35.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is hereby imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person after October 1, 1991. The tax shall be stated
and charged separately and shall be collected by the operator from the lodger.
The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by the operator to the
city and shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall
the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which
the operator is authorized and required by this section to collect from a
lodger.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 3)
§ 35.04 COLLECTIONS.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this section at the time the
rent is paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by the
operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the
rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a
receipt of payment from the operator.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 4)
§ 35.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it
is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be granted except
upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected and a claim shall
be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the Tax
Administrator. All the claims shall be forwarded to the Tax Administrator when
the returns and collections are submitted as required by this section.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 5)
§ 35.06 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
   It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the
public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than $0.01 shall be
considered an additional cent.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 6) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.07 PAYMENT AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this section shall be paid by the operator to the
Tax Administrator monthly not later than 15 days after the end of the month in
which the taxes were collected. At the time of payment the operator shall
submit a return upon forms and containing information as the Tax Administrator
may require. The return shall contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return;
      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of his or her
agent duly authorized in writing;
      (4)   The period covered by the return; and
      (5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging
tax.
   (B)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable, with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this section previously paid
as a result of any transaction, the consideration for which became
uncollectible during the reporting period, but only in proportion to the
portion of the consideration which became uncollectible.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 7)
§ 35.08 EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.
   The Tax Administrator shall, after return is filed, examine the same and
make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person
making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax
computed on the basis of the examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the
tax due is found to be greater than that paid, the excess shall be paid to the
Tax Administrator ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either
personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If
the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be
refunded to the person who paid the tax to the Tax Administrator ten days after
determination of the refund.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 8)
§ 35.09 REFUNDS.
   Any person may apply to the Tax Administrator for a refund of taxes paid for
a prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period,
provided that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within
one year after the tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the
return, whichever period is the longer. The Tax Administrator shall examine the
claim and make and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim
in whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to the
person at the address stated upon the return. If the claim is allowed in whole
or in part, the Tax Administrator shall credit the amount of the allowance
against any taxes due under this section from the claimant and the balance of
the allowance, if any, shall be paid by the Tax Administrator to the claimant.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 9)
§ 35.10 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   If any operator required by this section to file a return shall fail
to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an
incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice
and demand, file the return or corrected return within five days of receipt of
the written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the basis
thereof. If the person shall fail to file the return or corrected return, the
Tax Administrator shall make a return or corrected return, for the person from
any knowledge and information as the Tax Administrator can obtain, and assess a
tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore made on
account of the tax for the taxable period covered by the return) shall be paid
within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for the payment.
Any return or assessment made by the Tax Administrator shall be prima facie
correct and valid, and the person shall have the burden of establishing its
incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding in respect thereto.
   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this section, including penalties
thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the City
Attorney may institute any legal action as may be necessary to recover the
amount due plus interest, penalties, the costs and disbursements of any action.
   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may grant an
operator one 30-day extension of time within which to file a return and make
payment of taxes as required by this section, provided that interest during the
period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per
annum.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 10)
§ 35.11 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   The Tax Administrator shall administer and enforce the assessment and
collection of the taxes imposed by this section. The Tax Administrator shall
cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents required
by this section and shall distribute the same throughout the city and furnish
them on application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve
any person from any obligation required of him or her under this section.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 12)
§ 35.12 EXAMINE RECORDS.
   The Tax Administrator and those persons acting on behalf of the Tax
Administrator authorized in writing by the Tax Administrator or the city may
examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as
provided in this section. Every operator is directed and required to give to
the person authorized to examine the books, papers and records the means,
facilities and opportunity for examination and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 13)
§ 35.13 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully fail to make a return required by
this section; to fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment; to fail
to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this section
after written demand for the payment; or to refuse to permit the Tax
Administrator or any duly authorized agents or employees to examine the books,
records and papers under his or her control; or to willfully make any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 14) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.14 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   Five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant
to this section shall be paid to the Tax Administrator for costs of collection.
Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes
pursuant to this section shall be used in accordance with M.S. § 469.190, as
the same may be amended from time to time, to provide funding to Iron Trail
Convention and Visitors Bureau, or any other tourist or convention center as
selected by Council resolution, for the purpose of marketing and promoting the
city as a tourist or convention center.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 15)
§ 35.15 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by
the Tax Administrator under this section may file a petition for review of the
notice, order or determination detailing the operator’s reasons for contesting
the notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the
petitioner, the petitioner’s address and the location of the lodging subject to
the order, notice or determination.
   (B)   The petition shall be filed with the Tax Administrator within ten days
after the notice, order or determination for which review is sought has been
mailed or served upon the person requesting review.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition, the Tax Administrator shall set a date
and time for a meeting with the petitioner and shall give the petitioner at
least five days’ prior written notice of the date, time and place of the
meeting.
   (D)   At the meeting, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn.
If the meeting does not result in the matter being resolved to the satisfaction
of the petitioner, the petitioner may appeal to the Council.
   (E)   A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision to the Council must file a
written notice of appeal with the Council, in care of the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer, within ten days after the Tax Administrator’s decision
following the meeting has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will
thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon as is practical. At least
five days prior to the hearing before the Council, the Tax Administrator shall
prepare and serve on the petitioner a “Memorandum of Proposed Findings of Fact
and Conclusions of Law.” A copy of the memorandum shall be presented to the
Council at the time of the appeal hearing. The Council shall then review the
proposed findings of fact and conclusions to determine whether they are
correct. Upon a determination by the Council that findings and conclusions are
incorrect, the Council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the Tax
Administrator based upon an application of this subchapter and the evidence
presented.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 16) (Ord. 2, 2nd Ser., eff. 11-28-1991)
§ 35.16 LATE PAYMENTS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   If any tax imposed by this subchapter is not paid within the time
herein specified for the payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be
added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.
   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by this section, unless it is shown that the failure is not due to
willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in addition to the 10%
specific penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the failure is for not
more than 30 days with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction
thereof during which the failure continued, not exceeding 25% in the aggregate.
If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of $10 shall
be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time
and the same manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid
before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added shall
be collected in the same manner as the tax.
   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment
required by this section, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat the tax or payment thereof,
there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any tax
(less any amounts paid on the basis of the false or fraudulent return) found
due for the period to which the return related. The penalty imposed by this
division (C) shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition to
any other penalties provided by this section.
   (D)   All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to
interest, and then to the tax due.
   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided
by this section, shall bear interest at the maximum rate per annum as
prescribed by M.S. § 469.190(7), as it may be amended from time to time, from
the time the tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest and penalty
shall be added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.
(1989 Code, § 6.32, Subd. 11)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1989 Code, § 6.99)
CHAPTER 36: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Workers’ compensation
   
36.02   Personnel rules and regulations
   
36.03   Special assessment policy
   
36.04   Trust or escrow account for fire or explosion losses
Disposal of Abandoned Motor Vehicles, Unclaimed Property and Excess Property
   
36.20   Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles
   
36.21   Disposal of unclaimed property
   
36.22   Disposal of excess property
   
36.23   Persons who may not purchase; exception
 
   
36.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Contractors.  The city shall not enter into any contract for doing
public work before receiving from all other contracting parties acceptable
evidence of compliance with the workers’ compensation insurance coverage
requirement of state statutes.
   (B)   City officers.  All officers of the city elected or appointed for a
regular term of office or to complete the unexpired portion of the regular term
shall be included in the definition of “employee” as defined in state statutes
relating to coverage for purposes of workers’ compensation entitlement.
(1989 Code, § 2.12)
§ 36.02 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish personnel rules setting forth the
rights, duties and responsibilities of employees. The rules may from time to
time be amended.
(1989 Code, § 2.51)
§ 36.03 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT POLICY.
   The Council may, by resolution, adopt, from time to time amend or repeal a
special assessment policy.
(1989 Code, § 2.52)
§ 36.04 TRUST OR ESCROW ACCOUNT FOR FIRE OR EXPLOSION LOSSES.
   The city may establish a trust or escrow account to hold proceeds from
losses arising from fire or explosion of insured real property located within
the city. The city may utilize these funds to secure, repair or demolish
damaged or destroyed structures and clear the property in question, so that the
structure and property are in compliance with local code requirements and
applicable city code provisions. Any unused portion of the retained proceeds
shall be returned to the insured. In addition, the regulatory and procedural
provisions of M.S. § 65A.50, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby
incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provision
thereof.
(1989 Code, § 2.53) (Ord. 26, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-7-1999)
DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, UNCLAIMED PROPERTY AND EXCESS PROPERTY
§ 36.20 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle as defined in M.S. Chapter 169,
as it may be amended from time to time, that has remained for a period of more
than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or
has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property without the
consent of the person in control of the property, or in an inoperable condition
such that it has no substantial potential further use consistent with its usual
function unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall
also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to and accepted
by the city. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. Chapter 168, as
it may be amended from time to time, shall not be considered an ABANDONED MOTOR
VEHICLE within the meaning of this section. Vehicles on the premises of junk
yards or automobile graveyards, which are licensed and maintained in accordance
with the city code, shall not be considered ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES within the
meaning of this section.
      JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle that is three years old or older; is extensively
damaged, with the damage including such things as broken or missing wheels,
motor, drive train or transmission, is apparently inoperable; does not have a
valid, current registration plate; and has an approximate fair market value
equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.
      UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to removal and
impoundment pursuant to state statutes but is not a junk vehicle or abandoned
vehicle.
      VITAL COMPONENT PARTS.  Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential
to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including but not limited to the
motor, drive train and wheels.
   (B)   Custody. The city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or
junk motor vehicle or any unauthorized vehicle as provided by statute.
   (C)   Sale; waiting periods.
      (1)   An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale 15 days after
notice to the owner if the vehicle is determined to be a junk vehicle, except
that it may have a valid, current registration plate and still be eligible for
disposal or sale; or an abandoned motor vehicle.
      (2)   An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale 45 days after
notice to the owner if the vehicle is determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.
   (D)   Notice.
      (1)   When an impounded vehicle is taken into custody, the city or
impound lot operator shall give notice of the taking within five days. The
notice shall set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model
and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if the information can be
reasonably obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held, shall
inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle
under division (E) of this section, and shall state that failure of the owner
or lienholder to exercise his or her right to reclaim the vehicle and contents
within the appropriate time allowed under statute shall be deemed a waiver by
him or her of all rights, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to
the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents
pursuant to division (F) of this section.
      (2)   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any,
of the impounded motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of
record. This information shall be made available to impound lot operators for
notification purposes. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable
certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders,
the notice shall be published once in the official newspaper where the motor
vehicle was towed from or abandoned. Published notices may be grouped together
for convenience and economy. If an unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after
30 days from the date the notice was sent, a second notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of
the unauthorized vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record.
   (E)   Right to reclaim.
      (1)   The owner or any lienholder of an impounded motor vehicle shall
have the right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or impound lot upon payment
of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into
custody within 15 or 45 days as applicable under this section after the date of
the notice required by this section.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any lien of a
garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right of the lienholder to
foreclose. For the purposes of this division (E), GARAGE KEEPER is an operator
of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage
facility or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
   (F)   Auction or sale.
      (1)   An abandoned or unauthorized motor vehicle and contents taken into
custody by the city or any impound lot and not reclaimed under division (E) of
this section may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible
pursuant to division (E) above. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a
form prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient
title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser
to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and claims of ownership. Before a vehicle is issued a new certificate
of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.
      (2)   From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned or unauthorized motor
vehicle by the city or public impound lot, the city shall reimburse itself for
the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative,
notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this section. Any remainder
from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or
entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the General Fund
of the city.
      (3)   The operator of a nonpublic impound lot may retain any proceeds
from a sale derived from a sale conducted under the authority of this section.
The operator may retain all proceeds from the sale of any personal belongings
and contents in the vehicle that were not claimed by the owner or the owner’s
agent before the sale; except that any suspected contraband or other items that
likely would be subject to forfeiture in a criminal trial must be turned over
to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
   (G)   Operator’s deficiency claim. The nonpublic impound lot operator has a
deficiency claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the reasonable
costs of services provided in the towing, storage and inspection of the vehicle
minus the proceeds of the sale or auction. The claim for storage costs may not
exceed the cost of 25 days’ storage for an abandoned or junk vehicle and 55
days’ storage for a vehicle determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.
   (H)   Disposal of vehicles. Where no bid has been received for an abandoned
or junk motor vehicle, the city may dispose of it in accordance with this
section.
   (I)   Contracts and disposal.
      (1)   The city may contract with any qualified person for collection,
storage, incineration, volume reduction, transportation or other services
necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal for
recycling or other methods of disposal.
      (2)   Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly licensed
by the State Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall review the contract to
determine whether it conforms to the Agency’s plan for solid waste disposal. A
contract that does so conform may be approved by the Agency. Where a contract
has been approved, the Agency may reimburse the city for the costs incurred
under the contract which have not been reimbursed.
      (3)   If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal
of the abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the
cost thereof along with its other costs as herein provided.
(1989 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 1)
§ 36.21 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definition. The term ABANDONED PROPERTY means tangible or intangible
property that has lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course
of municipal operations, remains unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the
possession of the city for at least 60 days and has been declared one by a
resolution of the Council.
   (B)   Preliminary notice. If the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer knows
the identity and whereabouts of the owner, he or she shall serve written notice
upon him or her at least 30 days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the
Council. If the city acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity and
whereabouts of whom are known by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, notice
shall also be served upon him or her. The notice shall describe the property
and state that unless it is claimed and proof of ownership, or entitlement to
possession established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will be
brought to the attention of the Council after the expiration of 30 days from
the date of the notice.
   (C)   Notice and sale. Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain
property to be abandoned property, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall
publish a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if
known) and addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and
including a brief description of the property. The text of the notice shall
also state the time, place and manner of sale of all the property, except cash
and negotiables. The notice shall be published once in a legal newspaper at
least ten days prior to the sale. Sale shall be made to the highest bidder at
public auction or sale or by a nonprofit organization with a significant
mission of community service in a private sale in the manner authorized by
statute.
   (D)   Funds and claims thereon. Expenses shall be paid from the proceeds of
the sale; the balance of the proceeds shall be paid into the General Fund of
the city if the property was disposed of by a public auction or sale, or in the
case of a private sale, to the nonprofit organization authorized to conduct the
sale. The former owner, if he or she makes claim within six months from the
date of publication of the notice herein provided, and upon application and
satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash or negotiables
or, in the case of property sold, the amount received therefor, less a pro rata
share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice and sale expenses, but
without interest.
(1989 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 2) (Ord. 26, 2nd. Ser., eff. 5-7-1999)
§ 36.22 DISPOSAL OF EXCESS PROPERTY.
   (A)   Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property. The City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may, from time to time, recommend to the Council
that certain personal property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed
for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the Council, the
property shall be declared surplus, the value estimated and the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer authorized to dispose of the property in the
manner stated herein.
   (B)   Surplus property with a total estimated value of less than $100. The
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may sell surplus property with a total value
of less than $100 through negotiated sale.
   (C)   Surplus property with a total estimated value between $100 and $500.
The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall offer for public sale, to the
highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value of from $100 to
$500. Notice of the public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale
and generally describing the property to be sold at least ten days prior to the
date of sale either by publication once in the official newspaper, or by
posting in a conspicuous place in the City Hall at the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer’s option. The sale shall be by auction.
   (D)   Surplus property with a total estimated value over $500.  The City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall offer for public sale, to the highest
bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value over $500. Notice of the
public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally
describing property to be sold at least ten days prior to the date of sale by
publication once in the official newspaper. The sale shall be to the person
submitting the highest bid.
   (E)   Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts from sales of
surplus property under this section shall be placed in the General Fund.
(1989 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 3)
§ 36.23 PERSONS WHO MAY NOT PURCHASE; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No employee of the city who is a member of the administrative staff,
department head, a member of the Council or an advisor serving the city in a
professional capacity may be a purchaser of property under this section. Other
city employees may be purchasers if they are not directly involved in the sale,
if they are the highest responsible bidder, and if at least one week’s
published or posted notice of sale is given.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this
section if the purchase is prohibited by the terms of this section.
(1989 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 4) Penalty, see §
36.99
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1989 Code, § 2.99)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
      
52.   WATER REGULATIONS
      
53.   SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Fixing rates and charges for municipal utilities
   
50.03   Contractual contents
   
50.04   Connection or tapping prohibited under delinquent assessments or
charges
Rules and Regulations Relating to Municipal Utilities
   
50.15   Billing, payment and delinquency
   
50.16   Application, connection and sale of service
   
50.17   Discontinuance of service
   
50.18   Ownership of municipal utilities
   
50.19   Right of entry
   
50.20   Unlawful acts
   
50.21   Municipal utility services and charges a lien
   
50.22   Municipal utility service outside the city
   
50.23   Customer’s responsibility
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPANY, GRANTEE and FRANCHISEE. Any public utility system to which a
franchise has been granted by the city.
   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any city-owned utility system, including but not by way
of limitation water, sewerage and refuse service.
   SERVICE.  Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
   UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be public city-owned
facilities or furnished by public utility companies.
(1989 Code, § 3.01)
§ 50.02 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of the city code, all rates and charges
for municipal utilities, including but not by way of limitation rates for
service, permit fees, deposit, connection and meter testing fees, disconnection
fees, reconnection fees including penalties for non-payment, if any, shall be
fixed, determined and amended by the Council and adopted by resolution. The
resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and
open to inspection in the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and
shall be uniformly enforced. For the purpose of fixing the rates and charges,
the Council may categorize and classify under the various types of service,
provided that the categorization and classification shall be included in the
resolution authorized by this section.
(1989 Code, § 3.02)
§ 50.03 CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.
   Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall constitute
portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of municipal
utility services, and every consumer shall be deemed to assent to the same.
(1989 Code, § 3.03)
§ 50.04 CONNECTION OR TAPPING PROHIBITED UNDER DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS OR
CHARGES.
   No permit shall be granted to tap or connect with sewer or water mains when
any assessment or connection charge for the sewer or water main against the
property to be connected is in default or delinquent. If the assessment or
connection charges are payable in installments, no permit shall be granted
unless all installments then due and payable have been paid.
(1989 Code, § 3.05) Penalty, see §
50.99
RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
§ 50.15 BILLING, PAYMENT AND DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   All municipal utilities shall be billed and a utilities statement
mailed which shall be due and payable and, if unpaid, become delinquent, all as
hereinafter provided. A penalty in an amount adopted by resolution of the
Council shall be added to, and become part of, all delinquent utility bills. If
service is suspended due to delinquency, it shall not be restored at that
location until disconnection and reconnection charges have been paid for each
utility reconnected in addition to amounts owed for service and other
penalties.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
      (4)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (5)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge, with said charge to be set by resolution of the City Council.
(1989 Code, § 3.04, Subd. 1) (Ord. 8, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994; Ord. 66, passed
11-6-2013)
§ 50.16 APPLICATION, CONNECTION AND SALE OF SERVICE.
   Application for municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied
by the city and strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made
until consent has been received from the city to make the same. All municipal
utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable
rate applied to the amount of the utilities taken as metered or ascertained in
connection with the rates.
(1989 Code, § 3.04, Subd. 2)
§ 50.17 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued whenever it is found
that:
   (A)   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on
any connection with the municipal utility systems, has violated any requirement
of the city code relative thereto, or any connection therewith;
   (B)   Any federal, state or county fee imposed on the city but which is to
be paid by the owner or occupant of the premises served is unpaid after due
notice thereof;
   (C)   Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other financial
obligation imposed on the present owner or occupant of the premises served, is
unpaid after due notice thereof; or
   (D)   There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in
connection with any application for service or delivery or charges therefor.
(1989 Code, § 3.04, Subd. 3) (Ord. 8, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994)
§ 50.18 OWNERSHIP OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
   Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions and
appurtenances thereto shall be and remain in the city, and no person shall own
any part or portion thereof; provided, however, that private facilities and
appurtenances constructed on private property are not intended to be included
in municipal ownership.
(1989 Code, § 3.04, Subd. 4)
§ 50.19 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   By applying for or receiving a municipal utility service, a customer
irrevocably consents and agrees that any city employee acting within the course
and scope of his or her employment may enter into and upon the private property
of the customer, including dwellings and other buildings, in accordance with §
10.20, at all reasonable times under those circumstances in or upon which
private property a municipal utility, or connection therewith, is installed,
for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, connecting or disconnecting the
municipal utility service.
(1989 Code, § 3.04, Subd. 5)
§ 50.20 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break,
injure, mar, deface, disturb or in any way interfere with any buildings,
attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture or appurtenance of any
municipal utility or municipal utility system, or commit any act tending to
obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with, opening
into, use or alter in any way any municipal utility system without first having
applied for and received written permission to do so from the city.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the
same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for non-payment of a bill
or for any other reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so from
the city.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to “jumper” or by any means or device
fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, to knowingly use or
consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any utility system, the use
of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge.
(1989 Code, § 3.04, Subd. 6) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.21 MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICES AND CHARGES A LIEN.
   (A)   Payment for all municipal utility (as that term is defined in §
50.01) service and charges shall be the primary responsibility of the fee owner
of the premises served and shall be billed to the owner unless otherwise
contracted for and authorized in writing by the fee owner and any other person
(such as a tenant, contract purchaser, manager and the like), as agent for the
fee owner, and consented to by this city. If the utility service and charges
are for a single-metered, multi-unit rental residential building, the owner of
the building shall be the customer of record and this responsibility shall not
be waived by contract or otherwise. The city may collect the same in a civil
action or, in the alternative and at the option of the city, as otherwise
provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   Except as to the furnishing of retail natural, manufactured or mixed
gas or electric service to or for the public, and to the extent otherwise
authorized by state law, each account is hereby made a lien upon the premises
served. All accounts which are more than 45 days delinquent may, when
authorized by resolution of the Council, be certified by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to the County Auditor, and the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer in so certifying shall specify the amount
thereof, the description of the premises served and the name of the owner
thereof. The amount so certified shall be extended by the Auditor on the tax
rolls against the premises in the same manner as other taxes, collected by the
County Treasurer and paid to the city along with other taxes.
   (C)   As to the furnishing of retail natural, manufactured or mixed gas or
electric service to or for the public, and to the extent otherwise authorized
by state law, the city shall not:
      (1)   Recover or attempt to recover payment for a tenant’s outstanding
bill or charge from a landlord, property owner or manager, manufactured home
park owner or manufactured home dealer who has not contracted for the service;
      (2)   Condition service on payment of an outstanding bill or other charge
for utility service due upon the outstanding account of a previous customer or
customers when all of the previous customers have vacated the property; or
      (3)   Place a lien on the landlord’s or owner’s property for a tenant’s
outstanding bill or charge.
(1989 Code, § 3.04, Subd. 7) (Ord. 27, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-7-1999)
§ 50.22 MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to furnish
municipal utility service to consumers outside the city, provided that the
consumers specifically agree to all of the terms of the city code, including
but not limited to rules, regulations and rates adopted thereunder and the
right to specially assess delinquent services, charges and penalties.
(1989 Code, § 3.04, Subd. 8)
§ 50.23 CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   It is the responsibility of any new or existing customer to install,
service, repair and maintain all lines, pipes and appurtenances from the point
of delivery and consumption up to and including (i) the curb stop on water
mains and (ii) the wye on sewer mains.
(Ord. 71, passed 11-5-2015)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
title when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions of this title.
(1989 Code, § 3.99)
Cross-reference:
   Petty misdemeanor, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Storage and transporting refuse
   
51.03   Storage of refuse
   
51.04   Collection and disposal of refuse
   
51.05   Collection of recyclable materials
   
51.06   Disposal site
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RECYCLABLES. Materials which may be recycled or reused through recycling
processes, including but not limited to newspapers, cans, glass, trees and lawn
clippings.
   REFUSE. Includes all drained organic material resulting from the preparation
of food and spoiled or decayed food from any source, bottles, cans, glassware,
paper or paper products, crockery, ashes, rags and discarded clothing, and
solid market and industrial waste.
(1989 Code, § 3.20, Subd. 1) (Ord. 8, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994)
§ 51.02 STORAGE AND TRANSPORTING REFUSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to store refuse except as herein
provided.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to transport refuse over any street, for
hire, except by special permit from the Council, or acting within the course
and scope of a written contract with the city, or his or her employment with
the city.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to transport refuse on any street unless
it is carried in a vehicle equipped with a leak-proof body or container and
completely covered with a heavy canvas or top to prevent loss of contents.
(1989 Code, § 3.20, Subd. 2) (Ord. 8, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 51.03 STORAGE OF REFUSE.
   All refuse shall be placed in the type of bags designated by the city and
which are available for purchase from retail outlets in the city. The bags
shall be securely tied or closed and may be stored in containers with tight-
fitting lids; provided, however, that if the bags are not placed in containers,
the owner or occupant of the premises shall be responsible for cleanup of
debris left by damaged bags.
(1989 Code, § 3.20, Subd. 3) (Ord. 8, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994)
§ 51.04 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   The city shall provide for the collection and disposal of all refuse in a
sanitary manner to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of its
residents, under terms and conditions as the city may, from time to time, deem
appropriate. Bagged refuse which may be placed in containers shall be placed at
the designated collection point on days specified by the city. Collection
points will generally be the alley adjacent to the property from which refuse
is collected; but where there is no alley, the curb line in front of the
property. There shall be a minimum monthly fee set by the Council and adopted
by resolution for refuse pickup, whether or not the service is used.
(1989 Code, § 3.20, Subd. 4) (Ord. 8, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994)
§ 51.05 COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   The city shall provide for a recycling center and for the disposal of
recyclables in a sanitary manner to ensure the health, safety and general
welfare of its residents, under terms and conditions as the city may, from time
to time, deem appropriate.
(1989 Code, § 3.20, Subd. 5) (Ord. 8, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994)
§ 51.06 DISPOSAL SITE.
   Privately hauled non-refuse disposal from households, and refuse and non-
refuse disposal from commercial establishments, may be deposited at the
disposal site upon payment of charges therefor.
(1989 Code, § 3.20, Subd. 6) (Ord. 8, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994)
CHAPTER 52: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
   
52.01   Deficiency of water and shutting off water
   
52.02   Repair of leaks
   
52.03   Abandoned service penalties
   
52.04   Service pipes
   
52.05   Private water supplies
   
52.06   Prohibited uses or restricted hours
   
52.07   Private fire hose connections
   
52.08   Opening hydrants
   
52.09   Code requirement
   
52.10   Secondary connections prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Sewer and water main service lateral installation, see §
91.053
§ 52.01 DEFICIENCY OF WATER AND SHUTTING OFF WATER.
   The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water
to customers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of
making repairs or connections or by any other cause whatever. In case of fire,
or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to ensure a supply for firefighting. In
making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time
and kept off so long as may be necessary.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 1)
§ 52.02 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
   It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service
pipe from the curb stop into the house or other building. In case of failure
upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in his or
her service pipe within 24 hours after oral or written notice has been given
the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off and will not
be turned on until a reconnection charge has been paid and the water service
has been repaired. When the waste of water is great or when damage is likely to
result from the leak, the water will be turned off if the repair is not
proceeded with immediately.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 2)
§ 52.03 ABANDONED SERVICE PENALTIES.
   (A)   All service installations connected to the water system that have been
abandoned or, for any reason, have become useless for further service shall be
disconnected at the main. The owner of the premises served by this service
shall pay the cost of the excavation. The city shall perform the actual
disconnection and all pipe and appurtenances removed from the street right-of-
way shall become the property of the city. When new buildings are erected on
the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase the old water service, a
new permit shall be taken out and the regular tapping charge shall be made as
if this were a new service.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any service pipe to be
hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the flow of water, or to save
expense in improperly removing the pipe from the main. Also, any improper
disposition thereof shall be corrected by the city and the cost incurred shall
be borne by the person causing or allowing the work to be performed.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 3) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.04 SERVICE PIPES.
   Every service pipe must be laid in a manner as to prevent rupture by
settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than seven feet below the
surface, in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture and stoppage by
freezing. Frozen service pipes between the curb stop and the building shall be
the responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the curb stops
to the inside of the building; or if not taken into a building, then to the
hydrant or other fixtures which they are intended to supply. A valve, the same
size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of the
building, ahead of the meter and well protected from freezing. Joints on copper
tubing shall be flared or compression-fitted and kept to a minimum. Not more
than one joint shall be used for a service up to 70 feet in length. All joints
shall be left uncovered until inspected. Minimum size connection with the water
mains shall be three-fourths inch in diameter.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 4)
§ 52.05 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.
   No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any pump,
well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any other source of water
supply and when they are found, the city shall notify the owner or occupant to
disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water shall be
turned off. Before any new connections to the city system are permitted, the
city shall ascertain that no cross-connections will exist when the new
connection is made. When a building is connected to city water, the private
water supply may be used only for any purposes as the city may allow.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 5) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.06 PROHIBITED USES OR RESTRICTED HOURS.
   Whenever the city shall determine that a shortage of water threatens the
city, it may entirely prohibit water use or limit the times and hours during
which water may be used from the city water system for lawn and garden
sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning and other uses, or either
or any of them. It is a petty misdemeanor for any water consumer to cause or
permit water to be used in violation of the determination after public
announcement thereof has been made through the news media specifically
indicating the restrictions thereof.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 6) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.07 PRIVATE FIRE HOSE CONNECTIONS.
   Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may apply
for and obtain permission to connect the street mains with hydrants, large
pipes and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only, at their own
installation expense and at rates as the Council may adopt by resolution as
herein provided.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 7)
§ 52.08 OPENING HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire Department or
other person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to
open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the same or in any manner
interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person so authorized to
deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or
wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 8) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.09 CODE REQUIREMENT.
   All piping, connections and appurtenances shall be installed and performed
strictly in accordance with the State Plumbing Code. Failure to install or
maintain the same in accordance therewith, or failure to have or permit
required inspections shall, upon discovery by the city, be an additional ground
for termination of water service to any consumer.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 9)
§ 52.10 SECONDARY CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   As used in this chapter, a SECONDARY CONNECTION means a connection with the
water service line to another building rather than directly to the water main.
Secondary connections are hereby prohibited. Existing secondary connections
shall be abandoned within 90 days after receipt of written notice to both
property owners. If this remedial action is not taken, water service to both
properties shall be shut off and discontinued.
(1989 Code, § 3.30, Subd. 10) (Ord. 3, 2nd Ser., eff. 3-26-1993)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Unlawful acts
   
53.03   Building sewers and connections
   
53.04   Use of the public sewers
   
53.05   Protection of sewage works from damage
   
53.06   Wastewater backups
   
53.07   Point of sale certification
Wastewater Service Charges
   
53.20   User charges
   
53.21   Measurement of flow
   
53.22   Depreciation
   
53.23   Basic user charge
   
53.24   Surcharge for BOD5 and SS
   
53.25   Computation of wastewater service charge
Accounting and Records
   
53.40   Revenues
   
53.41   Accounts
   
53.42   Notice of charges
   
53.43   Access to records
 
   
53.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Sewer and water main service lateral installation, see §
91.053
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORITY. The City Council, or its authorized representative, of the City
of Aurora, St. Louis County, State of Minnesota.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l,
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures in five days at 20ºC.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning
three feet outside the building wall.
   BUILDING DRAIN, SANITARY. A building drain which conveys sanitary or
industrial sewage only.
   BUILDING DRAIN, STORM. A building drain which conveys stormwater or other
clearwater drainage but no wastewater.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal (also called HOUSE CONNECTION).
   BUILDING SEWER, SANITARY. A building sewer which conveys sanitary or
industrial sewage only.
   BUILDING SEWER, STORM. A building sewer which conveys stormwater or other
clearwater drainage but no sanitary or industrial sewage only.
   CESSPOOL.  A tank in the ground used to receive drainage or sewage from a
sink or toilet facilities of a building.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams per liter as
determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedures.
   CITY.  The City of Aurora, St. Louis County, State of Minnesota, or the
authorized agent, deputy or representative.
   CLASSES OF USERS. The division of wastewater treatment customers by waste
characteristics and process or discharge similarities.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL. Includes transient lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise for personal, household
or industrial consumption and/or rendering services to others.
      (2)   GOVERNMENTAL. Includes legislative, judicial, administrative and
regulatory activities of federal, state and local governments, such as
courthouses, police and fire stations, city halls and similar governmental
users.
      (3)   INDUSTRIAL. Includes manufacturing activities involving the
mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into other
products. These activities occur in establishments usually described as plants,
factories or mills and characteristically use power-driven machines and
material handling equipment.
      (4)   INSTITUTIONAL. Includes social, charitable, religious and
educational activities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes,
penal institutions and similar institutional users.
      (5)   RESIDENTIAL. Includes all dwelling units such as detached, semi-
detached and row houses, mobile homes, garden and standard apartments,
permanent multi-family dwellings. (Transient lodging, considered commercial in
nature, is not included.)
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacterial, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the treatment works was designed to treat these pollutants, and in
fact does remove the pollutants to a substantial degree. The term “substantial
degree” is not subject to precise definition, but generally contemplates
removals in the order of 80% or greater. Minor incidental removals in the order
of 10% to 30% are not considered substantial. Examples of the additional
pollutants which may be considered COMPATIBLE include: chemical oxygen demand;
total organic carbon; phosphorus and phosphorus compounds; nitrogen and
nitrogen compounds; and fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin
(except as prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation
of the treatment works).
   COLLECTION SYSTEM. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the
collection, transportation and pumping of domestic wastewater.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   DEBT SERVICE. Charges levied to customers of the wastewater system and which
are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the
debt incurred for constructing the local portion of the wastewater treatment
systems, and which may include any further upgrading of the system as needed to
maintain compliance of the discharge permit. The DEBT SERVICE CHARGE shall be
in addition to the user charge specified in this chapter, depreciation
allowance or surcharge.
   DEPRECIATION. The annual operating cost reflecting capital consumption and
obsolescence (reduction of future service potential) of the treatment works.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   E.P.A. The Environmental Protection Agency.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract
of humans and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FEDERAL GRANT. A grant in aid of construction for wastewater treatment works
provided under Pub. L. No. 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that will not
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the city.
   FLOW.  The quantity of sewage expressed in gallons or in 1,000-gallon units.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of
produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY (ICR). A charge collected from users discharging
industrial wastes for the recovery of the Federal EPA grant amount allocable to
the treatment of the wastes and is proportionate to the volume and pollutional
characteristics at design capacity of Federal EPA-funded wastewater collection
and treatment facilities.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. For the purpose of cost recovery, any non-governmental user
of publicly owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented under the following Divisions. Any industry discharging less than
the equivalent of 25,000 PD or less of sanitary waste shall be excluded from
ICR, provided the industry does not discharge any pollutants which may
interfere with treatment processes, may be toxic or incompatible or may
contaminate or otherwise reduce the utility of the sludge.
      (1)   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
      (2)   Division B - Mining;
      (3)   Division D - Manufacturing;
      (4)   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
      (5)   Division I - Services.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through such means as but not limited to defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. (INFILTRATION does not
include and is distinguished from inflow.)
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW.  The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from sources such as but not limited to: roof leaders, groundwater
sump pumps, cistern overflows, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains,
unpolluted cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch
basins, stormwaters, surface water, street wash waters or drainage. (INFLOW
does not include and is distinguished from infiltration.)
   LOAD. Quantities of sewage characteristics such as BOD5, SS or other
constituents as expressed in mg/l or pounds per 24 hours (lbs./24 hrs.).
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industry that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the wastes;
      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of Pub. L. No. 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317
(a); or
      (4)   Has a significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on a treatment works or on the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   MG/L. Milligrams per liter.
   MULTI-DWELLING. A building housing more than one family, business or
combination of family and business, either a rental unit, dual ownership or
combination of a rental unit and dual ownership.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
groundwater.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. As defined for the purpose of determining surcharge,
shall mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily suspended solids
concentration of not more than 250 mg/l, and average daily BOD of not more than
200 mg/l, an average daily phosphorus concentration of ten mg/l and containing
not more than 2.5 mg/l of hexane soluble matter (grease and oil).
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the
United States pursuant to § 402 of Pub. L. No. 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs, direct and indirect (other than
debt service), necessary to ensure adequate wastewater treatment on a
continuing basis, conform with related federal, state and local requirements
and assure optimal long term facility management. (These costs include
depreciation and replacement.)
   OTHER WASTE. Other substances except sewage and industrial wastes.
   PARTS PER MILLION. A weight to weight ratio (ppm).
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
   PHOSPHORUS. Phosphorus (P), the total PHOSPHORUS in wastewater as determined
in the method in standard laboratory procedures.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned
industrial sources prior to introduction into a public treatment works.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by a public authority.
   PRIVY. Outside toilet facilities.
   PRIVY VAULT. An outside toilet facility with an underground concrete or wood
cavity.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to the degree that all particles will
be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particle greater than three-eighths inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any governmental agency having jurisdiction by law over
construction and use of a wastewater collection or treatment facility.
   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public authority
and will consist of the following increments:
      (1)   COLLECTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point source discharges;
      (2)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility;
      (3)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure;
and
      (4)   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer service
at which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works
were designed and constructed.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes and to
which storm, surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
   SEPTIC TANK. An underground tank in which wastes are putrefied and
decomposed of through bacterial action.
   SEWAGE.  The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions (including
polluted cooling water). The two most common types of sewage are:
      (1)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the
wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water); and
      (2)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The sum applicable of the user charge, surcharges,
industrial cost recovery, depreciation and debt services, if applicable.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRY. Any industry that will contribute greater than 10% of
the design flow or design pollutant loading of the treatment works.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer for conveying water, groundwater or unpolluted water
from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   SURCHARGE. As a part of a service charge, any customer discharging
wastewater having strength in excess of 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l SS will be
required to pay an additional charge to cover the cost of treating the excess
strength wastewater, or higher than ten mg/l P.
   THE CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, being
Pub. L. No. 92-500 of the 92nd Congress and adopted on October 18, 1972, being
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of pollutants,
which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse
effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological manifestations, as
defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of Pub. L. No. 92-500, being
33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance of these works pursuant to § 204(b) of Pub. L. No.
92-500, being 33 U.S.C. § 1284 and includes the cost of replacement.
   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed to
gases or vapors when heated at 550ºC for 15 to 20 minutes.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. The structures, equipment and processes required
to collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent and accumulated residual solids.
   WATER WORKS.  All facilities for water supply, filtration plant, storage
reservoir, water lines and services, and booster stations for obtaining,
treating and distributing potable water.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 1) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 53.02 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet
within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage
or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the NPDES permit.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities
intended or used for the disposal of sewage when a public sewer is available or
made available, unless compliance is made with the ordinance establishing
zoning regulations and land use classifications, the city zoning ordinance,
Chapter 153.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby
required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 200 feet of
the property line.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 2) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city or its authorized
representative.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
   (C)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential
and commercial service; and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the Council. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans and specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Council. The industry, as a condition of
permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics and type of activity.
   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   (E)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer if the establishment is an expansion of
previous existence. Otherwise, if the new building sewer is to furnish an
independent ownership or an addition for the purpose of a newly established
business, the sewer shall be classified as two independent sewers.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   (H)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the rules and regulations of the Council. In the absence of code provisions or
in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, the Guidelines for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Minnesota shall apply.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by the building drains shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and discharged to
the building sewer.
   (J)   It is unlawful for any person to make connection of roof downspouts,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
      (1)   No water from any roof, surface, groundwater sump pump, footing
tile, swimming pool or other natural precipitation shall be discharged into the
sanitary sewer system. Dwellings and other buildings and structures which
require, because infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces and the
like, a sump pump discharge system shall have a permanently installed discharge
line which shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary sewer
system, except as provided herein. Permanent installation shall be one which
provides for year-round discharge capability to the outside of the dwelling,
building or structure or is connected to the city storm sewer or discharges
through the curb and gutter to the street. It shall consist of a rigid
discharge line, without valving or quick connections for altering the path of
discharge.
      (2)   The Public Works Department shall have the power and duty of
hearing and deciding requests for waivers from the applicability of the
provisions of this chapter where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship
because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration
or cause a safety problem. Application for a waiver shall be in writing
addressed to the Public Works Department. The applications shall identify the
property for which the waiver is being applied, the name of the property owner
and describe in detail what characteristics of the subject property create an
undue hardship or safety concerns. Upon approval of an application for a
waiver, the property owner shall be allowed to temporarily pump directly into
the sanitary sewer system between the dates of November 1 and April 1 via a
city-controlled, locked valve. The owner of a property with a waiver shall
allow a city employee access prior to April 1 each year to lock out the valve
allowing winter discharge to the sanitary sewer.
      (3)   Cost for processing sump pump water through sanitary system will be
billed to the property owner for an annual charge to be set by resolution of
the Council. The city shall have the right to inspect all property in the
spring to assure his or her discharge water connection has been removed from
the sanitary sewer. Failure to remove the discharge will result in a $100 per
month surcharge.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements and applicable rules and regulations of the city,
or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American
Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of
Practice No. 9, and Guidelines for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Minnesota. All the connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
   (L)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (M)   Every person owning real estate that discharges into the city’s
sanitary sewer system shall allow an employee of the city or their designated
representative to inspect the buildings to confirm that there is no sump pump
or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. In lieu of having
the city inspect the property, any person may furnish a certificate from a
licensed plumber certifying that his or her property is in compliance with this
chapter.
      (1)   Any person refusing to allow his or her property to be inspected or
refusing to furnish a licensed plumber’s certificate, within 14 days of the
date city employees or their designated representatives are denied admittance
to the property, shall immediately become subject to the surcharge hereinafter
provided for. Any property found to violate this chapter shall make the
necessary changes to comply with this chapter and furnish proof of the changes
to the city within 15 days.
      (2)   During any new construction, renovation or demolition the
connection(s) to the sanitary sewer shall be protected through the use of a
cover plug in order to eliminate the potential for inflow to enter the sanitary
sewer system. Any water collected shall not be allowed to enter the sanitary
sewer system at any time.
      (3)   All new buildings with groundwater sump systems are required, prior
to final inspection by city personnel, to have the sump pump installed.
      (4)   All new homes will be required to have their sump pump system
inspected within 30 days of occupancy and a certificate of compliance
completed.
      (5)   Property owners not in compliance with these provisions shall be
charged a monthly surcharge in accordance with this chapter.
      (6)   Upon verified compliance with this chapter, the city reserves the
right to reinspect the property on a yearly basis to verify continued
compliance.
      (7)   Before any properties in the city are sold, they must comply with
the city code pertaining to sump pump installations. Prior to final sale, the
city will reinspect property to confirm compliance.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 3) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.04 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged,
any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer. Any person, firm or corporation having a roof, sump pump, drain
tile, swimming pool discharge, cistern overflow pipe or surface drain now
connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect
and/or remove the same prior to December 1, 1999. Any disconnects or openings
in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike
manner, as approved by the Public Works Department or its designated agent.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
those sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged
any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; or
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, sanitary napkins,
prophylactics and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until
the city has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which:
      (1)   Meets the requirements of § 204(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (citation) and applicable federal
regulations; and
      (2)   Has been approved by the Agency in accordance with the conditions
of any grant made to the city by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency for the construction of any part of the sewer system or sewage treatment
works of the city.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged
the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the city that the wastes can harm either the sewers or
sewage treatment process equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming the opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city will give consideration to factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150°F (0°
and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city
or its authorized representative;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to the degree that the material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
city, or its authorized representative, for those materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city, or its representative, as necessary after treatment of
the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the city, or its representative, in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time, except as permitted by the city, or its representative, in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as
permitted by the city, or its representative, in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but
not limited to fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, COD or chlorine requirements in quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
   (F)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated herein and/or which are in violation of the
standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations,
Subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 Pretreatment Standards, Federal Register,
Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973 and any amendments thereto and
which, in the judgment of the city or its representative, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may: reject the wastes; require pretreatment to an
acceptable condition for discharge to public sewers; require control over the
quantities and rates of discharge; and/or require payment to cover the added
costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or
sewer charges under the provisions of this chapter. If the city, or its
representative, permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city, or its representative, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, city code provisions and laws.
   (G)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city, or its representative, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that the
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city,
or its representative, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (H)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (I)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the city, or its representative, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city, or its
representative. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
   (J)   (1)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city, its representative or
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
      (2)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, or its
representative, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a
complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure
that compliance with the federal, state and local standards are being met. The
owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the
city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and
reporting required by the city. At times as deemed necessary, the city, or its
representative, reserves the right to take measurements and samples for
analysis by an outside laboratory service. The expense of an outside laboratory
shall be borne by the industry or owner.
   (K)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and SS analyses are obtained from 24-hour
composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab
samples.)
   (L)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, by the industrial concern,
provided the payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for
user charge system and industrial cost recovery system.
   (M)   Each residential household, commercial complex, commercial business or
industry shall pay to the city the established amount set forth by EPA user
charge system or industrial cost recovery for the proper operation of the
sewage treatment plant. Any building which is privately owned, whether occupied
or not, shall be subject to this payment. Any established multi-dwelling shall
make payment in the amount established by the user charge system. The payment
shall be made unless the water service is discontinued and the service valve
closed.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 4) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 5) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999) Penalty, see §
53.99
Cross-reference:
   Disorderly conduct, see Ch. 130
§ 53.06 WASTEWATER BACKUPS.
   (A)   All building drains which have backup problems shall have a backwater
valve installed at the owner’s expense, and it shall be the owner’s
responsibility to see that the backwater valve is kept clean and workable. The
city will assume no liability for any damages resulting from backup.
   (B)   All new housing projects shall be required to install a backwater
valve in the building drain behind the building drain cleanout wye, as to make
it possible to gain access to the private sewer line for cleaning purposes.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 6) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07 POINT OF SALE CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Scope and intent. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
real estate which is connected to the city's sanitary sewer or located within
the city. It is the intent of this section to identify and eliminate inflow and
infiltration resulting from cracked and leaking pipes, foundation drain
connections, roof drain connections, and sump pump connections.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms are
defined as follows:
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official appointed by the City Council
and/or the City Administrator or a City Administrator’s designee.
      BUYER. Any person or entity who purchases a property or to whom title to
a property is conveyed.
      CITY COMPLIANCE FORM. The form provided to the seller evidencing
compliance with this section.
      CLOSING. The date in which the ownership of the property is transferred
to the buyer.
      PLUMBER’S POINT OF SALE CERTIFICATION. The certificate provided to the
city evidencing inspection of sanitary sewer.
      QUALIFIED PERSON. A person qualified to complete an inspection and
plumber’s point of sale certification under division (D)(3) of this section.
      SALE or SOLD. The transfer of title to a property.
      SELLER. The current owner of real estate as identified in the property
records on file at the St. Louis County Auditor's Office or by court order.
   (C)   Requirements.
      (1)   Sanitary sewer lines. All sanitary sewer lines serving property,
from the house to the main line, shall be in a safe and functional condition
and shall be free from all leaks, failures including but not limited to sags,
partially collapsed sections or tree root intrusion.
      (2)   In addition, all sanitary sewer lines shall meet the standards and
specifications established in §
53.03, Building Sewers and Connections.
   (D)   Point of sale certification required and monies escrowed for
deficiencies.
      (1)   No property which is connected to the city's sanitary sewer shall
be sold within the city unless the seller or buyer has provided a plumber’s
point of sale certification to the Building Official at least two business days
prior to closing. The plumber’s point of sale certification shall provide the
city with the resources to provide the city compliance form evidencing that the
property has been inspected and is in compliance with the requirements of this
section. Compliance forms shall be valid for five years from the date of
signature.
      (2)   The plumber’s point of sale certification shall be in the form
provided by the city and requires one digital copy of the televising report to
be provided to the city along with written report.
      (3)   The inspection and certification of sanitary sewer lines must be
completed by a qualified person. A qualified person is a plumber licensed by
the State of Minnesota or another sewer professional pre-approved by the city.
      (4)   The fee for inspection and preparation of the certification by the
contractor shall be paid by the buyer or seller. There shall be no fee paid to
the city.
      (5)   Any deficiencies discovered during the inspection shall be
disclosed prior to closing and shall be corrected within 24 months from the
closing. The seller shall provide proof to the city that funds were placed in
an escrow account at closing to cover the required repairs. The amount to be
escrowed shall be one and one-half times the amount of the quote for repairs.
      (6)   Properties found to be sharing a common sewer line during the
inspection shall be remedied by providing at least two separate sewer laterals
that connect to the city’s main trunk line. The cost shall be split evenly
between the property’s owners that are connected to the common service.
   (E)   Exceptions. Compliance forms are not required for the following:
      (1)   A property where the compliance form has been issued by the city
within five years prior to the sale of the dwelling unit.
      (2)   Property sold or transferred by a court ruling including wills,
probate actions, divorce, and estate settlements.
      (3)   A property that is without building or contains no dwelling or
other buildings with plumbing fixtures.
      (4)   Property which is sold to a foreclosing mortgagee which holds a
mortgage on the dwelling unit.
      (5)   The transfer does not require the filing of a certificate of real
estate value, as described in M.S. § 272.115, subdivision 1.
   (F)   Penalties.
      (1)   Criminal remedies. The failure of any seller or buyer to comply
with the provisions of this section or to comply with an order issued by the
city pursuant to this section shall be a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Civil remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies, this section
may be enforced by injunction, action for abatement or other appropriate civil
remedy.
   (G)   Warranty disclaimer by city. By enacting and undertaking to enforce
this section, neither the city nor its council, agents or employees warrant or
guarantee the safety, fitness or suitability to any property in the city.
(Ord. 101, passed 10-3-2023)
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 53.20 USER CHARGES.
   (A)   Basis for wastewater service charges. The wastewater service charge
for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the
city shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus
replacement, a debt service charge, depreciation and a surcharge, if
applicable.
   (B)   Debt service charge. The debt service charge shall be computed by
dividing the annual debt service of all outstanding loans by the number of
users. Through further divisions, the cost per 1,000 gallons can be computed
and billed accordingly, when applicable.
   (C)   Basic user charge. The basic user charge shall be based on water usage
as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the
following normal concentrations:
      (1)   A five-day, 20ºC biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 mg/l;
      (2)   A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l; and
      (3)   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus
replacement and shall be computed as follows:
         (a)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories;
         (b)   Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories
by volume, suspended solids and BOD, if possible;
         (c)   Estimate wastewater volume, pound of SS and pounds of BOD to be
treated;
         (d)   Proportion the estimated costs to non-industrial and industrial
users by volume, SS and BOD;
         (e)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal sewage strength; and
         (f)   Compute surcharge costs per 1,000 gallons per mg/l in excess of
normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
   (D)   A surcharge will be levied on all users whose waters exceed the
maximum concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will
be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for
all wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l and 250 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS,
respectively. Section
53.24(B) specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
   (E)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed
annually by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer in the annual audit report.
The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change
in debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs, including
replacement costs.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 7A) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 53.21 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges
shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of
1,000 gallons.
   (A)   The quantity of water used as measured by the city water meter on the
premises; provided, however, that in determining the charge to be paid for
premises used exclusively for residential purposes, the water meter reading
from the average of the first two months of the year may be used as the basis
for the computation of the user charges for billing periods for that year.
   (B)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the city water
utility, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the
person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a
type approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
   (C)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the city if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
   (D)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, the meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the city.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 7B) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 53.22 DEPRECIATION.
   A depreciation charge of $0.101 per 1,000 gallons to each user of the
wastewater facility of the city is hereby established.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 7C) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 53.23 BASIC USER CHARGE.
   (A)   There shall be and there is hereby established a minimum charge and a
basic user charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater
facilities. A minimum charge per month for commercial customers in the city
limits and a minimum charge per month for commercial customers out of the city
limits shall be applied to all users whose water consumption does not exceed
5,000 gallons per month.
   (B)   A basic user charge per 1,000 gallons shall be applied to all users
for water consumption in excess of 5,000 gallons per month.
   (C)   A minimum charge per month for residential customers in the city
limits and a minimum charge per month for residential customers out of the city
limits shall be applied to users whose volume is estimated at not exceeding
7,000 gallons per month.
   (D)   The basic user charge and the minimum user charge for all commercial,
residential and out of city limits customers shall be determined and amended by
the Council and adopted by resolution. This resolution, containing the
effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and open to inspection in the
office of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and shall be uniformly
enforced. For the purpose of fixing the rates and charges, the Council may
categorize and classify under the various types of service, provided that the
categorization and classification shall be included in the resolution
authorized by this section.
   (E)   This section shall be in full force and effective from and after its
passage and approval and publication as provided by law.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 7D) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999; Ord. 39, 2nd
Ser., passed 11-7-2001; Ord. 58, 2nd Ser., passed 2-1-2011)
§ 53.24 SURCHARGE FOR BOD5 AND SS.
   (A)   Rates.  The rates of surcharges for BOD5 and SS shall be as follows:
   CS = [Bc(b) + SC(S)] Vu
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 7E)
   (B)   Computation of surcharge. The concentration of wastes used for
computing surcharges shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling
shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the city, or its
representative, and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 7F) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 53.25 COMPUTATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.
   The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following formula:
   CW = CDS + CM + (Vu - X) CU + CS
Where:
CW  = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period
CDS = Debt service charge
CM  = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement
Vu  = Wastewater volume for the billing period
X   = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge
Cu  = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement
CS  = Amount of surcharge
Bc  = $0.141/lb. BOD 5
B   = BOD - 100 mg/l
S   = SS - 250 mg/l
 
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 7G) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
ACCOUNTING AND RECORDS
§ 53.40 REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund, to be
known as the City Advance Wastewater Facility Fund. All these moneys and
revenues shall be held by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer separate and
apart from their private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of
the city.
   (B)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall receive all the revenues
from the sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the
operation of the system as the same may be delivered to them and deposit the
same in the account of the fund designated as the City Advance Wastewater
Facility Fund. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall administer the Fund
in every respect in the manner provided by statute.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 8A) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 53.41 ACCOUNTS.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a proper system of
accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage
system, and at regular intervals he or she shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 8B) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 53.42 NOTICE OF CHARGES.
   A copy of this chapter properly certified by the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder of this county
and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the
sewerage system of the city on their properties.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 8C) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 53.43 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall
have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city which are
applicable to the city system of user charges and industrial cost recovery for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transactions thereof to
ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any
federal grant.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 8D) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
§
53.05, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the
notice, permanently cease all violations. The city may revoke any permit for
sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided for herein. Each day in which the violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city by reason of the violation.
   (D)   The city, or its representative, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The city, or its representative, shall have no
authority beyond that point having direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterways of facilities for waste treatment.
(1989 Code, § 3.40, Subd. 9) (Ord. 33, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Highway Traffic Regulation Act adopted by reference
   
70.02   Definitions; applicability; scope and orders of officers
   
70.03   Traffic and parking control
   
70.04   Truck route
   
70.05   U-turns
   
70.06   Exhibition driving
   
70.07   Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal
   
70.08   Emergency vehicles
   
70.09   Motorized vehicles prohibited on sidewalks
Special Vehicle Use by Disabled
   
70.20   Operation authorized
   
70.21   Permits
   
70.22   Unlawful acts
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in
Chapter 71 of this code, M.S. Chapter 169 (commonly referred to as the Highway
Traffic Regulation Act), as amended through Laws 1998, as it may be amended
from time to time, is hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference,
including the penalty provisions thereof.
(1989 Code, § 8.01) (Ord. 31, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS; APPLICABILITY; SCOPE AND ORDERS OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise defined in the city code, or where the context
clearly indicates a contrary intent, the words and terms defined in M.S.
Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be applicable to
this Title VII.
(1989 Code, § 7.01)
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are applicable to the drivers of all
vehicles and animals upon streets, including but not limited to those owned or
operated by the United States, this state or any county, town, city, district
or other political subdivision.
(1989 Code, § 7.02)
   (C)   (1)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter relate exclusively to the
streets and alleys in the city, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer
exclusively to the operation and parking of vehicles upon the streets and
alleys.
      (2)   Orders of an officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any
peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
(1989 Code, § 7.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.
   (A)   Council action. No device, sign or signal shall be erected or
maintained for traffic or parking control unless the Council shall first have
approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided in this section;
provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign-posted, the
marking or sign-posting shall attest to Council action thereon.
   (B)   Temporary restrictions. The city may temporarily restrict traffic or
parking for any private, public or experimental purpose.
   (C)   Traffic restrictions and prohibitions. It is a misdemeanor for any
person to drive a vehicle contrary to lane restrictions or prohibitions painted
on any street, or contrary to sign-posted, fenced or barricaded restrictions or
prohibitions.
   (D)   Parking restrictions and prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person
to park a vehicle, except an emergency vehicle, contrary to lane restrictions
or prohibitions painted on any curb, or contrary to sign-posted, fenced or
barricaded restrictions or prohibitions.
   (E)   Damaging or moving markings. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
deface, mar, damage, move, remove or in any way tamper with any structure,
work, material, equipment, tools, sign, signal, barricade, fence, painting or
appurtenance in any street unless the person has written permission from the
city or is an agent, employee or contractor for the city or other authority
having jurisdiction over a particular street, and acting within the authority
or scope of a contract with the city or other authority.
(1989 Code, § 7.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 TRUCK ROUTE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural
implement, truck over 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, truck-trailer,
tractor-trailer or truck-tractor in through traffic upon any street, except
those which have been designated and sign-posted as truck routes. For the
purpose of this section, THROUGH TRAFFIC means originating without the city and
with a destination without the city, as distinguished from LOCAL TRAFFIC which
means traffic either originating or having a destination within the city.
   (B)   Use of engine retarder brakes and/or transmission brakes is prohibited
within any area of the city that is zoned as a residential district or as a
business district, or which abuts a residential or business district, except in
an emergency.
(1989 Code, § 8.02) (Ord. 25, 2nd Ser., eff. 9-18-1998) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 U-TURNS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle by turning (U-turn)
so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street.
(1989 Code, § 8.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   (A)   Prima facie evidence.  It is prima facie evidence of exhibition
driving when a motor vehicle stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates or turns
at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to squeal, gears to grind,
soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing or skidding or, as to two-
wheeled or three-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with
the ground or roadway surface.
   (B)   Unlawful act.  It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any exhibition
driving on any street, parking lot or other public or private property, except
when an emergency creates necessity for the operation to prevent injury to
persons or damage to property; provided, that this section shall not apply to
driving on a racetrack. For purposes of this section, a RACETRACK means any
track or premises whereon motorized vehicles, horses, dogs or other animals or
fowl legally compete in a race or timed contest for an audience, the members of
which have directly or indirectly paid a consideration for admission.
(1989 Code, § 8.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic-control
device by driving upon or through any private property.
(1989 Code, § 8.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign shall
slow down as necessary for safety, but may proceed cautiously past the red or
stop sign or signal after sounding siren and displaying red lights.
   (B)   The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to any
emergency call, may enter against the run of traffic on any one-way street
where there is authorized division of traffic, to facilitate traveling to the
area in which an emergency has been reported.
   (C)   An authorized emergency vehicle, when at the scene of a reported
emergency, may park or stand, notwithstanding any law to the contrary.
   (D)   No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special
privilege under this section except when the vehicle is operated in response to
any emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law.
(1989 Code, § 8.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motorized vehicle,
except a wheelchair powered by electricity and occupied by a disabled person,
on any public sidewalk or public property designated for use as a pedestrian
walkway or bicycle trail, except when crossing the same for ingress and egress
through a curb cut to property lying on the other side thereof.
(1989 Code, § 7.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
SPECIAL VEHICLE USE BY DISABLED
§ 70.20 OPERATION AUTHORIZED.
   Operation of motorized golf carts or four-wheel all-terrain vehicles are
hereby authorized on the roadways of all streets, except those that are
prohibited by resolution of the Council, and only in strict compliance with
this subchapter. For the purpose of this subchapter, a FOUR-WHEEL ALL-TERRAIN
VEHICLE is a motorized floatation-tired vehicle with four low-pressure tires
that is limited in engine displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters and
total dry weight less than 600 pounds.
(1989 Code, § 8.09, Subd. 1)
§ 70.21 PERMITS.
   Permits shall be issued only to disabled persons as defined by statute.
Application for a permit to operate a motorized golf cart or a four-wheel all-
terrain vehicle on the roadways of streets shall include the name and address
of the applicant and any other information as may from time to time be required
by the Council. Applications for initial or renewal permits shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a physician stating that the applicant
is capable of safely operating a motorized golf cart or a four-wheel all-
terrain vehicle on the roadway of streets. All permits shall expire on December
31, unless renewed. The fee for a permit shall be fixed by resolution of the
Council.
(1989 Code, § 8.09, Subd. 2)
§ 70.22 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart or a four-
wheel all-terrain vehicle on the roadway of a street unless:
   (A)   The operator has in possession a valid, current and unrevoked permit
from the city;
   (B)   The operation is on a roadway which has not been designated as
prohibited for the operation, except crossing at an intersection;
   (C)   The operation is during daylight hours between sunrise and sunset;
   (D)    The operation is not during inclement weather or when visibility is
impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or when there is
insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles thereon at a distance of
500 feet;
   (E)   The motorized golf cart or four-wheel all-terrain vehicle displays a
slow-moving vehicle emblem, as described by statute, on the rear thereof;
   (F)   The motorized golf cart or four-wheel all-terrain vehicle is equipped
with rear view mirrors as required by statute for other vehicles;
   (G)   The operator has insurance coverage as provided by statute (presently
M.S. § 65B.48, Subdivision 5, as it may be amended from time to time) for
motorcycles; and
   (H)   The operator observes all traffic laws, except those that cannot
reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts or four-wheel all-terrain
vehicles.
(1989 Code, § 8.09, Subd. 3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
   (A)   Where the specific section, division, paragraph or provision
specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be punished as for
a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under
circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within
the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he or
she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor;
   (B)   As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor; and
   (C)   As to any violation of a provision adopted by reference, he or she
shall be punished as specified in that provision, so adopted.
(1989 Code, § 8.99)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Presumption
   
71.02   General parking prohibitions
   
71.03   Recreational camping vehicle parking
   
71.04   Unauthorized removal
   
71.05   Direction to proceed
   
71.06   Parallel parking
   
71.07   Angle parking
   
71.08   Streets without curb
   
71.09   Parking hours
   
71.10   Calendar parking
   
71.11   Truck parking
   
71.12   Impounding and removing vehicles
   
71.13   Unattended vehicle
   
71.14   Vehicle repair on street
   
71.15   Parking for the purpose of advertising or selling merchandise
   
71.16   Physically disabled parking
   
71.17   Parking on private property without consent
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 PRESUMPTION.
   As to any vehicle parking in violation of this Title VII when the driver
thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner or lessee of a
vehicle parked the same, or that the driver was acting as the agent of the
owner or lessee.
(1989 Code, § 9.01)
§ 71.02 GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
specific directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the
following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   On a crosswalk;
   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;
   (G)   In a signposted fire lane;
   (H)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
the entrance when properly sign-posted;
   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (L)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (M)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;
   (N)   At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict stopping,
parking or both;
   (O)   In any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so long as
reasonably necessary for the loading and unloading to or from adjacent
premises; or
   (P)   On any boulevard which has been curbed.
(1989 Code, § 9.02) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE PARKING.
   (A)   Definition.  The term RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE means any of the
following:
      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses;
      (2)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary building to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled
vehicle;
      (3)   PICKUP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis
for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation; or
      (4)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses, permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer of the
trailer.
   (B)   Unlawful act.  It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a
recreational camping vehicle on or within the limits of any street or right-of-
way for a continuous period in excess of 72 hours, except where signs are
erected designating the place as a campsite; provided, however, that during the
72-hour period, the vehicle shall not be occupied as living quarters.
(1989 Code, § 9.03)
§ 71.04 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.
   It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned, leased or under
the control of the person into any prohibited area or away from a curb a
distance as is unlawful.
(1989 Code, § 9.04) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 DIRECTION TO PROCEED.
   It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when
directed or ordered to proceed by any police officer invested by law with
authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(1989 Code, § 9.05) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 PARALLEL PARKING.
   Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by curb or
street marking or sign-posting, or all or any of them, each vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way road where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with, and within 12
inches of, the right-hand curb and, where painted markings appear on the curb
or the street, the vehicle shall be within the markings, front and rear;
provided, that upon a one-way roadway all vehicles shall be so parked, except
that the left-hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within 12
inches from the left-hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and
with respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the direction of the
flow of traffic upon the one-way street; and it is unlawful to park in
violation of this section.
(1989 Code, § 9.06) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 ANGLE PARKING.
   Where angle parking has been established by Council resolution, and is
allowed, as shown by curb or street marking or sign-posting, or all or any of
them, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45
to 60 degrees with the front wheel touching the curb and within any parking
lines painted on the curb or street; provided, that the front wheel not
touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction
of one-way traffic; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(1989 Code, § 9.07) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 STREETS WITHOUT CURB.
   Upon streets not having a curb each vehicle shall be stopped or parked
parallel and to the right of the paving, improved or main traveled part of the
street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(1989 Code, § 9.08) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09 PARKING HOURS.
   Parking on streets shall be limited as follows.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any
vehicle upon any street for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours.
   (B)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may, when authorized by
resolution of the Council, designate certain streets, blocks or portions of
streets or blocks as prohibited parking zones, or five-minute, ten-minute, 15-
minute, 30-minute, one-hour, two-hour, four-hour, six-hour, eight-hour, morning
or afternoon rush hour limited parking zones and shall mark by appropriate
signs any zones so established. These zones shall be established whenever
necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and
preserve a free flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or
leave standing any vehicle in a prohibited parking zone, for a period of time
in excess of the sign-posted limitation or during sign-posted hours of
prohibited parking.
(1989 Code, § 9.09) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.10 CALENDAR PARKING.
   (A)   Definition. The term CALENDAR PARKING as used in this section shall
apply during the period November 1 and May 1 of the year next following.
   (B)   Streets affected. The Council shall, by resolution, designate the
streets upon which calendar parking shall be observed and shall provide that
the same be sign-posted.
   (C)   Parking regulations. During the period that calendar parking is in
effect, parking is permitted on even-numbered sides of streets and avenues on
even-numbered days, and odd-numbered sides of streets and avenues on odd-
numbered days.
   (D)   Time of change. The hours of 8:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight of each day
shall be the hours of change wherein all vehicles affected by calendar parking
must be parked on the proper side of the street for the subsequent day.
(1989 Code, § 9.10) (Ord. 12, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-9-1994) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.11 TRUCK PARKING.
   (A)   It is unlawful to park a detached semi-trailer upon any street, city-
owned parking lot or other public property except those that are specifically
designated by the Council by resolution and sign-posted.
   (B)   It is unlawful to park a truck (other than a truck of 12,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight or less), truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck-tractor
within an area zoned as a residential district except for the purpose of
loading or unloading the same, and then only during the time as is reasonably
necessary for that activity.
   (C)   It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle of more than 12,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight upon any street in the business district except streets as
specifically designated by the Council by resolution and sign-posted, but
parking of the vehicle for a period of not more than 20 minutes shall be
permitted in that space for the purpose of necessary access to abutting
property while actively loading or unloading, when the access cannot reasonably
be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck parking is not
so restricted.
   (D)   It is unlawful to park a truck or other vehicle using or equipped with
a trailer, or extended body or other extension or projection beyond the
original length of the vehicle, or any passenger bus, diagonally along any
street except for a time sufficient to load or unload, and in that case, only
parallel parking shall be permitted; provided, however, that a truck may stand
backed up to the curb if the weight or bulk of the load makes parallel parking
impracticable, but then only for a period of time sufficient to load or unload.
   (E)   Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and
sign-posted loading zones and in alleys, for a period of up to 20 minutes,
provided that the alley parking does not prevent the flow of traffic therein,
all of which shall be for the purpose of access to abutting or adjacent
property while actively loading or unloading.
(1989 Code, § 9.11) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.12 IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.
   When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or city-owned
parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, the officer is hereby
authorized to require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to
remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter. When any police
officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or city-owned parking lot in
violation of any parking regulation, the officer is hereby authorized to
impound the unlawfully parked vehicle and to provide for the removal thereof
and to remove the same to a convenient garage or other facility or place of
safety; provided, that if any charge shall be placed against the vehicle for
cost of removal or storage, or both, by anyone called upon to assist therewith,
the same shall be paid prior to removal from the place of storage or
safekeeping.
(1989 Code, § 9.12)
§ 71.13 UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended
while the engine is running.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended with
the key in the ignition.
(1989 Code, § 9.13) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.14 VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET.
   It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle any
vehicle parked upon a street, or attempt to do so, except to service the
vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency repairs thereon, but in no
event for more than 24 hours.
(1989 Code, § 9.14) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.15 PARKING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING OR SELLING MERCHANDISE.
   It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street for the
purpose of advertising the vehicle for sale, for the purpose of advertising for
sale or selling merchandise thereon or therein, or advertising any merchandise
for sale or a forthcoming event.
(1989 Code, § 9.15) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.16 PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING.
   (A)   Statutory parking privileges for physically disabled shall be strictly
observed and enforced. Police officers are authorized to tag vehicles on either
private or public property in violation of the statutory privileges.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, whether or not physically disabled, to
stop, park or leave standing a motor vehicle either in a sign-posted fire lane
at any time, or in lanes where and during the hours that parking is prohibited
to accommodate heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours.
(1989 Code, § 9.16) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT.
   It is a misdemeanor to park or abandon a motor vehicle on the property of
another, or upon an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without
the consent of the owner, lessee or person in charge of the property or
facility.
(1989 Code, § 9.17) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
   (A)   Where the specific section, division, paragraph or provision
specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be punished as for
a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under
circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within
the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he or
she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; and
   (B)   As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor.
(1989 Code, § 9.99)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Recreational Motor Vehicles (Including Snowmobiles)
   
72.01   Definitions
   
72.02   Operating restrictions
   
72.03   Owner responsibility
   
72.04   Additional snowmobile operating regulations
   
72.05   Snowmobile equipment
Motorcycles
   
72.20   Motorcycle regulations
Skateboards, Roller Skates, Roller Blades and Roller Skis
   
72.35   Unlawful acts
   
72.36   Right-of-way
   
72.37   Responsibility of parents and other adults
   
72.38   Confiscation by County Sheriff’s Department
   
72.39   Effective date
 
   
72.99   Penalty
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES (INCLUDING SNOWMOBILES)
§ 72.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV. Trail bikes, amphibious vehicles and similar
devices, other than snowmobiles, used at least partially for travel on natural
terrain, but not “special mobile equipment” as defined in M.S. § 84.92,
Subdivision 8, as it may be amended from time to time, which is hereby
incorporated herein by reference.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE.  A bicycle with fully operable pedals which may be
propelled by human power or a motor, or by both, with a motor of a capacity of
less than 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement, and a maximum of two break
horsepower, which is capable of a maximum speed of not more than 30 mph on a
flat surface with not more than 1% grade in any direction when the motor is
engaged.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and have control of a recreational motor vehicle.
   OPERATOR. The person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
recreational motor vehicle.
   OWNER. A person, other than a lienholder, having a property interest in or
title to a recreational motor vehicle, who is entitled to the use or possession
thereof.
   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle
propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes,
including but not limited to a motorized bicycle, all-terrain vehicle,
snowmobile, hovercraft or motor vehicle licensed for highway operation which is
being used for off-road recreational purposes.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
(1989 Code, § 8.07, Subd. 1)
§ 72.02 OPERATING RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a recreational motor vehicle as
follows:
   (A)   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian
travel, or to park a recreational motor vehicle on any public sidewalk;
   (B)   On private property of another without lawful authority or permission
of the owner or occupant;
   (C)   On any lands owned or occupied by a public body or on frozen waters,
including but not limited to school grounds, park property, playgrounds,
recreational areas, hospital area, skating rinks, sliding areas, the cemetery
and within two blocks of church areas during services; provided, however, that
the Council may by resolution specifically permit use on city property, in
which event the shortest route to and from areas so permitted shall be used;
   (D)   While the operator is under the influence of liquor or narcotics, or
habit-forming drugs;
   (E)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all of the
surrounding circumstances;
   (F)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person or property of another or cause injury or damage thereto;
   (G)   Towing any person or thing on a public street or highway except
through the use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of an automobile;
   (H)   On boulevards within any public right-of-way;
   (I)   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which
disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons;
   (J)   Chasing, running over or killing any animal, wild or domestic; or
   (K)   During the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., except that
operation is permitted on a sign-posted recreational motor vehicle route and if
the operation does not exceed a speed of 15 mph.
(1989 Code, § 8.07, Subd. 2)
§ 72.03 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner of any recreational motor vehicle to
permit its operation on private property without permission of the owner or
occupant, on city property without the permission of the Council, or on other
public property without permission of the body in charge thereof. For purposes
of this section, the owner shall be conclusively presumed to have given that
permission unless the recreational motor vehicle so operated shall have been
reported stolen to a law enforcement agency.
   (B)   Every person leaving a recreational motor vehicle in a public place
shall lock the ignition, remove the key and take the same with him or her.
(1989 Code, § 8.07, Subd. 3) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 ADDITIONAL SNOWMOBILE OPERATING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon the
roadway, shoulder or inside bank or slope of any street or highway. Operation
in the ditch or on the outside bank within the right-of-way of any street or
highway except interstate highways or freeways is permitted in conformance with
state law and the city code, unless the roadway directly abuts a public
sidewalk or walkway or property used for private purposes. Between the hours of
one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, any operation may
only be on the right-hand side of the street or highway and in the same
direction as the highway traffic on the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent
thereto.
   (B)   A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway except
an interstate highway or freeway, provided:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing;
      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway;
      (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
      (4)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only
at an intersection of the street or highway with another public street or
highway; and
      (5)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on.
   (C)   No snowmobile shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making
a complete stop. The operator shall then yield the right-of-way to any vehicles
or pedestrians which constitute an immediate hazard.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any prohibition in this section, a snowmobile may be
operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time
when, and at locations where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by
automobile impractical.
   (E)   No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or highways
or make a direct crossing of a street or highway as the operator of a
snowmobile. A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age,
may operate a snowmobile on streets or highways as permitted under this section
and make a direct crossing thereof only if he or she has in his or her
immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the
Commissioner of Conservation as provided by M.S. § 84.86 of 1969, as it may be
amended from time to time. It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to
permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this
division (E).
   (F)   Upon notice by occupant of a residence in the close vicinity of the
place of operation of snowmobiles upon public ways that the snowmobile
interferes with the occupant’s television receiver or other electronic
equipment, the operator of the snowmobile shall either equip his or her machine
with suppressors sufficient to eliminate the interference, if or when
available, or shall operate his or her snowmobile a sufficient distance from
the residence to avoid the interference.
(1989 Code, § 8.07, Subd. 4) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 SNOWMOBILE EQUIPMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile unless it is equipped
with the following:
   (A)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and in constant
operation and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation. Mufflers shall comply with Regulation CONS. 55 which
is hereby adopted by reference as it existed on September 1, 1970. No person
shall use a muffler cut-out, bypass, straight pipe or similar device on a
snowmobile motor, and the exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp
popping or crackling sound;
   (B)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
snowmobile under any conditions of the operation;
   (C)   A safety or so-called “deadman” throttle in operating condition, so
that when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle, the motor is
disengaged from the driving track;
   (D)   At least one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. The
head lamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes
of an oncoming vehicle operator. It shall also be equipped with at least one
red tail lamp having a minimum candle power of sufficient intensity to exhibit
a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the
hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. The equipment shall be
in operating condition when the vehicle is operated between the hours of one-
half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or at times of reduced
visibility; and
   (E)   Reflective material at least 16 inches on each side, forward of the
handlebars, so as to reflect or beam light at a 90-degree angle.
(1989 Code, § 8.07, Subd. 5) Penalty, see §
72.99
MOTORCYCLES
§ 72.20 MOTORCYCLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle, except as
follows:
      (1)   On a roadway, if the operator has a valid standard driver’s
license, with a two-wheeled vehicle endorsement as provided by law, or a valid
two-wheeled vehicle instructional permit or a special motorcycle permit as
issued by the Public Safety Liaison; or
      (2)   On private property, if the operator has permission of the owner or
other person entitled to the possession of the property.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Operate or park a motorcycle on a public sidewalk or boulevard. A
BOULEVARD is defined as the area of the public roadway lying between the
sidewalk and the portion of the right-of-way of any roadway used for motor
vehicle traffic;
      (2)   Operate a motorcycle at any place, while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs as defined in M.S. § 84.92, Subdivision 8, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (3)   Operate or park a motorcycle in a careless, reckless or negligent
manner, or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a
manner so as to endanger or likely to endanger, or cause or be likely to cause
injury or damage to any person or property;
      (4)   Operate a motorcycle in a manner or location so as to create loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and
quiet of other persons; or
      (5)   Operate a motorcycle, unless there is full compliance with the
provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, and all
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to operate or be in physical control of
a motorcycle without a valid two-wheeled endorsement, two-wheeled vehicle
instructional permit or special motorcycle permit, except on private property
with the express consent of the owner or occupant of the private property.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to perform any stunts, acrobatics,
racing or games of any sort, while operating a motorcycle.
   (E)   Parents, guardians or any other adult in charge shall be held
responsible for all damages or wrongful acts conducted by a minor operating a
motorcycle. It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or adult in charge to
permit a minor to operate a motorcycle, if the minor violates the provisions of
this section. It shall be no defense to the parent, guardian or adult in charge
that he or she did not expressly allow the violation of this section or did not
have knowledge of past or present violations. It is the intent of this section
to require the parents, guardians or adults in charge to take adequate
precautions to ensure that any minor conforms to the provisions of this section
while operating a motorcycle within the city.
(1989 Code, § 8.08) Penalty, see §
72.99
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER BLADES AND ROLLER SKIS
§ 72.35 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate or ride upon a skateboard,
roller skates, roller blades or roller skis at any time upon sidewalks, streets
and alleys in the following areas:
      (1)   Central Avenue to 4th Avenue North; and
      (2)   1st Street East to 1st Street West.
   (B)   The use of the above modes of transportation are strictly prohibited
at all times on the above listed sidewalks, streets and alleys. Skateboards,
roller skates, roller blades and roller skis are allowed on all other roadways,
provided the following provisions are met:
      (1)   The person must operate the conveyance as close to the right-hand
shoulder of the road as possible at all times;
      (2)   The person must yield the right-of-way to all other traffic,
including but not limited to all other vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles;
      (3)   The person must obey all signs and signals designed to direct the
flow of traffic (i.e., stop signs);
      (4)   When a group of two or more persons are traveling together, the
persons must travel in a single line as close to the right-hand shoulder of the
road as possible at all times; and
      (5)   The person must not engage in unsafe or boisterous activity or
engage in sport-related activities, including but not limited to the use of
hockey sticks, balls or hockey pucks.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move and/or use city-owned
fixtures, including but not limited to parking lot concrete “wheel stops,”
picnic tables, benches, railings, concrete steps, street curbs and concrete
flower beds, for the purpose of doing skateboarding, roller skating, roller
blading or roller skiing jumps and/or trick maneuvers.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person who engages in skateboarding, roller
skating, roller blading or roller skiing to apply substances such as paraffin
and/or wax or any substance to city-owned fixtures, including but not limited
to parking lot concrete “wheel stops,” picnic tables, benches, railings,
concrete steps, street curbs and concrete flower beds, for facilitating the use
of skateboards, roller skates, roller blades or roller skis for the purpose of
doing jumps and/or trick maneuvers.
(Ord. 48, 2nd Ser., passed 12-6-2005) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.36 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   It shall be the obligation of any person operating a skateboard, roller
skates, roller blades or roller skis to yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian, giving an audible sign when necessary before overtaking and passing
any pedestrian.
(Ord. 48, 2nd Ser., passed 12-6-2005)
§ 72.37 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS AND OTHER ADULTS.
   Parents, guardians or any other adult in charge shall be held responsible
for all damages or wrongful acts conducted by the minor in contravention of
this subchapter. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or adult in charge to
permit a minor to ride or otherwise utilize a skateboard, roller skates, roller
blades or roller skis if the minor violates the provisions of this subchapter.
It shall be no defense to the parent, guardian or adult in charge that he or
she did not expressly allow the violation of this subchapter or did not have
knowledge of past or present violations. It is the intent of this subchapter to
require the parents, guardians or adults in charge to take adequate precautions
to ensure that the minor conforms to the provisions of this subchapter while
operating the modes of transit listed within the city.
(Ord. 48, 2nd Ser., passed 12-6-2005) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.38 CONFISCATION BY COUNTY SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT.
   Persons found violating the provisions of this subchapter are subject to
having their skateboards, roller blades, roller skates or roller skis
confiscated and held at the Sheriff’s Department for a period of time as
designated by the Sergeant.
(Ord. 48, 2nd Ser., passed 12-6-2005)
§ 72.39 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective upon adoption and publication on
December 15, 2005 according to law.
(Ord. 48, 2nd Ser., passed 12-6-2005)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
   (A)   Where the specific section, division, paragraph or provision
specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be punished as for
a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under
circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within
the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he or
she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor;
   (B)   As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor; and
   (C)   As to any violation of a provision adopted by reference, he or she
shall be punished as specified in that provision, so adopted.
(1989 Code, § 8.99)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   NUISANCES, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
      
94.   CEMETERY REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: NUISANCES, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Section
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
90.01   Shade tree disease control and prevention
   
90.02   Maintenance of private property; weeds
   
90.03   Abandoning a motor vehicle prohibited
   
90.04   Maintenance of individual sewerage systems; overflow prohibited
   
90.05   Drug paraphernalia
   
90.06   Tree planting and maintenance
Nuisances
   
90.15   Public nuisance
   
90.16   Public nuisances affecting health
   
90.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
90.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
90.19   Nuisance parking and storage
   
90.20   Inoperable motor vehicles
   
90.21   Building maintenance and appearance
   
90.22   Duties of city officers
   
90.23   Abatement
   
90.24   Recovery of cost
Excavations in the Earth’s Surface
   
90.40   Purposes
   
90.41   Definitions
   
90.42   Unlawful act and permit required
   
90.43   Application fee and permit conditions
   
90.44   Exceptions
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Hazardous conditions, see
Chapter 130
   Street excavations, see
Chapter 91
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.
   (A)   Policy and purpose. The city has determined that the health of oak and
elm trees is threatened by fatal diseases known as oak wilt and Dutch elm
disease. It has further determined that the loss of oak and elm trees located
on public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of
property and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of
the public. It is declared to be the intention of the Council to control and
prevent the spread of these diseases, and provide for the removal of dead or
diseased trees, as nuisances.
   (B)   Definitions.    For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      NUISANCE. 
         (a)   Any living or standing tree infected to any degree with a shade
tree disease; or
         (b)   Any logs, branches, stumps or other parts of any dead or dying
tree, so infected, unless the parts have been fully burned or treated under the
direction of the Tree Inspector.
      SHADE TREE DISEASE. Dutch elm disease or oak wilt disease.
      TREE INSPECTOR. The Public Works Director, or any other employee of the
city as the Council may designate and who shall thereafter qualify.
   (C)   Scope and adoption by reference. M.S. §§ 89.001 et seq., as it may be
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference, together with the
rules and regulations of the State Commissioner of Agriculture relating to
shade tree diseases; provided, that this section shall supersede those
statutes, rules and regulations only to the extent of inconsistencies.
   (D)   Stockpiling of elm wood. The stockpiling of bark-bearing elmwood shall
be permitted during the period from September 15 through April 1 of the
following year if a permit has been issued therefor. Any wood not utilized by
April 1 must then be removed and disposed of as provided by this section and
the regulations incorporated thereby. Prior to April 1 of each year, the Tree
Inspector shall inspect all public and private properties for elmwood logs or
stumps that could serve as bark beetle breeding sites, and require by April 1,
removal or debarking of all wood, logs or stumps to be retained.
(1989 Code, § 10.06) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY; WEEDS.
   (A)   It is the primary responsibility of any owner or occupant of any lot
or parcel of land to maintain any weeds or grass growing thereon at a height of
not more than eight inches or which have gone to or about to go to seed except
as part of a managed natural landscape pursuant to M.S. § 412.925; to remove
all public health or safety hazards therefrom; to install or repair water
service lines thereon; and to treat or remove infested or diseased trees
thereon.
   (B)   If any owner or occupant fails to assume the primary responsibility
described in division (A) of this section, and after notice given by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer has not within two days of the notice complied,
the city may cause the work to be done and the expenses thus incurred shall be
a lien upon the real estate. The City Administrator/Clerk Treasurer shall
certify to the County Auditor of this county a statement of the amount of the
cost incurred by the city. This amount together with interest shall be entered
as a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land and be collected in
the same manner as real estate taxes.
(1989 Code, § 10.07) (Ord. 83, passed 8-7-2018; Am. Ord. 87, passed 5-19-2020;
Am. Ord. 115, passed - -)
§ 90.03 ABANDONING A MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on any public or
private property without the consent of the person in control of the property.
For the purpose of this section, an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE is as defined in
city code
Chapter 36.
(1989 Code, § 10.34) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 MAINTENANCE OF INDIVIDUAL SEWERAGE SYSTEMS; OVERFLOW PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for the owner or tenant of any premises to permit an
individual sewage disposal system to overflow, or expose the contents thereof
above ground.
(1989 Code, § 10.02) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the possession,
sale, manufacture, advertisement, and delivery of drug paraphernalia and
thereby deter the use of controlled substances in the city. This section is not
intended to allow what the Minnesota Statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the
Minnesota Statutes expressly allow.
   (B)   Definitions. The following words and terms when used in this section
shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
Minnesota Statutes or this section. It includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         (b)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances;
         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for
use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
controlled substances;
         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances;
         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances;
         (k)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use, or designed for use in parenterally injected controlled substances
into the human body; or
         (l)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
            2.   Water pipes;
            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            5.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material
such as a marijuana cigarette which has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            7.   Chamber pipes;
            8.   Carburetor pipes;
            9.   Electric pipes;
            10.   Air-driven pipes;
            11.   Chillums;
            12.   Bongs; or
            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (C)   Evidence. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or anyone in control of the
object under state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this section;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or
anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons who he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation
of this section; the innocence of an owner or anyone in control of the object
as to a direct violation of this section should not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (D)   Offenses.
      (1)   Possession. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with
intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section.
      (2)   Manufacture, sale or delivery. It is unlawful for any person to
sell, deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to
deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably
should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
this section.
      (3)   Minors. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates division
(D)(2) above by selling or delivering drug paraphernalia and said sale or
delivery is to a person who is under 18 years of age and at least three years
his or her junior shall also be violating this division, as well as division
(2) of this section.
      (4)   Advertisement. It is unlawful for any person to place in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement knowing,
or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of
the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (E)   Civil forfeiture. All drug paraphernalia as defined in this section
are subject to forfeiture, subject to the provisions set forth in Minnesota
Statutes.
(Ord. 64, 1st Ser., passed 9-20-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 TREE PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Authority and purpose. The purpose of this chapter is promoting
preservation, protection, and planting of trees within the city. In
perpetuating a healthy city forest, it is necessary and desirable to regulate
tree planting and maintenance on public property within the city. To ensure the
health of the city forest, the authority to require removal of hazard trees
from public or private property is needed.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOULEVARD. Area between curb or street edge and the private property/
parcel line. This publicly owned area is defined by the distance noted on
official city maps from the center of the street or cul-de-sac to the
property's lot line.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any area or building owned by the city including
sidewalks, alleys, and public parking lots, but not limited to: boulevards,
parks, playgrounds, wetlands, and streets.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Portion of property reserved for public use and
accepted for such use by the city to provide circulation and travel to abutting
properties, including but not limited to: streets, boulevards, alleys,
sidewalks, and easements for public utilities.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Any public or private facility or system for producing,
transmitting or distributing communications, electricity, gas, oil products,
water, sanitary or storm water, which directly or indirectly serves the public
or any part thereof within the corporate limits of the city.
      TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three
inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree. This is an undesirable practice, causing
shock to the tree, leaving it susceptible to disease and affecting the overall
health by disturbing the crown to root ratio.
      TREE. Any tree, shrub, hedge or woody vegetation. Definition includes:
         (a)   Boulevard tree. A tree planted within the strip of land lying
between property lines and the edge of streets, avenues, boulevards, or
roadways within the city.
         (b)   Hazard tree. Any public or private tree or part thereof which:
            1.   Has an infectious or destructive disease, insect problem or
other pestilence which endangers the growth, health, life or well-being of
trees in the city, or which threatens to or is capable of causing the spread of
a disease, pestilence or insect infestation;
            2.   Is infected with Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, or Emerald Ash
Borer or other insect, pest or tree disease;
            3.   Is dead, dying, broken or decayed;
            4.   Obstructs street lights, traffic signs, or the view of any
street intersection;
            5.   Obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
            6.   Is causing the surface of a public street, curb or sidewalk to
be up- heaved or otherwise disturbed;
            7.   Poses an imminent threat to the sewer system, electric power
lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvement; or
            8.   Constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or well-
being of the general public.
         (c)   Large tree. A tree growing to a maximum height of over 50 feet.
         (d)   Medium tree. A tree growing to a maximum height of 30 to 50
feet.
         (e)   Park tree. A tree growing in designated parks owned by the city
to which the public has free access.
         (f)   Private tree. All trees growing on private property within the
city limits.
         (g)   Public tree. Any tree growing on public right-of-ways and city
owned lands, including boulevard and park trees.
         (h)   Small tree. A tree growing to a maximum height of 30 feet.
      URBAN FOREST. A forest or a collection of trees growing within a city. It
may include any kind of woody plant vegetation growing in and around the city.
   (C)   Responsibilities of city and private property owners.
      (1)   City responsibilities.
         (a)   City Tree Board established. 
            1.   The City Council shall appoint a committee to serve as the
city Tree Committee. This Tree Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to
the City Council concerning issues related to the well-being of the urban
forest resources within the municipal boundaries of the city.
            2.   The responsibilities of the Tree Board shall include, but are
not limited to, promoting well managed growth and development of the urban
forest within the city. Duties shall be to:
               a.   Serve as an advocate of the city's urban forest. It will
meet monthly, or otherwise as needed.
               b.   Recommend to City Council the adoption and alteration of
all rules and regulations which it shall deem in the public interest to enhance
and beautify the urban forest as well as to carry out the purposes of this
section. This may include, but is not limited to:
                  i.   Establishing standards and specifications needed to
carry out tree care work in the city;
                  ii.   Develop and maintain a list of both desirable and
unsuitable trees for planting along streets in three size classes: small,
medium and large;
               c.   Encourage improvement of the urban forest:
                  i.   Promote appreciation of trees and the urban forest
through Arbor Day observances and other activities;
                  ii.   Encourage landscaping, planting and maintenance of
trees and vegetation on private property by providing information on tire value
of landscaping and on the proper planting and care of trees and other
vegetation; and
                  iii.   Assist city departments to enhance the urban forest in
the city and recommend obtaining professional assistance when needed.
         (b)   The city will designate resources for the planting and care of
public trees and other vegetation. This includes assigning and managing city
staff to complete necessary tasks. If needed, the city shall appoint or
contract with a licensed arborist to perform the duties imposed by this
section. The arborist will provide proof of liability insurance and worker’s
compensation insurance.
      (2)    Private property owner’s responsibilities. Protection and
maintenance of public trees in boulevard. Any owner of private property
abutting a boulevard shall have the following responsibilities for public trees
located in the boulevard adjacent to the owner's property:
         (a)   Periodic watering of trees, located in the boulevard, when
necessary to maintain good health and vigor.
         (b)   Protection of trees against damage caused by lawn mowers, weed
trimmers, snow blowers and similar equipment.
         (c)   The city may maintain boulevard trees, but residents are
encouraged to care for trees in the boulevard adjoining their property
according to these specifications: that branches are no closer than eight feet
above sidewalks or level of turf and a minimum of 12 feet above the street.
         (d)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
accomplish the trimming and/or removal of private trees with due consideration
for public safety concerns, such as a duty to adequately block off any affected
street, sidewalk and/or yard area to make certain there are no pedestrians
under a proposed fall line of the trees or branches to be trimmed and that
adequate consideration for protection of neighboring property is also provided.
Third parties are required to provide proof of liability insurance.
   (D)   Tree planting, maintenance, and removal.
      (1)   Permits required.
         (a)   It is unlawful for any person to plant or remove any tree on
public property (boulevard tree), without first obtaining a permit from the
city.
         (b)   In the case of a requested boulevard planting, a permit
application shall be submitted and the city will provide a list of approved and
suggested trees and guidelines for planting and pruning.
         (c)   Permits shall not be required for tree removal from private
property, but due consideration for streets, pedestrians, neighbors and proof
of third party liability insurance must be made.
         (d)   There is no fee for the permits.
         (e)   Permits shall not be required for work performed by city
employees.
      (2)   Planting; boulevard tree specifications.
         (a)   Tree species. A list of desirable trees for planting and a list
of trees not suitable for planting in boulevards will be available at City
Hall.
         (b)   Utilities. No public trees may be planted under or within ten
lateral feet of any overhead transmission or primary utility wire, over or
within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, sub-drain,
transmission line, or other utility. No trees shall be planted within utility
easements. A locate call must be made prior to planting to determine location
of utility lines (Gopher State One Call: 800-252-1166).
         (c)   Distance from intersection. Tree's minimum distance from an
intersection is defined by "Clear Vision Areas" (Section 8.09, Zoning
Ordinance): "A clear vision area shall be maintained on the corners of all
property at the intersection of two streets, or a street and a railroad. A
clear vision area shall be a triangular shaped area with two sides following
lot lines; the clear vision areas shall extend along the edge of the road
surface or curb for a distance of not less than 25 feet. The clear vision area
shall contain no planting, fence, wall, structure or temporary or permanent
obstruction exceeding 36 inches in height, except for trees with branches and
foliage removed to a height of eight feet above the ground, and open wire
fencing that does not obscure sight."
         (d)   Distance from driveways. Trees must be at least five feet from
any driveway or approach sidewalk within a boulevard area.
         (e)   Distance from curb, sidewalk, and streets edges without curbing.
When no sidewalk exists the trees must be a minimum of eight feet behind the
curb. When a sidewalk exists with an eight foot boulevard, the trees may be
centered between the sidewalk and the curb. If the boulevard is smaller than
eight feet, the trees should be planted at least four feet to the house side of
the sidewalk. On streets lacking curbing and a paved parking area, plant trees
a minimum distance of 12 feet from the edge of the road. Unique situations or
specific requirement questions should be referred to the Tree Board.
         (f)   Distance from fire hydrants. No public tree shall be planted
closer than ten feet to any fire hydrant.
      (3)   Maintenance.
         (a)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and
remove public trees as may be necessary to ensure the public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public property. The city
may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is
in an unsafe condition which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers,
electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or
is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest, including but not
limited to Dutch elm disease, oak wilt disease or Emerald Ash Borer.
         (b)   If the city chooses to plant boulevard trees on a property's
boulevard, the property owners shall be notified in writing and have the right
to stop the planting.
            1.   Prevention of visual obstructions. Every public or private
tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall be trimmed so
that the branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct
the view of any street intersection or street sign and so that there shall be a
clear space of at least 12 feet above the street or eight feet above the
sidewalk.
            2.   Topping. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or city
department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property.
Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under
utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the City
Inspector.
            3.   Control of private hazard trees. The city maintains the right
to take action on private trees that meet the definition of hazard trees to
protect the public. Every effort will be made to cooperate with the citizen
before action is taken. Required process for orders relating to private hazard
trees is as follows:
               a.   Except in situations of imminent danger to human life and
safety, the tree inspector or city representative will not enter private
property for the purpose of inspecting for hazard trees without the permission
of the owner, resident, or other person in control of the property, unless the
inspector has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
               b.   All orders to remove, treat or trim trees, eradicate or
otherwise control the hazardous condition given pursuant to this section shall
be in writing and authorized by the city or its designated representative.
Orders shall be served in person or by mail upon the owner of the property
where such trees are located. Such orders shall afford the owner of the
property not less than 30 days or a reasonable amount of time determined by the
city from the date of the mailing of such notice to comply with such order.
               c.   If the required action is not taken by the property owner
within the specified time, the city may cause the tree concerned to be trimmed,
removed, or treated for the hazardous condition to be eradicated or otherwise
controlled. The costs of such actions shall be apportioned as provided in
division (F)(2).
               d.   Disposal of wood from hazard trees must follow accepted
Department of Natural Resource standards to ensure diseased wood does not
infect healthy trees. Wood from elms infected with Dutch elm disease, oaks
infected with oak wilt or ash infected with Emerald Ash Borer must follow DNR
approved quarantine procedures. Apportionment of costs relating to hazard
trees:
                  i.   Public trees. In the event that the city determines that
a tree located on a boulevard or on public land as defined in division (B)
herein is a hazard, the city will be responsible for the tree treatment,
trimming, or removal.
                  ii.   Private tree. In the event the city determines that a
private tree is a hazard to city owned utilities, the homeowner will assume
responsibility for the cost of removal, treatment, trimming or otherwise
eradicating or controlling the hazardous condition. In cases wherein the tree
is determined to be infected with a shade tree pest or disease, including but
not limited to Dutch elm disease, oak wilt disease, and Emerald Ash Borer, and
where the city has determined that a private tree is a hazard, the owner will
be responsible for removal, treatment, trimming or otherwise eradicating or
controlling the hazardous private tree. In situations where a private tree is
dead, dying and decayed and deemed as being an imminent danger to public
health, safety, and well-being, the owner will be responsible for appropriate
trimming or removal of their tree.
                  iii.   Special assessments. If a private hazard tree is not
removed or treated as ordered or if the owner does not voluntarily pay to the
city the cost of removal or treatment by the city, all costs incurred by the
city for trimming, tree removal, treatment, eradicating or controlling the
hazardous condition may be recovered by the city by assessing the property.
      (4)   Removal. Permits shall not be required for trees removed from
private property, but due consideration for streets, pedestrians, neighbors and
proof of third party liability insurance must be made. Permits are required, at
no cost, to remove any boulevard tree.
   (E)   Tree protection.
      (1)   No person may plant, remove, alter, destroy, cut or disturb any
public tree within the city without permission from the city.
      (2)   Abuse or mutilation of public trees. No person shall damage,
transplant, top, remove or mutilate any public tree. Damage may include, but is
not limited to the following: posting signs with nails, staples, screws or
other devices, hanging wires of any kind, vehicle damage, weed whip, lawn mower
damage, stripping bark off the tree, and poison or toxin applications.
      (3)   Protection of public trees near construction activities. Any public
tree in the immediate vicinity of any excavation, demolition or construction
site of any building, structure, street or utilities work which has potential
for injury, shall be protected from injury by the person responsible for
carrying out the construction activities.
   (F)   Penalties, claims.
      (1)   Violations. Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or
provision of this section when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to
act when the failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by
reference by this section, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
      (2)   Assessment of claim. In the event that a hazardous condition is not
removed by the date specified in the notice, the city is authorized to cause
the removal of such hazardous condition. The reasonable cost of such removal
shall be filed as an assessment against the property on which the hazardous
tree was located.
      (3)   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any ruling or order of the city
may appeal to the City Council, which shall hear the matter and make a final
decision. The City Council shall have the right to review decisions and may
modify, affirm, or reverse any determination of the Tree Board.
(Ord. 75, passed 2-3-2015)
NUISANCES
§ 90.15 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally
does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is
a misdemeanor:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§
90.16,
90.17 or
90.18, or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no
sentence is specifically provided.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license.
   (L)   All unnecessary and annoying vibrations.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as
otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in
violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor
is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and
other property used for maintaining that place. For the purposes of this
section INTOXICATING LIQUOR shall mean any ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented,
spirituous, vinous or malt beverage containing more than ½% alcohol by volume;
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal
purpose;
   (F)   Drug use.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as they may
be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated by reference into
this code;
   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any recreational device
except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations;
   (F)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or
other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly
audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person
nearby. Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line
of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of 50
feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of this section;
   (G)   No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people
giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of
another person. When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating
such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than
the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to
disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a
police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has
knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the
disturbance is stopped;
   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law;
   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance;
   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (O)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public properties;
   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from accumulation;
   (Q)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located;
   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;
   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
substance;
   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone.
   (V)   (1)   Noises prohibited.  
         (a)   General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made
any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of
any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property's
value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of
this section.
         (b)   Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use any vehicle so
out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling, or other noise.
         (c)   Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall create loud or
excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.
         (d)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the like. No person
shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or other device for the
production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly audible manner as
to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any person nearby.
Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is
located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if
the source is located outside a structure or building, shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
         (e)   Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like. No person shall
create any excessive noise on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church or hospital when the noise unreasonably
interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its
occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such
institution.
      (2)   Hourly restriction of certain operations.
         (a)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn
mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or
other similar domestic power maintenance equipment except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this
provision.
         (b)   Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or
refuse in any residential district except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
any weekend or holiday.
         (c)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel, or
gas-powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
      (3)   Noise impact statements. The Council may require any person
applying for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license for any
structure, operation, process, installation or alteration or project that may
be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement on a
form prescribed by the Council. It shall evaluate each such statement and take
its evaluation into account in approving or disapproving the license or permit
applied for or the zoning change requested.
   (W)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5
footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting
is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one footcandle when
abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.
   (X)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5
footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting
is located when abutting any residential parcel and one footcandle when
abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.19 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles, outdoor
non-permanent structures, materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used
for residential purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is
declared to be a public nuisance because it (a) obstructs views on streets and
private property, (b) creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas, (c)
prevents the full use of residential streets for residential parking, (d)
introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial advertising
signs are otherwise prohibited, (e) decreases adjoining landowners' and
occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and (f) otherwise
adversely affects property values and neighborhood patterns.
   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.
      (1)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage
of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-permanent
structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the front-yard area
of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from the front property
line.
      (2)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage
of pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar materials, including all
materials used in connection with a business, outside on residential property,
unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles shall be mobile and shall not be permanently
affixed upon any foundation nor upon or in the group in any manner that would
prevent portability.
         (a)   No recreational vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, camper trailer,
fish house, or other articles stored outside shall be used as a permanent
dwelling, storage, or other accessory building.
         (b)   When parked or stored, recreational vehicles shall be kept neat
and clean at all times. Debris, excessive dirt, spider webs, weed accumulation
on and under such units are prohibited at all times.
      (4)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
the following requirements:
         (a)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be
parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except as otherwise
permitted or required by the city because of nonresidential characteristics of
the property. This maximum number does not include vehicles of occasional
guests who do not reside on the property.
         (b)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front-yard
area must be on a paved or graveled parking or driveway area.
         (c)   Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on
residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that property.
Students who are away at school for periods of time but still claim the
property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the property.
         (d)   Vehicles, watercraft, and other articles stored outside shall
not be parked or stored where any portion thereof infringes upon, blocks, or
overhangs the public street, alley, sidewalk, trail way, boulevard, or curb
within the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 91, passed 9-20-2022) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful, except as provided in division (B) below,
to keep, park, store or abandon any motor vehicle which is:
         (a)   Not in operating condition;
         (b)   Partially dismantled;
         (c)   Used for repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement
parts for other vehicles;
         (d)   Kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind; or
         (e)   Not properly licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to
M.S. § 168B.011, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any such vehicle shall be deemed for purposes of this section to be
an “inoperable motor vehicle.”
   (B)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle which is:
      (1)   Enclosed in a building and/or kept out of view, with a privacy
fence or otherwise, from any street, road or alley, and which does not foster
complaint from a resident of the city.
      (2)   Is stored or parked on private property of the owner thereof, or a
member of his or her family, for the purpose of making repairs thereto, or for
the purpose of evaluating and inspecting damages or necessary repairs, provided
that:
         (a)   At all times while the vehicle is so stored, at least one-half
of the total number of wheels of the vehicle are in contact with the ground;
         (b)   Only one vehicle may be so stored or parked at any one time; and
         (c)   The vehicle so stored does not remain there for a period of more
than 14 days.
   (C)   If the registered owner of any inoperable motor vehicle, or if the
owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property upon which the
inoperable motor vehicle is located, shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove or
house the inoperable motor vehicle in accordance with this section, the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, or the Police Department, may remove and dispose
of the inoperable motor vehicle in the following manner:
      (1)   Immediate sale. When an inoperable motor vehicle is more than seven
model years of age, is lacking vital component parts and does not display a
license plate currently valid in Minnesota or any other state or foreign
country, it immediately shall be towed. The owner of any such towed inoperable
motor vehicle is required to abide by the process of the tow company including
any and all tow fees, storage fees, and all other reasonable costs.
      (2)   Notice.
         (a)   When an inoperable motor vehicle does not fall within the
provisions of division (1) above, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or the
Police Department shall give, or cause to be given, within ten days of the
taking, to the vehicle owner and any lienholders, written notice setting forth
the date and place of taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the
inoperable motor vehicle, and, if the information can be reasonably obtained,
the place where the vehicle is being held. The notice shall inform the owner
and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle under division (3)
below and shall state that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle shall be deemed to be a waiver by them of
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the
vehicle in accordance with the towing company’s policies.
         (b)   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if
any, or to the person in lawful possession or control of the property upon
which the vehicle was located, and to all readily identifiable lienholders of
record. When an inoperable motor vehicle is found on public property, if it is
impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of
the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in
a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the inoperable motor
vehicle was found. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience
and economy.
      (3)   Right to reclaim. The owner or any lienholder of an inoperable
motor vehicle or any person in lawful possession or control of the property
upon which the inoperable motor vehicle was found shall have a right to reclaim
the inoperable motor vehicle from the tow company in accordance with the
company’s policies and procedures.
      (4)   Entry upon private property for removal or abatement. In the event
that an inoperable motor vehicle is located on private property in violation of
this section, the City Clerk-Treasurer, or the Police Department, or its
designee, may give ten days’ written notice, either by certified mail/return
receipt requested or by personal service, to the registered owner of the
vehicle, or to the owner or occupant of the real estate, which directs the
abatement of the violation within ten days. In the event that the violation is
not abated within such ten day period, the City Clerk-Treasurer or Police
Department, or its designee, may and is hereby expressly authorized to enter
upon the private property for the purpose of abating the violation and removing
the inoperable motor vehicle. The cost of the removal and storage shall be
billed to the owner of the inoperable motor vehicle and/or owner or occupant of
the real estate, and if not paid, may be certified to the real estate as a
special assessment.
(Am. Ord. 87, passed 5-19-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences and other structures that
have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance
detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances
because they (a) are unsightly, (b) decrease adjoining landowners and
occupants’ enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and (c) adversely
affect property values and neighborhood patterns.
   (B)   Standards. A building, fence or other structure is a public nuisance
if it does not comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes,
breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers.
      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint
applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No
wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise
deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
         (a)   Any one wall or other flat surface; or
         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar
projections on any one side or surface.
      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be
broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.
      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an
operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.
      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows and
similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.
      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water.
All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.
      (7)   Chimneys, antennae, air vents, and other similar projections must
be structurally sound and in good repair. These projections must be secured
properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof.
      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   For purposes of §§
90.22 and
90.23, the Police Department, or Sheriff or person designated by the City
Council under §
10.20, if the city has at the time no Police Department, may enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances. Any peace officer or designated person shall
have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions
to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. Except in
emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police
officer or designated person shall enter private property for the purpose of
inspecting or preventing public nuisances without the permission of the owner,
resident or other person in control of the property, unless the officer or
person designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry, as provided in §
10.20.
§ 90.23 ABATEMENT.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or the Police Department, or its
designee, or any other person designated by City Council motion, may give
written notice to the owner or occupant of the property requiring that the
nuisance be abated within 48 hours. Notice shall be personally served upon the
owner or occupant of the property. If the nuisance is not abated within the 48-
hour time period, unless good cause is shown by the owner or occupant for an
additional period of time, the city or its designee may enter onto the property
and abate the nuisance by causing the weeds and grasses to be cut and removed
at the expense of the owner, and may remove any garbage, refuse or other
materials accumulated on the property at the expense of the owner, and if not
paid, the cost for the work shall be certified to the real estate as a special
assessment, in accordance with this code of ordinances.
(Am. Ord. 87, passed 5-19-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.24 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city or a person who has caused a public nuisance on a property
not owned by that person shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of
the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or
other official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.
Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as
it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or
safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer shall, on or before September 1 next following
abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other
charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S.
§ 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or
parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then spread
the charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with
current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten,
as the City Council may determine in each case.
Penalty, see §
90.99
EXCAVATIONS IN THE EARTH’S SURFACE
§ 90.40 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this subchapter are to prevent any interruption of or damage
to utilities, and to prevent unsightly or hazardous holes in the earth’s
surface.
(1989 Code, § 10.33, Subd. 1)
§ 90.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCAVATING. The act of constructing an excavation.
   EXCAVATION. The construction or maintenance of a hole in the earth’s surface
more than 18 inches in depth (measured from the surface adjoining the
excavation on any side thereof) or more than five feet in length or width.
(1989 Code, § 10.33, Subd. 2)
§ 90.42 UNLAWFUL ACT AND PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to construct or maintain an excavation
on private property or public property which is not owned or under the control
of the city, without a written permit from the city.
   (B)   All applications for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
city, and all permits shall be issued on conditions that will protect persons
and property from damage or injury.
(1989 Code, § 10.33, Subd. 3) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.43 APPLICATION FEE AND PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No application shall be considered until the applicant has paid a fee
which includes the cost of any investigation deemed necessary by the city.
   (B)   The city may impose conditions on any permit for the protection of
persons and property and to assure completion of the excavation including
filling and dressing the surface.
   (C)   The city may require a cash or surety bond in an amount as the city
deems reasonable to assure compliance with the conditions of the permit.
(1989 Code, § 10.33, Subd. 4)
§ 90.44 EXCEPTIONS.
   No permit shall be required:
   (A)   Of any contractor acting within the course and scope of a contract
with the city;
    (B)   For stripping sod from the earth’s surface; or
   (C)   For excavating for the purpose of building construction for which a
building permit has been issued.
(1989 Code, § 10.33, Subd. 5)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when
the failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference
by this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, for which no other penalty is
provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of §§
90.01 -
90.18 and
90.21 be subject to an administrative penalty, and in addition, the violation
may constitute a petty misdemeanor. Every day that the offense occurs shall be
deemed a separate violation of §§
90.01 -
90.18 and
90.21. A second offense occurring within 12 months after a conviction of a
violation of §§
90.01 -
90.18 and
90.21 shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Failure by an owner or an occupant of property to comply with the
notice served upon the owner or occupant as provided by §§
90.19 and
90.20 within the time allowed therein shall constitute a violation of §§
90.19 and
90.20 and shall be subject to an administrative penalty, and in addition, shall
constitute a petty misdemeanor. A second offense occurring within 12 months
after a conviction of a violation of §§
90.19 and
90.20 shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Administrative penalty and administrative remedies for §§
90.01 -
90.21.
      (1)   Generally. A violation of a city ordinance which constitutes an
administrative offense shall be subject to the administrative penalties set
forth in divisions (B) and (C) above. A first offense shall be subject to an
administrative penalty in the amount of $100. A second offense within a 12-
month time period shall be subject to an administrative penalty in the amount
of $250. Any further violations within a 12-month time period shall be subject
to $500 administrative penalties, if property is still not compliant after the
administrative penalty of $500 the violation shall constitute a petty
misdemeanor or misdemeanor.
      (2)   Administrative remedy. Should the owner or occupant not comply with
the requirements set forth in the notice and abate the violation, the city may
enter onto the property to cure the violation, in accordance with §
10.20 of this Code of Ordinances, at the expense of the property owner, and if
not paid, the cost for the work shall be certified to the real estate as a
special assessment.
      (3)   Payment of administrative penalty. In the event of a violation of
an ordinance and failure to cure in timely fashion, the city may issue a notice
which establishes an administrative penalty as provided herein. Once notice is
given, the alleged violator shall, within seven days of the issuance of the
notice, pay the amount set forth in the notice, or may request a hearing in
writing, as is provided for hereafter. If a hearing is not requested or the
administrative fine is not paid within the seven-day time period, the city may
assess the cost of abatement and the amount of the administrative fine as a
special assessment against the property and may also prosecute the violation as
a criminal offense.
      (4)   Hearing. Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant
to this division (D) may, within seven days of the time of issuance of the
notice, request a hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall have
authority to dismiss the violation, or reduce or waive the penalty, or sustain
the violation. If the violation is sustained, the violator shall pay the
penalty within seven days.
(1989 Code, § 10.99) (Ord. 93, passed 12-6-2022)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Definitions
   
91.002   Application
   
91.003   Scope and orders of officers
Sidewalks
   
91.015   Ice and snow on public sidewalks
Streets
   
91.030   Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk, curb
and gutter
   
91.031   Obstructions in streets
   
91.032   Load limits
Street Openings or Excavations
   
91.045   Prohibition; permit required
   
91.046   Application
   
91.047   Investigation and payment of estimated costs
   
91.048   Protection of the city and the public
   
91.049   Issuance of permit
   
91.050   Repairs
   
91.051   Cost adjustment
   
91.052   Alternate method of charging
   
91.053   Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral installation
Right-of-Ways
   
91.065   Findings, purpose and intent
   
91.066   Election to manage the public rights-of-way
   
91.067   Definitions
   
91.068   Administration
   
91.069   Utility Coordination Committee
   
91.070   Registration and right-of-way occupancy
   
91.071   Registration information
   
91.072   Reporting obligations
   
91.073   Permit requirement
   
91.074   Permit applications
   
91.075   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
91.076   Permit fees
   
91.077   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
91.078   Joint applications
   
91.079   Supplementary applications
   
91.080   Other obligations
   
91.081   Denial of permit
   
91.082   Installation requirements
   
91.083   Inspection
   
91.084   Work done without a permit
   
91.085   Supplementary notification
   
91.086   Revocation of permits
   
91.087   Mapping data
   
91.088   Location and relocation of facilities
   
91.089   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
91.090   Damage to other facilities
   
91.091   Right-of-way vacation
   
91.092   Indemnification and liability
   
91.093   Abandoned and unused facilities
   
91.094   Appeal
 
   
91.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Motorized vehicles prohibited on sidewalks, see
Chapter 70
   Traffic and parking control, see
Chapters 70 and
71
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise defined in the city code, or where the context clearly
indicates a contrary intent, the words and terms defined in M.S. Chapter 169,
as it may be amended from time to time, shall be applicable to this chapter.
(1989 Code, § 7.01)
§ 91.002 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this chapter are applicable to the drivers of all vehicles
and animals upon streets, including but not limited to those owned or operated
by the United States, this state or any county, town, city, district or other
political subdivision.
(1989 Code, § 7.02)
§ 91.003 SCOPE AND ORDERS OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter relate exclusively to the
streets and alleys in the city, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer
exclusively to the operation and parking of vehicles upon the streets and
alleys.
   (B)   Orders of an officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to willfully
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace
officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(1989 Code, § 7.03) Penalty, see §
91.999
SIDEWALKS
§ 91.015 ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Ice and snow a nuisance. All snow and ice remaining upon public
sidewalks in the Central Business District is hereby declared to constitute a
public nuisance and shall be abated by the owner or tenant of the abutting
private property within 12 hours after the snow or ice has ceased to be
deposited.
   (B)   City to remove snow and ice. The city may cause to be removed from all
public sidewalks in the Central Business District, beginning 12 hours after
snow or ice has ceased to fall, all snow or ice which may be discovered
thereon, and it shall keep a record of the cost of the removal and the private
property adjacent to which the accumulations were found and removed.
   (C)   Cost of removal to be assessed. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
shall, upon direction of the Council, and on receipt of the information
provided for in the preceding division (B), extend the cost of the removal of
snow or ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcel of ground
abutting on walks which were cleared, and any special assessments shall at the
time of certifying taxes to the County Auditor be certified for collection as
other special assessments are certified and collected.
   (D)   Civil suit for cost of removal.  The City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer shall, in the alternative, upon direction of the Council, bring suit
in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land
adjacent to which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in division (B) above,
the cost of the clearing and the cost and disbursement of a civil action
therefor.
   (E)   City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to report sidewalks cleared. The
City Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer shall present to the Council at its first
meeting after snow or ice has been cleared from the sidewalks as provided in
division (B) above the report of the city thereon, and shall request the
Council to determine by resolution the manner of collection to be used as
provided in divisions (C) or (D) of this section.
(1989 Code, § 7.05) Penalty, see §
91.999
STREETS
§ 91.030 CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF ROADWAY SURFACING, SIDEWALK, CURB
AND GUTTER.
   (A)   Unlawful act. It is a misdemeanor for any abutting or non-abutting
property owner to contract for, construct or reconstruct roadway surfacing,
sidewalk or curb and gutter except in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Permitted method of procedure.  Any abutting property owner, with or
without petition, may request the city to construct or reconstruct roadway
surfacing, sidewalk or curb and gutter in accordance with M.S. Chapter 429, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(1989 Code, § 7.06) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.031 OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS.
   (A)   Obstructions.  It is a misdemeanor for any person to place, deposit,
display or offer for sale any fence, goods or other obstructions upon, over,
across or under any street (including sidewalks and boulevards) without first
having obtained a written permit from the Council, and then only in compliance
in all respects with the terms and conditions of the permit, and taking
precautionary measures for the protection of the public. An electrical cord or
device of any kind is hereby included, but not by way of limitation, within the
definition of an obstruction.
   (B)   Fires. It is a misdemeanor for any person to build or maintain a fire
upon a street.
   (C)   Dumping in streets. It is a misdemeanor for any person to throw or
deposit in any street any nails, dirt, glass or glassware, cans, discarded
cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or tree limbs, paper or
paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other petroleum products, or
to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon. It is a
violation of this section to haul any such material, inadequately enclosed or
covered, thereby permitting the same to fall upon streets. It is also a
violation of this section to place or store any building materials or waste
resulting from building construction or demolition on any street without first
having obtained a written permit from the Council.
   (D)   Signs and other structures.  It is a misdemeanor for any person to
place or maintain a sign, advertisement or other structure in any street
without first having obtained a written permit from the Council. In a district
zoned for commercial or industrial enterprises, special permission allowing an
applicant to erect and maintain signs overhanging the street may be granted
upon terms and conditions as may be set forth in the zoning or construction
provisions of the city code.
   (E)   Placing snow or ice in a roadway or on a sidewalk.
      (1)   It is a misdemeanor for any person, not acting under a specific
contract with the city or without special permission from the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, to remove snow or ice from private property and
place the same in any roadway or on a sidewalk.
      (2)   Where permission is granted by the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, the person to whom that permission is granted shall be initially
responsible for payment of all direct or indirect costs of removing the snow or
ice from the street or sidewalk. If not paid, collection shall be by civil
action or assessment against the benefitted property as any other special
assessment.
   (F)   Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in violation
of this section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such.
   (G)   Condition. Before granting any permit under any of the provisions of
this section, the Council may impose any insurance or bonding conditions
thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public or private property
or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding the persons and property. This
insurance or bond shall also protect the city from any suit, action or cause of
action arising by reason of the obstruction.
(1989 Code, § 7.07) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.032 LOAD LIMITS.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, upon the recommendation of the
Public Works Department, may from time to time impose upon vehicular traffic on
any part or all of the streets any load limits as may be necessary or
desirable. These limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads are
limited, shall be clearly and legibly sign-posted thereon. It is a misdemeanor
for any person to operate a vehicle on any street in violation of the
limitation so posted.
(1989 Code, § 7.09) Penalty, see §
91.999
STREET OPENINGS OR EXCAVATIONS
§ 91.045 PROHIBITION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is a misdemeanor for any person, except a city employee acting within the
course and scope of his or her employment or a contractor acting within the
course and scope of a contract with the city, to make any excavation, opening
or tunnel in, over, across or upon a street or other public property without
first having obtained a written permit from the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer as herein provided.
(1989 Code, § 7.08) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.046 APPLICATION.
   Application for a permit to make a street excavation shall describe with
reasonable particularity the name and address of the applicant; the place,
purpose and size of the excavation; and any other information as may be
necessary or desirable to facilitate the investigation hereinafter provided
for, and shall be filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
(1989 Code, § 7.08, Subd. 1)
§ 91.047 INVESTIGATION AND PAYMENT OF ESTIMATED COSTS.
   Upon receipt of an application, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall
cause an investigation to be made as he or she may deem necessary to determine
estimated cost of repair, such as backfilling, compacting, resurfacing and
replacement, and the conditions as to the time of commencement of work, manner
of procedure and time limitation upon the excavation. The foregoing estimated
costs shall include permanent and temporary repairs due to weather or other
conditions, and the cost of the investigation shall be included in the
estimate.
(1989 Code, § 7.08, Subd. 2)
§ 91.048 PROTECTION OF THE CITY AND THE PUBLIC.
   (A)   Non-completion or abandonment. Work shall progress expeditiously to
completion in accordance with any time limitation placed thereon so as to avoid
unnecessary inconvenience to the public. In the event that work is not
performed in accordance therewith, or shall cease or be abandoned without due
cause, the city may, after six hours’ notice in writing to the holder of the
permit of its intention to do so, correct the work, fill the excavation and
repair the public property, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the person
holding the permit.
   (B)   Insurance. Prior to commencement of the work described in the
application, the applicant shall furnish to the city satisfactory evidence in
writing that the applicant will keep in effect public liability insurance of
not less than $100,000 for any person, $300,000 for any occurrence and property
damage insurance of not less than $25,000, issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in this state on which the city is named as a co-
insured.
    (C)   Indemnification. Before issuance of a permit, the applicant shall, in
writing, agree to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability for
injury or damage arising out of the action of the applicant in performance of
the work, or any expense whatsoever incurred by the city incident to a claim or
action brought or commenced by any person arising therefrom.
(1989 Code, § 7.08, Subd. 3)
§ 91.049 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the permit after:
   (A)   Completion of the investigation;
   (B)   Payment by the applicant in advance of all estimated costs as
aforesaid;
   (C)   Agreement by the applicant to the conditions of time and manner as
aforesaid;
   (D)   Agreement in writing by the applicant to pay all actual cost of
repairs over and above the estimate, including cost of the investigation; and
   (E)   Agreement in writing by the applicant to be bound by all of the
provisions of this subchapter.
(1989 Code, § 7.08, Subd. 4)
§ 91.050 REPAIRS.
   All temporary and permanent repairs, including backfilling, compacting and
resurfacing, shall be made or contracted for by the city in a manner prescribed
by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, and an accurate account of costs
thereof shall be kept.
(1989 Code, § 7.08, Subd. 5)
§ 91.051 COST ADJUSTMENT.
   Within 60 days following completion of the permanent repairs, the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall determine actual costs of repairs,
including cost of investigation, and prepare and furnish to the permit holder
an itemized statement thereof and claim additional payment from, or make refund
(without interest) to, the permit holder, as the case may be.
(1989 Code, § 7.08, Subd. 6)
§ 91.052 ALTERNATE METHOD OF CHARGING.
   In lieu of the above provisions relating to cost and cost adjustment for
street openings, the city may charge on the basis of surface square feet
removed, excavated cubic feet or a combination of surface square feet and
excavated cubic feet, on an established unit price uniformly charged.
(1989 Code, § 7.08, Subd. 7)
§ 91.053 REQUIREMENT OF SEWER AND WATER MAIN SERVICE LATERAL INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Requirement of sewer and water laterals. No petition for the
improvement of a street shall be considered by the Council if the petition
contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or stabilized base, or
curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have been
made therein, including the installation of service laterals to the curb, if
the area along the street will be served by those utilities installed in the
street.
   (B)   Sewer system service and water main service laterals. No sewer system
shall be hereafter constructed or extended unless service laterals to platted
lots and frontage facing thereon shall be extended simultaneously with
construction of mains.
   (C)   Waiver.  The Council may waive the requirements of this section only
if it finds the effects thereof are burdensome and upon notice and hearing as
the Council may deem necessary or proper.
(1989 Code, § 7.10) Penalty, see §
91.999
RIGHT-OF-WAYS
§ 91.065 FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new subchapter of this code
relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This subchapter imposes
reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and
equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies. Under this subchapter, persons excavating and obstructing the
rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this
subchapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from
persons using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   This subchapter shall be interpreted consistently with M.S. §§ 237.16,
237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81 and 238.086 (the “Act”), as it may be amended
from time to time, and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city
and users of the right-of-way. This subchapter shall also be interpreted
consistent with Minn. Rules 7819.0050 - 7819.9950, as they may be amended from
time to time, where possible. To the extent any provision of this subchapter
cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that
interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and
case law is intended. This subchapter shall not be interpreted to limit the
regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 91.066 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant M.S.
§ 237.163, Subdivision 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
§ 91.067 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04. Subdivision 3, as it may be amended from
time to time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee’s option:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73,
Subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; or
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules 7819.1100, as it may be amended
from time to time, means the cost to achieve a level of restoration, as
determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the
maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minn. Rules parts
7819.9900 to 7819.9950, as they may be amended from time to time.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this subchapter.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works of the city, or her
or his designee.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration as established by
permit.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that poses a danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair or maintain facilities
in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION PERMIT
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in §
91.076.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions
for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this subchapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right-of-way permit applications;
inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting,
protecting or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the
adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed
after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking
right-of-way permits. MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, the fees
and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws
1997, Chapter 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as they may be amended from time
to time; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and
costs related to appeals taken pursuant to §
91.094.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in §
91.076.
   PATCH or PATCHING. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A patch consists of the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base,
and the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two
feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch is
considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city's
five-year project plan.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate or gravel.
   PERMIT. The meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this subchapter.
   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions
of this subchapter.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified
in writing that they have been put on probation.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities
located in any right-of-way, or in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy
or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-
way.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission rules.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city has an
interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and
utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does not include the airwaves
above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit
or both, depending on the context, required by this subchapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S.
§ 237.162, Subdivision 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or a person
owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended
to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law,
franchise or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Those services provided by a public utility as
defined in M.S. § 216B.02, Subdivisions 4 and 6, as they may be amended from
time to time; services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information; services of a cable communications
systems as defined in M.S. Chapter. 238, as it may be amended from time to
time; natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by
the city; services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and water, and
sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer’s premises.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already
been issued.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting
telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this
subchapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S.
Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time, and telecommunication
activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services whether
provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be amended
from time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized
under M.S. Chapters 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time to time, or
a cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may
be amended from time to time, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for
purposes of this subchapter.
   TWO YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next two years.
§ 91.068 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
§ 91.069 UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.
   The city may create an advisory Utility Coordination Committee.
Participation on the Committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and, by
making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the
size of the Committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants that
have expressed a desire to assist the city.
§ 91.070 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will
consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any
part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to repeal or
amend the provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or
maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between
their property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard
plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and
shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements
for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this
subchapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the M.S. Chapter 216D, Gopher One Call Law,as it may be amended
from time to time.
§ 91.071 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at the time
of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, and placement and use of facilities
and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities
and collapse of property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this subchapter.
      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is
required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to
time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
      (6)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate
from said commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge
of any change.
§ 91.072 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December
1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground
facilities with the city. The plan shall be submitted using a format designated
by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city to be
necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of
excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of
all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
“next-year project”); and
         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated
beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years
following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five-year project”).
      (3)   The term “project” in this section shall include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
      (4)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for
inspection in the city’s office a composite list of all projects of which the
city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for
keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project
in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other
registrants of all such changes in the list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant
listed by the other registrant.
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
§ 91.073 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-
of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000, Subpart 3,
as it may be amended from time to time, and notwithstanding division (B) of
this section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for
unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City
Council resolution.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
§ 91.074 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain and will be considered complete only upon compliance
with, the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Registration with the city pursuant to this subchapter;
   (B)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.
   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city;
      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
   (D)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing.
   (E)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
§ 91.075 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this subchapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use.
§ 91.076 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city excavation permit fee is $40.
   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management
costs.
   (C)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
   (D)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in §
91.086 are not refundable.
   (E)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
§ 91.077 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
91.080.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city
may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following the
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee’s improper backfilling, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with correcting the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule
7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rule 7819.1100, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. The work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under §
91.080.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.
§ 91.078 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on their applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.
§ 91.079 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided in this subchapter, continue working after
the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date,
it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive
the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end
date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted
before the permit end date.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.080 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable
rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to M.S. § 216D.01
through 216D.09, as it may be amended from time to time, (Gopher One Call
Excavation Notice System) and Minn. Rules Chapter 7560, as it may be amended
from time to time. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all
applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for
all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who
does the work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited
to Horizontal Directional Drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Chapter 216D and Minn. Rules Chapter 7560, as they may be amended from
time to time, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing
underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the Director.
§ 91.081 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this subchapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
§ 91.082 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
7819.1100 and 7819.5000, as they may be amended from time to time and other
applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn.
Rules Chapter 7560, as they may be amended from time to time, and these
ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those
requirements and conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits
and/or agreements referenced in §
91.087(B).
§ 91.083 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minn. Rule 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the
city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of Director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that
the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within
the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to §
91.086.
§ 91.084 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of any event
regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant
may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency
situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this subchapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's
facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each
registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event,
the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the
city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to
the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this subchapter.
§ 91.085 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
§ 91.086 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee's control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
91.084.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. The permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or the permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable
plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, the permittee’s
failure to so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one
full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and
permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
§ 91.087 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and the permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules
7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as they may be amended from time to time. Within 90
days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall
provide the Director accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built”
location of all equipment installed, owed and maintained by the permittee. The
maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all
facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city’s
electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the
Director. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this subsection
shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder’s registration.
   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules 7560.0150,
Subpart 2, shall require the permittee’s use of appropriate means of
establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the
service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the director reasonably
requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the director
evidence satisfactory to the director of the installed service lateral
locations. Compliance with this division and with applicable Gopher State One
Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals install after December
31, 2005, shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for payments to
contractors working on a public improvement project including those under M.S.
Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time, and city approval of
performance under development agreements, or other subdivision or site plan
approval under M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time. The
Director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such
information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on
the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit
issued for the work or for future permits to the offending permittee or its
subcontractors.
§ 91.088 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement, location and relocation. Placement, location and relocation
of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with
Minn. Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, as they may be amended from
time to time, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise
available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors.
      (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position
at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at
the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the
registrant.
   (C)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this subchapter, any
facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be
deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at
law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or
talcing possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a
useable condition.
   (D)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
§ 91.089 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through
216D.09, as they may be amended from time to time (“One Call Excavation Notice
System”) before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant
who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the
horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose
facilities are less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall
notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact
location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
§ 91.090 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its
facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the
city’s response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.
§ 91.091 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minn. Rules 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 91.092 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this
subchapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city
in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules 7819.1250, as it may be
amended from time to time.
§ 91.093 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this subchapter have been lawfully assumed
by another registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the city.
§ 91.094 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied a
permit; has had a permit revoked; believes that the fees imposed are not in
conformity with M.S. § 237.163, Subdivision 6, as it may be amended from time
to time; or disputes a determination of the director regarding §
91.087(B) may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision
reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act
on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided
the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include
the appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the city council affirming
the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
   (A)   Where the specific section, division, paragraph or provision
specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be punished as for
a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under
circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within
the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he or
she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; and
   (B)   As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor.
(1989 Code, § 7.99)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
Animal Licensing and Regulation
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Running at large prohibited
   
92.03   Number per dwelling
   
92.04   License required
   
92.05   License issuance, term, and renewal
   
92.06   Adoption of fees
   
92.07   Tag required
   
92.08   Animal shelter
   
92.09   Notice of impounding
   
92.10   Release from animal shelter
   
92.11   Seizure by a citizen
   
92.12   Immobilization of animals
   
92.13   Other unlawful acts
   
92.14   Summary destruction
   
92.15   Rabies control, generally
   
92.16   Reports of bite cases
   
92.17   Responsibility of veterinarians
   
92.18   Police dogs, service dogs exempt
   
92.19   Animals in heat
   
92.20   Prohibition of deer feeding
   
92.21   Abatement of pigeon nuisance
Animals and Fowl; Keeping, Transporting, Treatment, Housing
   
92.30   Definitions
   
92.31   Keeping
   
92.32   Horses
   
92.33   Animals in transit
   
92.34   Treatment
   
92.35   Housing
   
92.36   Trespasses
   
92.37   Effective date
Dangerous Dogs
   
92.50   Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs
 
   
92.99   Penalty
ANIMAL LICENSING AND REGULATION
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Dog or cat, male and female.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by the City Council for the purpose
of impounding and caring for dogs, cats, other domesticated animals, or non-
domesticated animals, held under the authority of this subchapter or state
statutes.
   KENNEL. Any premises where more than three of any type of domestic animals
over six months of age are present as owners' pets, or accepted for boarding,
breeding, training, or sale, except when located in a pet shop or veterinary
clinic.
   OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer of the city, animal control officer,
and any persons designated by the city to assist in the enforcement of this
subchapter.
   OWN. To have a property interest in, or to harbor, feed, board, keep, or
possess.
   OWNER. A person who owns an animal hereby regulated.
   RESTRAINT. A dog or cat shall be deemed under restraint if it is on the
residential premises of its owner, or if accompanied by a responsible person
and under that person's effective control. UNDER THAT PERSON'S EFFECTIVE
CONTROL shall mean effectively restrained by:
      (1)   A chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length (hereinafter
referred to as leash restraint); or
      (2)   A chain or leash capable of extending leash lengths greater than
six feet if the leash is retracted so it does not exceed six feet in length
when the dog or cat is being approached or approaching within ten feet of other
persons and/or other animals (hereinafter referred to as leash restraint); or
      (3)   Accompanied by and under the control and direction of the owner or
other responsible person by voice control so as to be effectively restrained by
command as by a leash (hereinafter referred to as verbal restraint).
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 92.02 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for an animal to run at large. The owner of an animal
found to be running at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on
a leash with current license and accompanied by a responsible person, or
accompanied by and under the control and direction of a responsible person so
as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash, shall be permitted in
streets or on public land unless the city has posted an area with signs reading
"Dogs or Cats Prohibited."
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 NUMBER PER DWELLING.
   No person shall exceed the number of three animals per dwelling unit. This
section shall not apply to a licensed kennel.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal six months of age or more, to
fail to obtain a license therefor from the city.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 LICENSE ISSUANCE, TERM, AND RENEWAL.
   All animal licenses shall be issued only upon presentation of a certificate
issued by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in this
state, showing rabies immunization of the animal for at least one year. All
animal licenses issued shall be valid for the period equal to the effective
period of the animal's current rabies vaccination as indicated by the
veterinarian's certificate.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019; Ord. 102, passed 4-2-2024) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 ADOPTION OF FEES.
   All fees for the licensing, impounding, and maintenance of animals,
including penalties for late application, may be fixed and determined by the
Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. The fees may from time
to time be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution
setting forth currently effective fees shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and open to inspection during regular
business hours.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 92.07 TAG REQUIRED.
   All licensed animals shall wear a collar and have a tag firmly affixed
thereto evidencing a current license. A duplicate for a lost tag may be issued
by the city. Tags shall not be transferable, and no refund shall be made on any
license fee because of leaving the city or death of the animal before the
expiration of the license.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 ANIMAL SHELTER.
   (A)   Any animal found in the city without a license tag, running at large,
or otherwise in violation of this subchapter, shall be placed in the animal
shelter, and an accurate record of the time of the placement shall be kept on
each animal. Every animal so placed in the animal shelter shall be held for
redemption by the owner for at least five regular business days. A REGULAR
BUSINESS DAY is one during which the shelter is open for business to the public
for at least four hours between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
   (B)   Impoundment records shall be preserved for at least six months and
shall show:
      (1)   The description of the animal by species, breed, sex, approximate
age, and other distinguishing traits;
      (2)   The location at which the animal was seized;
      (3)   The date of seizure;
      (4)   The name and address of the person from whom any animal three
months of age or over was received; and
      (5)   The name and address of the person to whom any animal three months
of age or over was transferred.
   (C)   If unclaimed, the animal shall be humanely destroyed and the carcass
disposed of, unless it is requested by a licensed educational or scientific
institution under authority of M.S. § 84.92, Subdivision 8, as it may be
amended from time to time; provided, however, that if a tag affixed to the
animal or a statement by the animal's owner after seizure specifies that the
animal should not be used for research, the animal shall not be made available
to any such institution but may be destroyed after the expiration of the five-
day period.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 92.09 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING.
   Upon the impounding of any animal, the owner shall be notified by the most
expedient means, or, if the owner is unknown, written notice shall be posted
for five days at the City Hall describing the animal and the place and time of
taking.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 92.10 RELEASE FROM ANIMAL SHELTER.
   Animals shall be released to their owners as follows:
   (A)   If the animal is owned by a resident of the city, after purchase of a
license if unlicensed, and payment of the impounding fee, maintenance, and
immunization fee; or
   (B)   If the animal is owned by a person not a resident of the city, after
immunization of the animal for rabies and payment of the impounding fee and
maintenance.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 92.11 SEIZURE BY A CITIZEN.
   It is lawful for any person to seize and impound an animal found running at
large, and shall, within six hours thereafter, notify the Animal Control
Officer of the seizure. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to
place the animal in the animal shelter. If the name of the owner of the animal
so seized is known to the person who first takes the animal into custody, he or
she shall inform the Animal Control Officer of the name of the owner and the
address, if known.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 IMMOBILIZATION OF ANIMALS.
   For the purpose of enforcement of this subchapter, any peace officer or
person whose duty is animal control, may use a so-called tranquilizer gun or
other instrument for the purpose of immobilizing and catching an animal.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 92.13 OTHER UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to:
   (A)   Fail to have the license tag issued by the city firmly attached to a
collar worn at all times by the licensed animal;
   (B)   Own a dangerous animal;
   (C)   Interfere with any peace officer or other city employee in the
performance of his or her duty to enforce this subchapter;
   (D)   Fail to keep his or her dog from barking, howling, or whining;
   (E)   Fail to keep his or her cat from emitting loud or unusual noise; or
   (F)   Suffer or permit an animal to defecate upon public property or the
private property of another, without immediately removing the excrement and
disposing of it in a sanitary manner.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.14 SUMMARY DESTRUCTION.
   If an animal is diseased, vicious, dangerous, rabid, or exposed to rabies,
and the animal cannot be impounded after a reasonable effort or cannot be
impounded without serious risk to the person attempting to impound, the animal
may be destroyed in a humane manner.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 92.15 RABIES CONTROL, GENERALLY.
   (A)   Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to a
peace officer or the Animal Control Officer and shall thereupon be securely
quarantined at the direction of the peace officer or Animal Control Officer for
a period of 14 days, and shall not be released from the quarantine except by
written permission of the city. In the discretion of the peace officer, the
quarantine may be on the premises of the owner or at the veterinary hospital of
his or her choice. If the animal is quarantined on the premises of the owner,
the city shall have access to the animal at any reasonable time for study and
observation of rabies symptoms, in accordance with §
10.20. In the case of a stray animal or in the case of an animal whose
ownership is not known, the quarantine shall be at the animal shelter, or at
the discretion of the peace officer the animal may be confined in a veterinary
hospital designated by him or her.
   (B)   The owner(s), upon demand made by the Animal Control Officer or by any
other city employee empowered by the Council to enforce this subchapter, shall
forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected
as having been exposed to rabies, for the purpose of supervised quarantine. The
expenses of the quarantine shall be borne by the owner, and the animal may be
reclaimed by the owner, if adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees set
forth in this subchapter, and upon compliance with licensing provisions set
forth in this subchapter.
   (C)   When an animal under quarantine and diagnosed as being rabid or
suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid dies or is killed, the city
shall immediately send the head of the animal and rabies data report to the
State Health Department for pathological examination and shall notify all
persons concerned of the results of the examination.
   (D)   The city shall issue a proclamation and take action when rabies is
suspected or exists as is required by state statutes.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.16 REPORTS OF BITE CASES.
   It is the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to a peace
officer the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by
animals, together with any other information as will be helpful in rabies
control.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 RESPONSIBILITY OF VETERINARIANS.
   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to a peace officer
his or her diagnosis of an animal observed by him or her as a rabies suspect.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 POLICE DOGS, SERVICE DOGS EXEMPT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the ownership or use of
service animals used by disabled persons, or dogs used in police activities of
the city, such as canine corps or tracking dogs used by or with the permission
of the Council.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 92.19 ANIMALS IN HEAT.
   Except for controlled breeding purposes, every female animal in heat shall
be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital
or boarding kennel, in a manner that the female animal cannot come in contact
with other animals.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.20 PROHIBITION OF DEER FEEDING.
   (A)   Findings.
      (1)   Recreational feeding of deer often causes deer concentrations which
develop into depredation and other public safety problems.
      (2)   Depredation of garden crops and landscaping plants is increasing as
deer habitat decreases and deer populations increase within particular areas
and neighborhoods in the city.
      (3)   High deer populations can result in increased car-deer crashes
within the community, causing public safety concerns and negative economic
impacts such as increased car insurance premium costs.
      (4)   High deer densities also contribute to the possible spread of
chronic diseases among deer populations and chronic wasting disease.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. The intent of the City Council is not to
unreasonably infringe upon the recreational enjoyment of city residents who
observe wildlife and enhance wildlife habitat on their property. The purpose of
this feeding ban is to eliminate these deer attractions which, when combined
with other management strategies, should reduce over time the depredation
impacts to adjacent residents, as well as assure the safety of the traveling
public on city streets and thoroughfares.
   (C)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person or group to place or
permit to be placed on the ground, or within five feet of the ground surface,
either on property owned or controlled by such person or on property owned by
others, any grain, fodder, fruit, vegetables, nuts, hay, or other edible
materials, which may reasonably be expected to intentionally result in deer
feeding, unless such items are screened or protected in a manner that prevents
deer from feeding on them. Also prohibited are salt licks and powder or liquid
deer attractants, unless legally used for deer management control purposes.
Living fruit trees and other live vegetation shall not be considered as deer
feeding. The provisions of this division (C) shall apply to the city limits.
   (D)   Exceptions. This prohibition shall not apply to:
      (1)   Veterinarians, police officers, or county, state, or federal game
officials, who are in the course of their duties, have deer in custody or under
their management;
      (2)   Persons authorized by the city to implement the deer management
program approved by the City Council;
      (3)   Any food placed upon the property for purposes of trapping or
otherwise taking deer, when such trapping or taking is pursuant to a permit
issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources;
      (4)   Persons feeding birds using self-enclosed feeding devices or
containers; or
      (5)   The use of straw, hay, or straw-related materials for erosion
control, mulching, gardening, or other landscape purposes.
   (E)   Investigation and enforcement. For the purpose of discharging the
duties imposed by this section and to enforce its provisions, any East Range
Police Department Officer, other law enforcement service, or agent of the city,
with prior approval of the City Council, is empowered to enter upon any
premises to investigate or inspect the premises for prohibited deer feeding
activities to eliminate the public nuisance. This section may be enforced by
injunction, action for abatement, or other appropriate civil remedy to
eliminate a public nuisance.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.21 ABATEMENT OF PIGEON NUISANCE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABATE. To reduce, stop, or prevent a pigeon nuisance.
      FEEDING. Providing food to pigeons. Food may include, but is not limited
to, grain, seed, greens, breadcrumbs, and other miscellaneous food scraps,
including garbage not properly contained or disposed of. FEEDING shall not
include the providing of food to pigeons as part of an appropriate population
control or flock reduction program.
      PIGEON. Columba livia, also known as the Rock Pigeon or Rock Dove. For
the purposes of this section, PIGEON includes any feral PIGEON and does not
include domestic PIGEONS used for recreation, racing, or show.
      PIGEON HARBORAGE. Any condition which provides shelter, nesting sites, or
protection for pigeons, thus favoring their multiplication and continued
inhabitancy in, under, or outside a structure or premise. Housing, care, or
shelter provided for injured or ill pigeons that are being rehabilitated is not
considered PIGEON HARBORAGE.
      PIGEON NUISANCE. The congregation of pigeons at a location when such
congregation of pigeons results in the accumulation of pigeon droppings or
other pigeon-related waste. In addition, PIGEON NUISANCE shall include the
accumulation of pigeon excrement, nesting materials, pigeon carcasses, and/or
other pigeon-related detritus that may be damaging to property, or pose a
threat to public health and welfare.
      PIGEON-PROOFING. Actions taken to abate a pigeon nuisance. The actions
may include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Construction to prevent the ingress of pigeons into or under
buildings or structures from the exterior;
         (b)   Steps taken to prevent the congregation of pigeons in a given
location, including the addition of anti-roosting spikes, mesh, or other
materials to prevent roosting; or
         (c)   The removal or covering of sources of food for pigeons.
      PROPERTY. Real property and/or improvements including land, buildings,
and structures regardless of use for residential, commercial, or other
purposes.
      RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The person or persons who hold legal or equitable
interest in property which empowers them to take appropriate actions to abate a
pigeon nuisance found to exist on that property. This may include, but not be
limited to, a person with ownership, condominium rights, time-share rights,
leasehold rights, or an easement, license, contractual right, and any right or
obligation to manage or act as agent or trustee for any person holding any of
the foregoing interests. The owner of real property shall be presumed to be a
RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   (B)   Investigation and abatement of a pigeon nuisance.
      (1)   There shall be an investigation of any complaint made to the City
Clerk's Office to determine if a pigeon nuisance exists. In addition, the City
Clerk's Office may initiate an investigation to determine if a pigeon nuisance
exists when there has been no complaint made.
      (2)   The City Clerk's Office shall determine if a pigeon nuisance
exists.
      (3)   The City Clerk's Office shall attempt to contact the property owner
and any person on the property who appears to be a responsible party to notify
them that a pigeon nuisance has been determined to exist.
      (4)   An abatement agreement may provide for the use of any pigeon-
proofing method agreed upon by the City Clerk's Office and the responsible
party. If the abatement and/or pigeon-proofing involves the removal of
accumulations of pigeon excrement, nesting materials, pigeon carcasses, or
other pigeon-related detritus, the method selected for such removal shall
protect human health and ensure that ground water, surface water, and real
property are not contaminated by the waste.
      (5)   If the City Clerk's Office determines that the responsible party is
in violation of this section and is unwilling to comply with this section, or
if the responsible party fails to act on or complete the terms and conditions
agreed to in an abatement agreement by the time or times set forth in the
agreement, the City Clerk's Office may proceed to seek the penalties provided
in §
92.99.
   (C)   Inspection of buildings, premises, and vacant lots. The City Clerk's
Office is authorized, by obtaining consent of the owner or occupant, and at
reasonable times, to make such inspections of property as is necessary to
perform a thorough investigation. For the purpose of making such inspections,
the City Clerk's Office is authorized to enter onto premises to examine and/or
survey property only after reasonable notice to and consent from the owner and
any person occupying the property. Such entry shall be made in a manner as to
cause the least reasonably possible inconvenience to the person in control of
the property. In the event that entry is denied, the City Clerk's Office shall
obtain an order for this purpose from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   Pigeon feeding violations and penalties.
      (1)   It is a violation of this section for any person to intentionally
feed pigeons on any public or private property within the city.
      (2)   It is a violation of this section for any person to permit or allow
the placement or discard of food, food by-products, vegetables , garbage or
animal food of any kind in a manner that such person knows will reasonably
result in the feeding, lingering, roosting, and/or congregating of pigeons.
      (3)   This prohibition does not extend to domesticated birds used for
recreation, racing, or show, or to injured or ill pigeons that are being
rehabilitated and are kept at all times in cages, or that are prevented from
creating pigeon nuisance conditions.
      (4)   This prohibition does not extend to birdseed or bird food set out
in bird feeders or otherwise provided to birds other than pigeons, provided
that the birdseed or bird food does not attract significant numbers of pigeons
or create conditions that constitute a pigeon nuisance.
      (5)   Each act in violation of this section shall constitute a public
nuisance and a separate violation. Any person who violates this section shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in §
92.99.
   (E)   Pigeon nuisance violations and penalties.
      (1)   No person shall create or foster any condition or allow any
condition to exist or continue which in any way harbors a number of pigeons or
results in an infestation of pigeons that would constitute a pigeon nuisance.
      (2)   No person shall allow the accumulation of pigeon excrement, nesting
materials, pigeon carcasses, and/or other pigeon-related detritus that would
constitute a pigeon nuisance on property where the person is the owner or
occupant.
      (3)   Each act in violation of this section shall constitute a public
nuisance and a separate violation. Any person who violates this section shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in §
92.99.
   (F)   Additional remedies. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to
preclude the city from seeking any other remedy available in law or equity.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
ANIMALS AND FOWL; KEEPING, TRANSPORTING, TREATMENT, HOUSING
§ 92.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMALS. Includes farm animals and all other animals, reptiles, and
feathered birds or fowl, except dogs, cats, gerbils, hamsters, and caged
household birds.
   FARM ANIMALS. Cattle, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ducks, geese, turkeys,
chickens, guinea hens, honey bees, and mink.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 92.31 KEEPING.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal, not in transit,
except:
   (A)   Farm animals kept as part of an agricultural operation established
prior to six years from the effective date of this subchapter;
   (B)   Animals kept in a laboratory for scientific or experimental purposes;
or
   (C)   Animals kept in an animal hospital or clinic for treatment by a
licensed veterinarian.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.32 HORSES.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep any horse, pony, or foal on any land
of less than 25 acres. It is unlawful for any person to keep more than four
horses, ponies, or foals.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.33 ANIMALS IN TRANSIT.
   It is unlawful for any person to transport animals unless they are:
   (A)   Confined within a vehicle, cage, or other means of conveyance;
   (B)   Farm animals being transported in the agricultural portion of the
city; or
   (C)   Restrained by means of bridles, halters, ropes, or other means of
individual restraint.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.34 TREATMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to treat any animal as defined in this
subchapter, or any other animal, in a cruel or inhumane manner.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.35 HOUSING.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal as defined in this
subchapter, or any other animal, in any structure infested by rodents, vermin,
flies or insects, or inadequate for protection against the elements.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.36 TRESPASSES.
   It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive, or ride any animal over and
upon any grass, turf, boulevard, city park, cemetery, garden, or lot without
specific permission therefor from the owner.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.37 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect after adoption upon the publication in the
city's official newspaper.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019)
DANGEROUS DOGS
§ 92.50 DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Adoption by reference. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
the regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S. §§ 347.50 to 347.565 (commonly
referred to as the "Dangerous Dog Regulations"), are adopted by reference.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has when unprovoked, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;
         (b)   Has killed a domestic animal when unprovoked while off the
owner's property;
         (c)   Has attacked one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
         (d)   Has been found to be potentially dangerous and after the owner
has notice of the same, the dog aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
      DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
      GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which creates a high probability of
death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a
permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member
or organ, or other serious bodily harm.
      MAINTENANCE COSTS. Any costs incurred as a result of seizing an animal
for impoundment, including, but not limited to, the capturing, impounding,
keeping, treating, examining, securing, confining, feeding, destroying,
boarding or maintaining seized animals, whether these services are provided by
the city or the pound.
      OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, corporation, organization,
department, or association owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having an
interest in, or having care, custody, or control of a dog.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has when unprovoked, inflicted a bite on a human or domestic
animal on public or private property;
         (b)   Has when unprovoked, chased or approached a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private
property, other than the owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack;
or
         (c)   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
      PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors, or in a securely enclosed
and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the dog from escaping, and to
provide protection for the dog from the elements. A PROPER ENCLOSURE does not
include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that
would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in
which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only barriers
which prevent the dog from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow the egress of
the dog in any manner without human assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the
following minimum specifications:
         (a)   A minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet.
         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be
constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches, support post shall be one and one-fourth inch or larger steel pipe
buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided,
the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.
         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The
cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls
and openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches.
         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of
the same material as the sidewalls, and openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches. The gate shall be self-closing and self-locking. The gate shall be
locked at all times when the dog is in the pen or kennel.
      SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily injury that involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or that causes a temporary but substantial loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or that causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
      UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the dog is not purposely excited,
stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
   (C)   Declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
      (1)   A police officer, community service officer, animal control
officer, or other authorized city employee may declare a dog to be dangerous or
potentially dangerous when the officer has probable cause to believe that a dog
is dangerous or potentially dangerous. The following factors will be considered
in determining a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog:
         (a)   Whether any injury or damage to a person by the dog was caused
while the dog was protecting or defending a person or the dog's offspring
within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault.
         (b)   The size and strength of the dog, including jaw strength, and
the animal's propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals.
         (c)   Whether the dog has wounds, scarring, is observed in a fight, or
has other indications that the dog has been or will be used, trained, or
encouraged to fight with another animal, or whose owner is in possession of any
training apparatus, paraphernalia, or drugs used to prepare such dogs to fight
with other animals.
      (2)   Beginning six months after a dog is declared potentially dangerous,
an owner may request annually that the city review the designation. The owner
must provide evidence that the dog's behavior has changed due to the dog's age,
neutering, environment, completion of obedience training, or other factors. If
enough evidence is provided, the city may rescind the designation.
      (3)   Exceptions.
         (a)   The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs used by law
enforcement.
         (b)   Dogs may not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if
the threat, injury, or danger was sustained by a person who was:
            1.   Committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the dog;
            2.   Provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or who
can be shown to have a history of repeatedly provoking, tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the dog; or
            3.   Committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (D)   License required. The owner must annually license potentially
dangerous dogs with the city, and must license a newly declared potentially
dangerous dog within 14 days after notice that a dog has been declared
potentially dangerous. Regardless of any appeal that may be requested, the
owner must comply with the requirements of M.S. § 347.52(a) and (c) regarding
proper enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer or death of the
dog, until and unless a hearing officer or court of law reverses the
declaration.
      (1)   Process for dangerous dogs. No person shall own, harbor, possess,
or keep any animal that has been classified as a dangerous dog.
      (2)   Process for potentially dangerous dogs. The city will issue a
license to the owner of a potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents
sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   The owner has paid the annual license fee;
         (c)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
potentially dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the
microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the
owner's expense.
      (3)   Inspection. A pre-license inspection of the premises to ensure
compliance with the city code is required. If the city issues a license to the
owner of a potentially dangerous dog, the city shall be allowed at any
reasonable time to inspect the dog, the proper enclosure, and all places where
the animal is kept.
      (4)   Warning symbol. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog licensed
under this section must post a sign with the uniform potentially dangerous dog
warning symbol on the property in order to inform children that there is a
potentially dangerous dog on the property. The sign will be provided by the
city upon issuance of the license.
      (5)   Tags. A potentially dangerous dog licensed under this section must
wear a standardized, easily identifiable tag at all times that contains the
uniform dangerous dog symbol, identifying the dog as potentially dangerous. The
tag shall be provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
      (6)   License fee. The city will charge the owner an annual license fee
for a potentially dangerous dog.
   (E)   Properly restrained in proper enclosure or outside of proper
enclosure. While on the owner's property, an owner of a potentially dangerous
dog must keep it in a proper enclosure. Inside a residential home, there must
be a secure area maintained where the dog will stay when persons other than
family members are present. If the dog is outside the proper enclosure, the dog
must be muzzled or restrained by a substantial chain or leash no longer than
four feet and under the physical restraint of an adult.
   (F)   Notification requirements to city.
      (1)   Relocation or death. The owner of a dog that has been declared
potentially dangerous must notify the City Clerk in writing if the dog is to be
relocated from its current address or if the dog has died. The notification
must be given in writing within 30 days of the relocation or death. The
notification must include the current owner's name and address, and the new
owner's name and the relocation address. If the relocation address is outside
of the city, the city may notify the local law enforcement agency of the
transfer of the dog into its jurisdiction.
      (2)   Renter's obligations. A person who owns or possess a potentially
dangerous dog and who will rent property from another where the dog will reside
must disclose to the property owner prior to entering the lease agreement and
at the time of any lease renewal periods that the person owns or possesses a
potentially dangerous dog that will reside at the property. A dog owner, who is
currently renting property, must notify the property owner within 14 days of
city notification if the owned dog is newly declared as potentially dangerous
and the owner keeps the dog on the property.
      (3)   Transfer of ownership into the city. No dog that has been
previously determined to be potentially dangerous by another jurisdiction shall
be kept, owned, or harbored in the city unless the dog's owner complies with
the requirements of this section prior to bringing the dog into the city. Dogs
in violation of this division are subject to impoundment and destruction.
   (G)   Seizure. Animal control, a police officer, or authorized city employee
may immediately seize any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if:
      (1)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous, the dog is not validly licensed and no
appeal has been filed;
      (2)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the owner does not secure the proper liability insurance or surety coverage as
required or such required insurance is cancelled;
      (3)   The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;
      (4)   The dog is outside the proper enclosure and not under proper
restraint, as required by division (E);
      (5)   After 30 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the dog is not sterilized, as required by division (D)(1);
      (6)   The dog's microchip has been removed.
   (H)   Reclamation. A dog seized under division (G) may be reclaimed by the
owner of the dog upon payment of maintenance costs and presenting proof to
animal control that the requirements of this section have been met. A dog not
reclaimed under this division within seven days may be disposed of and the
owner will be liable to the city for maintenance costs. A person claiming an
interest in a seized dog may prevent disposition of the dog by posting a
security in an amount sufficient to provide for the dog's maintenance costs.
The security must be posted with the city within seven days of the seizure
inclusive of the date seized.
   (I)   Subsequent offenses: seizure. If a person has been convicted of
violating a provision of this section, and the person is charged with a
subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the dog may be seized. If the
owner is convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the court may
order that the dog be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner pay
the maintenance costs. If the owner is not convicted and the dog is not
reclaimed by the owner within seven days after the owner has been notified that
the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may be disposed of or destroyed.
   (J)   Notice, hearings.
      (1)   Notice. After a dog has been declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous or has been seized for destruction, the city shall give notice by
delivering or mailing it to the owner of the dog, or by posting a copy of it at
the place where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a person residing on
the property, and telephoning, if possible. The notice shall include:
         (a)   A description of the seized dog; the authority for and purpose
of the declaration and seizure; the time, place, and circumstances under which
the dog was declared; and the telephone number and contact person where the dog
is kept;
         (b)   A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing
concerning the declaration and that failure to do so within 14 days of the date
of the notice will terminate the owner's right to a hearing;
         (c)   A statement that if an appeal request is made within 14 days of
the notice, the owner must immediately comply with the requirements of M.S. §
347.52(a) and (c), as it may be amended from time to time, regarding proper
enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer or death of the dog,
until such time as the hearing officer issues an opinion;
         (d)   A statement that if the hearing officer affirms the dangerous
dog declaration, the owner will have 14 days from receipt of that decision to
comply with all other requirements of M.S. §§ 347.51, 347.515, and 347.52, as
they may be amended from time to time;
         (e)   A form to request a hearing; and
         (f)   A statement that if the dog has been seized, all maintenance
costs of the care, keeping, and disposition of the dog pending the outcome of
the hearing are the responsibility of the owner, unless a court or hearing
officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not reasonably justified by
law.
      (2)   Right to hearing.
         (a)   After a dog has been declared dangerous, potentially dangerous,
or has been seized for destruction, the owner may appeal in writing to the city
within 14 days after notice of the declaration or seizure. Failure to do so
within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner's right to a
hearing. The owner must pay a $100 fee for an appeal hearing.
         (b)   The appeal hearing will be held within 14 days of the request.
The hearing officer must be an impartial employee of the city or an impartial
person retained by the city to conduct the hearing.
         (c)   If the declaration or destruction is upheld by the hearing
officer, actual expenses of the hearing up to a maximum of $1,000, as well as
all maintenance costs, will be the responsibility of the dog's owner. The
hearing officer shall issue a decision on the matter within ten days after the
hearing. The decision shall be delivered to the dog's owner by hand delivery or
registered mail as soon as practical and a copy shall be provided to the city.
The decision of the hearing officer is final.
   (K)   Destruction of certain dogs. The Police Chief and/or hearing officer
are authorized to order the destruction or other disposition of any dog, after
proper notice is given pursuant to division (J), and upon a finding that:
      (1)   The dog has habitually destroyed property or habitually trespassed
in a damaging manner on property of persons other than the owner;
      (2)   The dog has been declared dangerous, the owner's right to appeal
hereunder has been exhausted or expired, and the owner has failed to comply
with the provisions of this section;
      (3)   It is determined that the dog is infected with rabies;
      (4)   The dog inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human on
public or private property without provocation;
      (5)   The dog inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private
property without provocation;
      (6)   The dog bit multiple human victims on public or private property in
the same attack without provocation;
      (7)   The dog bit a human on public or private property without
provocation in an attack where more than one dog participated in the attack; or
      (8)   The dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety, or welfare.
In determining whether the dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety,
or welfare, the following factors may be considered:
         (a)   The dog weighs more than 20 pounds;
         (b)   The strength of the dog, including jaw strength;
         (c)   The dog's tolerance for pain;
         (d)   The dog's tendency to refuse to terminate an attack;
         (e)   The dog's propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals;
         (f)   The dog's potential for unpredictable behavior;
         (g)   The dog's aggressiveness; and
         (h)   The likelihood that a bite by the dog will result in serious
injury.
   (L)   Concealing of dogs. No person may harbor, hide, or conceal a dog that
the city has the authority to seize or that has been ordered into custody for
destruction or other proper disposition.
   (M)   Dog ownership prohibited.
      (1)   Except as provided below, a person shall not own a dog if the
person has been:
         (a)   Convicted of a third or subsequent violation of divisions (D),
(E), or (F), or similar ordinance in another jurisdiction, or M.S. §§ 347.51,
347.515 or 347.52, as they may be amended from time to time;
         (b)   Convicted of second degree manslaughter due to negligent or
intentional use of a dog under M.S. § 609.205(4), as it may be amended from
time to time; or
         (c)   Convicted of gross misdemeanor harm caused by a dog under M.S. §
609.226, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any person who owns a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and is
found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section, or had owned
a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog but never achieved compliance with
this section, may be prohibited from ownership or custody of another dog for a
period of five years after the original declaration. Any dog found to be in
violation may be impounded until due process is completed pursuant to division
(J).
      (3)   If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog in
divisions (M)(1) or (2), unless specifically approved with or without
restrictions by the city, no person in the household is permitted to own a dog.
   (N)   Dog ownership prohibition review. Beginning three years after a
conviction under division (M)(1) that prohibits a person from owning a dog, and
annually thereafter, the person may request in writing to the Police Chief that
the city review the prohibition. The city may consider such facts as the
seriousness of the violation or violations that led to the prohibition, any
criminal convictions, or other facts that the city deems appropriate. The city
may rescind the prohibition entirely or rescind it with limitations. The city
also may establish conditions a person must meet before the prohibition is
rescinded, including, but not limited to, successfully completing dog training
or dog handling courses. If the city rescinds a person's prohibition and the
person subsequently fails to comply with any limitations imposed by the city or
the person is convicted of any animal violation involving unprovoked bites or
dog attacks, the city may permanently prohibit the person from owning a dog in
this state.
   (O)   Penalties.
      (1)   Unless stated otherwise, any person who violates a provision of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person who is convicted of a second or subsequent violation of
any provision of divisions (D), (E), or (F) is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
      (3)   Any person who violates division (M), whether an owner or household
member, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019; Am. Ord. 108, passed 12-3-2024) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act
when the failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by
reference by this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
92.20 shall be subject to an administrative penalty, and, in addition, such
violation shall constitute a petty misdemeanor. A second offense occurring
within 12 months after a conviction of a violation of §
92.20 shall constitute a misdemeanor as referenced in division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Any person who involuntarily has animals removed from their residence
by warrant is subject to have those or any other animals removed from that
premise for up to one year following the initial removal.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-2-2019; Ord. 90, passed 5-3-2022)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
Section
   
93.01   State Uniform Fire Code
   
93.02   Covering fire hydrants
   
93.03   Recreational fires
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 STATE UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The 2007 edition of the State Uniform Fire Code is hereby
adopted as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of the Code shall be
marked “City of Aurora–Official Copy” and kept on file in the office of the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and open to inspection and use by the
public.
   (B)   Storage of flammable and explosives material. No bulk plants for
storage of flammable or combustible liquids, or bulk storage of liquified
petroleum gas, not established on the effective date of this section, shall be
permitted. No storage of explosives or blasting agents shall be permitted.
(1989 Code, § 10.08) (Ord. 32, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-21-1999) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 COVERING FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful to cover a fire hydrant with snow, soil or materials of any
kind.
(1989 Code, § 10.09) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   (A)   Conditions.  It is unlawful to have a recreational fire in any
residential district unless the following conditions can be met.
      (1)   No fire ban has been initiated by appropriate federal, state or
local authorities.
      (2)   Only above-ground fireplace type structures made of metal or other
noncombustible material which are completely enclosed may be used. Fire rings
are also permissible.
      (3)   The area of the fire, whether enclosed or in a fire ring, may not
exceed three feet in diameter or height; must be at least 25 feet from any
structure, public property, city streets, sidewalks and alleyways or to
adjoining property lines without adjoining property owners’ written consent;
and cannot produce excessive smoke so as to be a nuisance to other property
owners.
      (4)   Fire will not be allowed to smolder with no flame present, and only
clean, dry wood may be used. Items such as branches, lawn clippings, yard waste
and lumber are prohibited from burning in a recreational fire.
      (5)   No fire will be permitted within 20 feet in any direction of any
above- or below-ground natural gas, electrical, cable television or other
utility service lines.
      (6)   Mobile cooking devices such as charcoal grills, wood smokers,
hibachis and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as recreational
fires.
      (7)   Fire extinguishing equipment such as a water hose and/or fire
extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating must be readily available nearby.
      (8)   All fires are subject to discontinuance by direction of law
enforcement.
      (9)   Recreational burning is prohibited between 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
   (B)   Effective date. This section shall become effective upon the adoption
and publication on July 14, 2011 according to law.
(Ord. 49, 2nd Ser., passed 7-5-2006; Ord. 62, 2nd Ser., passed 7-5-2011)
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of §§
93.01 and
93.02 when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or
performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when the
failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by
this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1989 Code, § 10.99)
CHAPTER 94: CEMETERY REGULATIONS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Establishment
   
94.03   Sale of lots
   
94.04   Conditions of lot purchase
   
94.05   Handling of funds
   
94.06   Burial permits
   
94.07   Interments
   
94.08   Burial vaults
   
94.09   Funeral supervision
   
94.10   Disinterment and removal
   
94.11   Transfer of lots
   
94.12   City repurchase of unused cemetery lot
   
94.13   Conduct of persons in the cemetery
   
94.14   Monuments and markers
   
94.15   Foundations
   
94.16   Installation of monuments and markers
   
94.17   Mausoleums
   
94.18   Columbarium niches
   
94.19   Decoration of lots
   
94.20   Hours
   
94.21   Hazardous monuments/markers
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURIAL PERMIT. Legal written permission for burial to occur.
   BURIAL VAULT. A container that houses a casket for final interment in the
cemetery.
   CEMETERY. A tract of land used for burials or above-ground interment.
   CITY. The City of Aurora, Minnesota, owning and controlling the cemetery.
   COLUMBARIUM. Above-ground repository composed of niches to hold cremation
urns.
   INTERMENT. Disposition of human remains or cremains by burial or entombment.
   MARKER. A memorial of granite or other approved material that does not
extend above the surface of the lawn.
   MAUSOLEUMS. An external free-standing building enclosing the interment space
or burial chamber of a deceased person or persons.
   MEMORIAL. A monument, marker bench, or large urns (marked or unmarked).
   MONUMENT. A memorial of granite or other approved material that extends
above the surface of the lawn.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.02 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A cemetery has been established and is continued upon land owned by the
city, and described as Forest Hill Cemetery. The plat of the cemetery filed
with the county recorder in St. Louis County, Minnesota, is adopted as the
official plat of the cemetery. No person shall lay out or establish any
cemetery, or use any lot of land within this city for the burial of dead except
in Forest Hill Cemetery, or some other tract of land duly designated as a
cemetery.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.03 SALE OF LOTS.
   The prices of cemetery lots and services will be set by resolution of the
City Council. Any person paying for a lot is entitled to a license agreement
conveying the lot. A license agreement conveying a lot gives the purchaser only
the right of burial therein and shall be considered as a license that restricts
the use to burial purposes. Sale of lots between individuals is prohibited.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.04 CONDITIONS OF LOT PURCHASE.
   All lot agreements are subject to reasonable rules and regulations as the
Council may adopt relative to the use of the cemetery. No lot shall be used for
any purpose other than the burial of human remains and the placing of memorials
as permitted by this chapter or any additional regulation that the Council may
provide.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.05 HANDLING OF FUNDS.
   All money received from the sale of lots and other services must be paid to
the City Treasurer. No lot agreement to any cemetery lot shall be issued, nor
any cemetery service performed until a receipt showing payment to the city of
the cost thereof is exhibited to the person who issues the agreement or
performs the services. All money received from the sale of lots and performance
of services shall be placed in the cemetery fund. The fund may be used only for
payment of the purchase price of grounds, or maintenance and improvements to
the cemetery. The Treasurer shall keep an account of all receipts and
disbursements of money belonging to the cemetery fund and shall pay money out
of the fund as approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.06 BURIAL PERMITS.
   Before any interment, a burial permit shall be obtained from the funeral
home or State Registrar of Vital Statistics. No interment shall be made unless
the city is notified and a copy of such burial permit is filed with the city.
Within 36 hours after the death of any person in the city and before the body
is removed for burial within the city, the mortician, funeral director, or
person having charge of the interment shall apply for the permit. This
application shall be accompanied by a death certificate as prescribed by the
Minnesota Department of Health. No burial permit shall be issued until the
application and death certificate is completed and presented. The body of a
deceased person shall not be brought into the city for burial unless
accompanied by a death certificate and permit for removal issued by the
registrar of the registration district wherein the death occurred.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.07 INTERMENTS.
   (A)   No interment shall be made in any site, except by Board approval, of
the body or cremains of any person who was not, at the time of death, the owner
thereof, or the relative of the owner by blood or marriage. All excavations
shall be made under the direction of the Director of Public Works. When graves
are requested to be dug by the Director of Public Works or their agents, at
least 24-hours notice shall be given, and the outside dimensions of the case to
be used and the location shall be specified. No interment may be made in the
cemetery unless all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations regarding
interments have been complied with and until purchase price of the lot and all
burial fees are paid or arrangements have been made through a funeral home.
   (B)   Only one casket burial per grave site is allowed.
   (C)   Casket burial between grave sites is not allowed.
   (D)   Private burial of cremains is prohibited.
   (E)   Two cremain burials per grave site are allowed.
   (F)   Burial of cremains between sites is not allowed.
   (G)   Burial of cremains over a casket burial is not allowed.
   (H)   An urn vault is optional.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014; Ord. 79, passed 8-2-2016)
§ 94.08 BURIAL VAULTS.
   All caskets must be encased in a permanent type burial case or vault.
Fiberglass vaults are prohibited.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.09 FUNERAL SUPERVISION.
   All funerals, on reaching the cemetery, shall be under the supervision of
cemetery management.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.10 DISINTERMENT AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Before any grave may be opened, written permission of the lot owner
and the next of kin shall be filed with the cemetery superintendent, a permit
from the county health officer shall be secured and presented, and the required
fees paid. This provision does not apply when disinterment is ordered by a duly
authorized public authority.
   (B)   Removal of a body by the heirs so that the lot may be sold for profit
to themselves, or removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the
original lot owner is forbidden.
   (C)   A body may be removed from its original lot to a larger or better lot
in the cemetery when there has been an exchange or purchase for that purpose.
   (D)   The city shall assume no liability for damage to any casket or burial
case in making the disinterment and removal.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.11 TRANSFER OF LOTS.
   No cemetery lot or fractional lot may be resold or otherwise disposed of,
except by will, without the approval of the Cemetery Board, in accordance with
the procedures outlined in M.S. § 306.15.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.12 CITY REPURCHASE OF UNUSED CEMETERY LOT.
   A lot owner may sell his or her unused lot back to the city. The city will
purchase the lot at the original purchase price. Repurchase shall be completed
through the City Clerk's office.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.13 CONDUCT OF PERSONS IN THE CEMETERY.
   (A)   No person may discharge any firearm within the cemetery grounds
without written permission of the superintendent.
   (B)   No person may remove any object from any place in the cemetery or make
any excavation without the written permission of the city.
   (C)   No person may obstruct any drive or path in the cemetery or in any way
injure, deface, or destroy any structure, grave, flower, tree, or other thing
in the cemetery.
   (D)   No person may drive any vehicle at a speed exceeding ten miles per
hour. All automobiles must be kept off the grass.
   (E)   No person may disturb the quiet of the cemetery by noise or improper
conduct of any kind.
   (F)   No person may enter or leave the cemetery except at the entrances
provided.
   (G)   No person may use the cemetery grounds or any road therein as a public
thoroughfare, nor drive any vehicle through the cemetery grounds except for
purposes relating to the cemetery.
   (H)   Children shall not be permitted to engage in playing within cemetery
grounds, and children under ten years of age shall not be admitted to the
grounds unless accompanied by an adult, who shall be responsible for their
conduct while therein.
   (I)   Animals must be on a leash and under control at all times.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.14 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   Acceptable memorialization is as follows:
   (A)   Monuments or markers are allowed in Blocks 5-16, markers only are
allowed in Blocks 17-24.
   (B)   No monument may be placed on a lot platted for less than one burial.
   (C)   No monument or marker may be placed unless the location has been
approved by the city and the full purchase price of the lot has been paid.
   (D)   Monuments and markers must be constructed of granite, marble, or
bronze material.
   (E)   Single, double, and quad markers or monuments, shall follow current
approved Cemetery Guidelines. These restrictions shall not apply to markers or
monuments provided by the federal government.
   (F)   Markers or monuments between grave sites are not allowed.
   (G)   One marker at the foot of a casket or cremain burial where one burial
is on the site is allowed in addition to a family monument or marker.
   (H)   A marker can be placed over each cremain burial where two burials are
on the same site in addition to a family monument or marker.
   (I)   The city reserves the right to remove all monuments or markers without
liability to the owner whenever any of these objects become unsafe as per §
94.21.
   (J)   Memorialization cannot be placed for anyone who is not buried in the
cemetery; however, memorialization for a veteran buried overseas is allowed.
   (K)   Aurora Public Works staff will install military markers. All other
monuments and markers are the responsibility of the lot owner.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014; Am. Ord. 86, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 94.15 FOUNDATIONS.
   All monuments shall be placed on foundations of solid masonry at a depth and
size to be determined by the Cemetery Board. All foundations for monuments must
be constructed so as to extend four inches beyond the monument on all sides and
must be of sufficient depth and stability to support the proposed structure. A
four inch concrete border is recommended around markers. The city reserves the
right to excavate and build all foundations.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.16 INSTALLATION OF MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   (A)   Upon placement of an order for a monument, the lot owner or monument
salesperson shall furnish the dimensions of the proposed monument to the
Director of Public Works, who in turn will authorize the construction of the
foundation, and all charges must be paid before the monument is placed thereon.
   (B)   Persons engaged in erecting monuments and other structures shall
provide adequate planking to protect turf and shall remove all materials,
equipment, and refuse immediately upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Scattering of materials on adjoining lots, or leaving materials on the
ground longer than absolutely necessary is prohibited. In all cases the work is
subject to the control of the cemetery superintendent and work must be
conducted within the regulations of the cemetery. Ropes and cables may be
attached to trees or other objects only on approval of the superintendent.
   (D)   Monument salesperson and/or installer shall be responsible for ground
preparation, including tree root removal, when installing monuments or markers.
   (E)   Monument companies must provide to the city a Certificate of Liability
Insurance to maintain commercial general liability insurance in a minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence; $2,000,000 annual aggregate. The policy
shall cover liability arising from premises, operations, products completed
operations, personal injury, advertising injury, and contractually assumed
liability. The city shall be named as an additional insured.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.17 MAUSOLEUMS.
   Mausoleums may be placed only on cemetery lots designated by the Cemetery
Board for such structures.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.18 COLUMBARIUM NICHES.
   Each niche may contain one cremation urn of appropriate size. The cost of a
niche will include burial opening and closing costs. One four inch by ten inch
bronze plaque will be included per niche. Each plaque must be engraved
according to cemetery specifications. No other additional ornamentation will be
allowed on or in front of the columbarium.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.19 DECORATION OF LOTS.
   (A)   Lot owners are not allowed to change the grade of any lot nor
interfere with the general plan of the cemetery; however, lot owners may bring
the lot and monument or marker to level grade at their expense.
   (B)   Lot owners may lay sod after receiving approval from the Director of
Public Works.
   (C)   The private planting of trees, shrubs and bushes is not allowed.
   (D)   Decorations on wire hangers or objects anchored to the ground with
wire are not allowed and will be removed by Public Works maintenance staff.
   (E)   One planter is allowed per grave site. Planters may be placed one week
before Memorial Day and must be removed by September 30. Any planters left
beyond September 30 will be removed by Public Works maintenance staff.
   (F)   The use of shepherd hooks or elevated plant stands is acceptable.
   (G)   One vigil light and up to two solar lights per grave site is allowed.
   (H)   Any and all ornamentation other than one planter, one vigil light, and
up to two solar lights per grave site will be removed by Public Works staff.
   (I)   Artificial flowers are not allowed.
   (J)   The city reserves the right to remove all monuments, markers, flowers,
plants, trees, decorations, or other similar things without liability to the
owner whenever any of these objects become unsafe and in keeping with the
landscape design of the cemetery.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.20 HOURS.
   The cemetery has no posted hours.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.21 HAZARDOUS MONUMENTS/MARKERS.
   At least annually, city staff will conduct an inspection in the cemetery for
blighted monuments, markers and/or headstones that are considered to be in a
dangerous condition. A dangerous condition shall include leaning, crumbling,
cracking, broken or sinking. Attempts will be made by city staff to contact the
lot owner about the required repair. Said notification shall be by certified
letter, placed in the U.S. mail. Lot owner shall be given 90 days to comply
with requirements to correct the unsafe situation. If no lot owner or family
can be found after due diligence, the city will remove the dangerous headstones
and monuments and will store items at city facilities. If footstones mark the
graves, the monument will not be replaced. If the dangerous monument is the
only marking for the lot, a flat marker will be installed using designated
cemetery memorial funds. All documentation will be recorded in the office of
the City Clerk.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(Ord. 68, passed 6-3-2014)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS REGULATION AND LICENSING
      
111.   SOLICITORS
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES LICENSING AND REGULATION
      
113.   TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
      
114.   FOOD AND BEVERAGE BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS REGULATION AND LICENSING
Section
General Licensing Regulations
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Applications
   
110.03   Action on application, transfer, termination and duplicate license
   
110.04   Fixing license fees
   
110.05   Penalty for property owner
   
110.06   Responsibility of licensee
   
110.07   Conditional licenses
   
110.08   Renewal of licenses
   
110.09   Insurance requirements
   
110.10   License denial and fixing rates; hearing
   
110.11   Workers’ compensation
Specific Businesses
   
110.25   Reserved
   
110.26   Lawful gambling
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Lodging tax, see
Chapter 35
GENERAL LICENSING REGULATIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.
   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the
issuance of a license for a business.
   BOND. A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions
acceptable and specifically approved by the City Attorney.
   BUSINESS. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services or transaction
that is either licensed or regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the
terms and conditions of this chapter.
   LICENSE. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him or her
to carry on and transact a business.
   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior
to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business.
   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds a
valid, current, unexpired and unrevoked license from the city for carrying on a
business.
   SALE, SELL and SOLD. All forms of barter and all manner or means of
furnishing merchandise to persons.
(1989 Code, § 6.01)
§ 110.02 APPLICATIONS.
   All applications shall be made as follows.
   (A)   All applications shall be made at the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer upon forms that have been furnished by the city
for those purposes.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all the applications
must be subscribed, sworn to and include any information as the Council deems
necessary considering the nature of the business for which license application
is made.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false
statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in the
application, or any willful omission to state any information called for on the
application form, shall upon discovery of the falsehood work an automatic
refusal of license or, if already issued, shall render any license or permit
issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to protect the applicant from
prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part hereof.
   (D)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall, upon receipt of each
application completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth
of statements made therein and the moral character and business reputation of
each applicant for license to the extent that he or she deems necessary. For
the investigation the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may enlist the aid of
a peace officer. The Council shall not consider an application before the
investigation has been completed.
   (E)   Applications for renewal licenses may be made in an abbreviated form
as the Council may by resolution adopt.
(1989 Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 ACTION ON APPLICATION, TRANSFER, TERMINATION AND DUPLICATE LICENSE.
   (A)   Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period of the
remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing license
year. Failure to pay any portion of a fee when due shall be cause for
revocation. No license fee shall be refundable upon revocation or voluntarily
ceasing to carry on the licensed activity. All applications, including proposed
license periods, must be consistent with this chapter.
   (B)   Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form
prescribed by the Council, payment of the appropriate license fee and approval
of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All
licenses shall be on a calendar-year basis unless otherwise specified herein as
to particular businesses. Unless otherwise herein specified, license fees shall
be prorated on the basis of one-twelfth for each calendar month or part thereof
remaining in the then current license year; provided, that for licenses where
the fee is less than $100, a minimum license fee equal to one-half of the
annual license fee shall be charged. Except as to licenses which are
specifically city-wide, licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the
premises therein described.
   (C)   Transfer. A license shall be transferable between persons upon consent
of the Council and payment of the investigation fee, if any. No license shall
be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the Council
and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make any
transfer in violation of this section.
   (D)   Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.
   (E)   Refusal and revocation. The Council may, for any reasonable cause,
refuse to grant any application or revoke any license. No license shall be
granted to a person of questionable moral character or business reputation.
Before revocation of any license, the Council shall give notice to the licensee
and grant the licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given and the
exact time of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling for the
hearing. Grounds for revocation may be but are not limited to any of the
following, that: 
      (1)   The licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon licensed
premises;
      (2)   The licensee had knowledge of the illegal acts but failed to report
the same to peace officers;
      (3)   The licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with peace
officers in investigating the alleged illegal acts; or
      (4)   The activities of the licensee created a serious danger to public
health, safety or welfare.
   (F)   Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued
by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, without action by the Council, upon
licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee
in an amount adopted by resolution of the Council for issuance of the
duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked “Duplicate.”
(1989 Code, § 6.03) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 FIXING LICENSE FEES.
   Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses under this
chapter shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution and
uniformly enforced. The license fees may, from time to time, be amended by the
Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth currently
effective license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, and open to inspection during regular business
hours. For the purpose of fixing the fees, the Council may subdivide and
categorize licenses under a specific license requirement, provided that the
subdivision or categorization shall be included in the resolution authorized by
this section.
(1989 Code, § 6.04)
§ 110.05 PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNER.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or
controlled by him or her to be used, without a license, for any business for
which a license is required by this chapter.
(1989 Code, § 6.06) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
   The conduct of agents or employees of a licensee, while engaged in
performance of their duties for their principal or employer under the license,
except as to criminal liability therefor, shall be deemed the conduct of the
licensee.
(1989 Code, § 6.07)
§ 110.07 CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon
a finding of the necessity therefor, place conditions and restrictions upon a
license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.
(1989 Code, § 6.07)
§ 110.08 RENEWAL OF LICENSES.
   Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 30
days prior to the date of expiration of the license, and shall contain any
information as is required by the city. This time requirement may be waived by
the Council for good and sufficient cause.
(1989 Code, § 6.09)
§ 110.09 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Whenever insurance is required by a section of this chapter, after
approval by the Council, but before the license shall issue, the applicant
shall file with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer a policy or certificate
of public liability insurance showing that:
      (1)   The limits are at least as high as required;
      (2)   Coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and
      (3)   The insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without 30 days’
written notice served upon the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Cancellation or termination of the coverage shall be grounds for
license revocation.
(1989 Code, § 6.10)
§ 110.10 LICENSE DENIAL AND FIXING RATES; HEARING.
   (A)   Right to deny. The Council reserves to itself the right to deny any
application for a license to operate any business licensed or regulated under
this chapter where the business involves service to the public, rates charged
for service, use of public streets or other public property by the applicant or
the public, or the public health, safety and convenience. The Council may also
consider the location of the business in making the determination; provided,
however, that before making the determination, the Council shall hold a public
hearing thereon pursuant to the notice to interested parties and the public as
it may deem necessary or proper in action calling for the hearing.
   (B)   Rates. Where, under specific provisions of this chapter, the Council
has reserved to itself the right to fix or approve fees, rates or charges of a
licensed or regulated business, the rates shall be uniform for each category or
class of service, and no licensee or proprietor of a regulated business shall
claim or demand payment in excess thereof.
   (C)   Hearing. Any applicant or licensee under this chapter who challenges
denial of a license or rates fixed or approved by the Council shall have a
right to a hearing before the Council upon written request therefor. Notice of
time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be given to persons and by any
means as the Council may determine in calling the hearing.
(1989 Code, § 6.11)
§ 110.11 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.
   No license to operate a business shall be issued by the city until the
applicant presents acceptable evidence of compliance with the workers’
compensation insurance coverage requirement of state law by providing the name
of the insurance company, the policy number and dates of coverage, or the
permit to self-insure.
(1989 Code, § 6.12)
SPECIFIC BUSINESSES
§ 110.25 RESERVED
§ 110.26 LAWFUL GAMBLING.
   (A)   Adoption of state law by reference. The provisions of M.S. Chapter
349, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition
of terms, conditions of operation, provisions relating to sales, and all other
matters pertaining to lawful gambling are hereby adopted by reference and are
made a part of this section as if set out in full. It is the intention of the
Council that all future amendments of M.S. Chapter 349, are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
section was adopted.
   (B)   City may be more restrictive than state law. The Council is authorized
by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as it may be amended from time to time, to
impose, and has imposed in this section, additional restrictions on gambling
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (C)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate lawful gambling
within the city, to prevent its commercialization, to insure the integrity of
operations, and to provide for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes.
   (D)   Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. §
349.12, as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined
for purposes of this section:
      BOARD. The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
      CITY. The City of Aurora.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Aurora.
      LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.
   (E)   TRADE AREA. For the purpose of this section, the trade area shall be
defined as the City of Aurora, and each township contiguous to the city.
   (F)   Lawful gambling permitted. Lawful gambling is permitted within the
city provided it is conducted in accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75 through
609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; M.S. §§ 349.11
through 349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; and this
section.
   (G)   License and permit display. All permits issued under state law or this
section shall be prominently displayed during the permit year at the premises
where gambling is conducted.
   (H)   Notification of material changes to application. An organization
holding a state-issued premises permit or a local permit shall notify the city
within ten days in writing whenever any material change is made in the
information submitted on the application.
   (I)   Contribution of net profits to fund administered by the city.
      (1)   Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the
city pursuant to M.S. § 349.16, as it may be amended from time to time, shall
contribute 10% of its net profits derived from lawful gambling in the city to a
fund administered and regulated by the city without cost to the fund. The city
shall disburse the funds for charitable contributions as defined by M.S.§
349.12, Subdivision 7a, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Payment under this section shall be made to the city on a quarterly
basis.
      (3)   The city’s use of such funds shall be determined at the time of
adoption of the city’s annual budget or when the budget is amended.
      (4)   No organization shall receive any reimbursement from the city for
any contributions made pursuant to this section.
      (5)   Contributions to the city cannot be used for pension or retirement
funds by M.S. § 349.12, Subdivision 7a, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (6)   No organization may contribute funds to the city for the purpose of
the city giving the funds to a third party recipient designated by the
organization. Such designations are unlawful and shall be disregarded.
   (J)   Records and reporting. Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall
file with the City Clerk one copy of all records and reports required to be
filed with the Board, pursuant to M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from
time to time, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from
time to time. The records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they
are required to be filed with the Board.
   (K)   Hours of operation. Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 1:
00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Ord. 69, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of § 110.26, M.S. §§ 609.75
through 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; or M.S.
§§ 349.11 through 349.21, as they may be amended from time to time; or any
rules promulgated under those sections, as they may be amended from time to
time, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, plus in
either case the costs of prosecution. In addition, violations shall be reported
to the Board and recommendation shall be made for suspension, revocation, or
cancellation of an organization’s license.
(1989 Code, § 6.99) (Ord. 69, passed 6-3-2014)
CHAPTER 111: SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Modified Green River ordinance; signs
   
111.03   Registration
   
111.04   Exceptions
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HAWKER. A person who sells things outdoors.
   NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to-door for the
primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social or other
ideological beliefs. For purposes of this section, the term NON-COMMERCIAL
DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE shall include pamphleteering intended for non-commercial
purposes.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, street-to-
street or any other type of place-to-place movement, for the purpose of
offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to
sell and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise
transporting.
   PROFESSIONAL FUNDRAISER. Any person, including a corporation or other
entity, who, for compensation, performs any solicitations or other services for
a religious, political, social or other charitable organization.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, services or other personal property of which the person
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to
obtain orders as discussed above.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 111.02 MODIFIED GREEN RIVER ORDINANCE; SIGNS
   (A)   No non-commercial door-to-door advocate, peddler, professional
fundraiser or solicitor shall go in or upon private residences or residential
properties if the property has been posted with a sign forbidding non-
commercial door-to-door advocates, peddlers, professional fundraisers or
solicitors. The signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. A
sign posted on the door or entrance to a residence or residential property
shall be deemed “conspicuous” for purposes of this section.
   (B)   Accessory uses that are incidental and customarily subordinate to the
principal permitted uses may be allowed, provided they are located on the same
property as the principal use. These accessory uses shall include, but are not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Off-street parking and off-street loading;
      (2)   Storage of materials, provided that when the use abuts or is
adjacent to any residential zone, the storage shall be within completely
enclosed buildings and effectively screened by a solid wall or fence, including
solid entrance and exit garages not less than six feet nor more than eight feet
in height; and
      (3)   Foundries, provided that the foundry operation is necessary to the
principal use.
      (4)   Retail sales of products manufactured, processed or wholesaled at
the use site;
      (5)   Accessory off-site parking not located on the same property with
the principal use, subject to the provisions of this chapter; and
      (6)   Other uses similar in nature to the aforementioned uses, as
determined by the Council.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 111.03 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any solicitor or peddler who intends to sell or solicit orders for the
sale of wares, merchandise or services at the private residences or on
residential properties shall register with the city. The registration shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the solicitor, peddler or
hawker;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of solicitor or peddler’s
employer; and
      (3)   A description of the goods, merchandise, wares or services being
offered, including the brand name, if any.
   (B)   If any non-profit corporation intends to sell or solicit orders for
goods, wares, merchandise or services at residences or on residential
properties, it shall provide the following information in its registration:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the non-profit
corporation;
      (2)   A description of the goods, merchandise, wares or services being
offered; and
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of a person who may be
contacted for information concerning the organization and the selling or
soliciting.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 111.04 EXCEPTIONS,
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person who has
been invited to the residence or residential property by the resident thereof.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person going
from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or
other type of place-to-place movement when the activity is for a school
activity or activity related to Independent School District 2711.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Every person who violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES LICENSING AND REGULATION
Section
General Regulations
   
112.001   Definitions
   
112.002   Applications and licenses under this chapter; procedure and
administration
   
112.003   Renewal license applications
   
112.004   Delinquent taxes and charges
   
112.005   Conditional licenses
   
112.006   Premises licensed
   
112.007   Unlawful acts
   
112.008   Conduct on licensed premises
   
112.009   Sale by employee
   
112.010   License condition and unlawful act
   
112.011   License fees; fixing and refundment
   
112.012   Financial responsibility of licensees
   
112.013   Insurance certificate requirements
Prohibitions
   
112.025   Minors as defined in §
112.001; unlawful acts
   
112.026   Gambling prohibited
   
112.027   Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, public
property and private parking lots to which the public has access
   
112.028   Alcoholic beverages in certain buildings and grounds
   
112.029   Alcoholic beverages; certain unlawful acts
   
112.030   Nudity or obscenity
Beer
   
112.045   Beer license required
   
112.046   Temporary beer license
   
112.047   Hours and days of beer sales
Liquor
   
112.060   Liquor license required
   
112.061   Sunday sales
   
112.062   Hours and days of liquor sales
Wine
   
112.075   On-sale wine license required
   
112.076   Hours and days of wine sales
Liquor and On-Sale Wine License Restrictions, Regulations and Unlawful Acts
   
112.090   Limitations on issuance of licenses to one person or place
   
112.091   Licenses in connection with premises of another
   
112.092   Off-sale licenses where beer is sold
   
112.093   Employment of minors
   
112.094   Premises eligible
   
112.095   Number of licenses
Club Licenses
   
112.110   Club license restrictions and regulations; unlawful acts
Consumption and Display Licenses
   
112.125   License required; restrictions and regulations
   
112.126   One-day license
 
   
112.999   Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 112.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume, including but not limited to beer, wine and liquor as defined in this
section.
   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.
   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the
issuance of a license for a business.
   BEER. Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume nor more
than 3.2% alcohol by weight. (This definition includes so-called “malt coolers”
with the alcoholic content limits stated in state law.)
   BREWER. A person who manufactures beer for sale.
   CLUB. An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for
civic, fraternal, social or business purposes, for intellectual improvement,
for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered veterans’
organization, which has more than 50 members; has owned or rented a building or
space in a building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for
the accommodation of its members; and is directed by a board of directors,
executive committee or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting
held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent or employee shall receive any
profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the CLUB or
their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by
the governing body. The CLUB or congressionally chartered veterans’
organization must have been in existence for at least three years.
   COMMISSIONER. The State Commissioner of Public Safety.
   EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE. An establishment used exclusively for the sale of
liquor except for the incidental sale of ice, tobacco, beer, beverages for
mixing with liquor, soft drinks, cork extraction devices and books and videos
on the use of alcoholic beverages in the preparation of food, and the
establishment may offer recorded or live entertainment. EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE
also includes an on-sale or combination on-sale and off-sale liquor
establishment which sells food for on-premises consumption when authorized by
the city.
   HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to
transients and which has a dining room serving the general public at tables and
having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time, and at least ten
guest rooms.
   LICENSE. A document, issued by the city, to an applicant permitting him or
her to carry on and transact the business stated therein.
   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior
to issuance of a license to transact and carry on the business stated therein.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The premises described in the issued license.
   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her approved application,
holds a valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither been revoked nor
is then under suspension, from the city for carrying on the business stated
therein.
   LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and malt
beverages containing in excess of 3.2% of alcohol by weight. (This definition
includes so-called “wine coolers” and “malt coolers” with the alcoholic content
limits stated in state law.)
   MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale or other beverage made from malt by fermentation
and containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.
   MANUFACTURER.  Every person who, by any process of manufacture, fermenting,
brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending or by the combination of
different materials, prepares or produces alcoholic beverages for sale.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years.
   OFF-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the licensed premises only.
   ON-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed
premises only.
   PACKAGE and ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle holding alcoholic
beverages, which container or receptacle is corked, capped or sealed by a
manufacturer or wholesaler.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly served at tables to the
general public, and having seating capacity for at least 30 guests.
   SALE, SELL and SOLD. All barters and all manners or means of furnishing
alcoholic beverages to persons, including furnishing in violation or evasion of
law.
   WHOLESALER. Any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic
beverages to a licensee from a stock maintained in a warehouse.
   WINE. A beverage made without rectification or fortification by the
fermentation of sound ripe grapes, grape juice, other fruits or honey, and also
carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from other
agricultural products imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider,
perry and sake, containing not less than 0.5% nor more than 14% alcohol by
volume. (This definition includes so-called “wine coolers” with the alcoholic
content limits stated in state law.)
(1989 Code, § 5.01) (Ord. 29, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-14-1999)
§ 112.002 APPLICATIONS AND LICENSES UNDER THIS CHAPTER; PROCEDURE AND
ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Application. All applications shall be made at the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer upon forms prescribed by the city, or if by the
Commissioner, then together with any additional information as the Council may
desire. Information required may vary with the type of business organization
making application. All questions asked or information required by the
application forms shall be answered fully and completely by the applicant.
Every application for the issuance or renewal of an alcoholic beverage license
must include a copy of each summons received by the applicant during the
preceding year under M.S. § 340A.802, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally
make a false statement or omission upon any application form. Any false
statement in the application or any willful omission to state any information
called for on the application form shall, upon discovery of a falsehood, work
an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license
issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to protect the applicant from
prosecution for violation of this chapter or any part thereof.
   (C)   Application and investigation fees. At the time the initial
application is made, an applicant for a license under this chapter shall
accompany the application with payment of a fee to be considered an application
and investigation fee, not refundable to the applicant, to cover the cost of
the city in processing the application and the investigation of the applicant.
No fee shall be required of an applicant for a temporary beer license.
   (D)   Action.
      (1)   Granting. The Council may approve any application for the period of
the remainder of the then current license year or for the entire ensuing
license year. All applications including proposed license periods must be
consistent with this chapter. Prior to consideration of any application for a
license, the applicant shall pay the license fee, and if applicable, pay the
investigation fee. Upon rejection of any application for a license, or upon
withdrawal of an application before consideration by the Council, the license
fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Failure to pay any portion of a fee
when due shall be cause for revocation.
      (2)   Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form
prescribed by the city or the Commissioner, as the case may be. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, all licenses shall be on a fiscal year basis,
July 1 to June 30. For licenses issued and which are to become effective other
than on the first day of the licensed year, the fee to be paid with the
application shall be a pro rata share of the annual license fee. Licenses shall
be valid only at one location and on the premises therein described.
      (3)   Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons. Any
change in individual ownership, incorporation or substitution of partners is a
transfer. No license shall be transferable to a different location without
prior consent of the Council and payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It
is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this division (D)(3).
      (4)   Refusal and termination. The Council may, in its sole discretion
and for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application. No license shall
be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business reputation.
Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
      (5)   Public interest. No license under this chapter may be issued,
transferred or renewed if the results of any investigation show, to the
satisfaction of the Council, that the issuance, transfer or renewal would not
be in the public interest.
      (6)   Revocation or suspension. For any license granted under the
provisions of this chapter, the Council may revoke, suspend for a period not to
exceed 60 days, impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 or any combination of
these sanctions, for each violation on a finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with a statute, regulation or provision of the city code relating to
alcoholic beverages. The Council shall revoke the license upon conviction of
any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee for violating any law relating
to the sale or possession of beer, wine or liquor upon premises of the
licensee, or if the revocation is mandatory by statute. If it shall be made to
appear at the hearing thereon that the violation was not willful, the Council
may order suspension; provided that revocation shall be ordered upon the third
violation or offense. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the
licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Council, a
committee of the Council or a hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act
being M.S. §§ 14.001 to 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, as may
be determined by the Council in action calling the hearing. The hearing shall
be called by the Council upon written notice to the licensee served in person
or by certified mail not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the
hearing date, stating the time, place and purpose thereof. As additional
restrictions or regulations on licensees under this chapter, and in addition to
grounds for revocation or suspension stated in the city code or statute, the
following shall also be grounds for that action, that:
         (a)   The licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon licensed
premises unrelated to the sale of beer, wine or liquor;
         (b)   The licensee had knowledge of the illegal acts upon licensed
premises, but failed to report the same to police;
         (c)   The licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with police in
investigating the alleged illegal acts upon licensed premises; or
         (d)   The activities of the licensee created a serious danger to
public health, safety or welfare.
      (7)   Corporate applicants and licensees. A corporate applicant, at the
time of application, shall furnish the city with a list of all persons that
have an interest in the corporation and the extent of the interest. The list
shall name all shareholders and show the number of shares held by each, either
individually or beneficially for others. It is the duty of each corporate
licensee to notify the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer in writing of any
change in legal ownership or beneficial interest in the corporation or in the
shares. Any change in the ownership or beneficial interest in the shares
entitled to be voted at a meeting of the shareholders of a corporate licensee,
which results in the change of voting control of the corporation by the persons
owning the shares therein, shall be deemed equivalent to a transfer of the
license issued to the corporation, and the license shall be revoked 30 days
after the change in ownership or beneficial interest of shares unless the
Council has been notified of the change in writing and has approved it by
appropriate action. The Council, or any officer of the city designated by it,
may at any reasonable time examine the stock transfer records and minute books
of any corporate licensee in order to verify and identify the shareholders, and
the Council or its designated officer may examine the business records of any
other licensee to the extent necessary to disclose the interest which persons
other than the licensee have in the licensed business. The Council may revoke
any license issued upon its determination that a change of ownership of shares
in a corporate licensee or any change of ownership of any interest in the
business of any other licensee has actually resulted in the change of control
of the licensed business so as materially to affect the integrity and character
of its management and its operation, but no action shall be taken until after a
hearing by the Council on notice to the licensee.
   (E)   Duplicate licenses.  Duplicates of all original licenses under this
chapter may be issued by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer without action
by the Council, upon licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost, and
upon payment of the fee adopted by resolution of the Council for issuance of
the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked “Duplicate.”
   (F)   Posting. All licensees shall conspicuously post their licenses in
their places of business.
   (G)   Resident manager or agent. Before a license is issued under this
chapter to an individual who is a nonresident of the city, to more than one
individual whether or not they are residents of the city, or to a corporation,
partnership or association, the applicant or applicants shall appoint in
writing a natural person who is a resident of the city as its manager or agent.
The resident manager or agent shall, by the terms of his or her written
consent, take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises, and
serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the
license. The manager or agent must be a person who, by reason of age,
character, reputation and other attributes, could qualify individually as a
licensee. If the manager or agent ceases to be a resident of the city or ceases
to act in that capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor,
the license issued pursuant to the appointment shall be subject to revocation
or suspension.
   (H)   Persons disqualified.
      (1)   No license under this chapter may be issued to:
         (a)   A person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
         (b)   A person who within five years of the license application has
been convicted of any felony or a willful violation of a federal or state law,
or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession
for sale or distribution, of alcoholic beverages;
         (c)   A person who has had an alcoholic beverage license revoked
within five years of the license application or to any person who at the time
of the violation owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than 5% of the
capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the
premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation,
partnership, association, enterprise, business or firm in which the person is
in any manner interested;
         (d)   A person under the age of 21 years; or
         (e)   A person not of good moral character and repute.
      (2)   No person holding a license from the Commissioner as a
manufacturer, brewer (except as provided by statute), wholesaler or importer
may have a direct or indirect interest, in whole or in part, in a business
holding an alcoholic beverage license from the city.
(1989 Code, § 5.02) (Ord. 29, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-14-1999) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.003 RENEWAL LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for renewal of all licenses under this chapter shall be
made at least 30 days prior to the date of expiration of the license and shall
contain any information as is required by the city.
   (B)   This time requirement may be waived by the Council for good and
sufficient cause.
(1989 Code, § 5.03)
§ 112.004 DELINQUENT TAXES AND CHARGES.
   No license under this chapter shall be granted for operation on any premises
upon which taxes, assessments or installments thereof or other financial claims
of the city are owed and are delinquent and unpaid.
(1989 Code, § 5.04)
§ 112.005 CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon
a finding of the necessity therefor, place any special conditions and
restrictions, in addition to those stated in this chapter, upon any license as
it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.
(1989 Code, § 5.05)
§ 112.006 PREMISES LICENSED.
   A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only
for the premises described in the license, and all transactions relating to a
sale under the license must take place within the space or structure.
(1989 Code, § 5.06) (Ord. 29, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-14-1999)
§ 112.007 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee
to permit consumption of, alcoholic beverages on licensed premises more than 30
minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made.
   (B)   Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than a licensee or his
or her bona fide employee actually engaged in the performance of his or her
duties, to be on premises licensed under this chapter more than 30 minutes
after the legal time for making licensed sales, unless the licensed
establishment is open to the public for serving food.
(1989 Code, § 5.07)
§ 112.008 CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   Except as herein provided, every licensee under this chapter shall be
responsible for the conduct of his or her place of business and shall maintain
conditions of sobriety and order therein.
(1989 Code, § 5.08)
§ 112.009 SALE BY EMPLOYEE.
   Any sale of an alcoholic beverage in or from any premises licensed under
this chapter by any employee authorized to make the sale in or from the place
is the act of the employer as well as of the person actually making the sale;
and every employer is liable to all of the penalties, except criminal
penalties, provided by law for the sale, equally with the person actually
making the sale.
(1989 Code, § 5.09)
§ 112.010 LICENSE CONDITION AND UNLAWFUL ACT.
   (A)   All premises licensed under this chapter shall at all times be open to
inspection by any police officer to determine whether or not this chapter and
all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued
the license, consent to the inspection by the officers and without a warrant
for searches or seizures.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee to
hinder or prevent a police officer from making the inspection.
(1989 Code, § 5.10) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.011 LICENSE FEES; FIXING AND REFUNDMENT.
   (A)   Fixing fees. Except as otherwise specifically provided, all fees for
licenses provided for in this chapter, including but not by way of limitation
license fees, investigation and administration fees, shall be fixed and
determined by the Council, adopted by resolution and uniformly enforced. These
fees may, from time to time, be amended by the Council by resolution; provided,
however, that before any fee shall be increased, a 30-day notice shall be
mailed to all affected licensees and a hearing held thereon. A copy of the
resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer and open to inspection during regular business hours. For the purpose
of fixing the fees, the Council may categorize and classify, provided, that the
categorization and classification shall be included in the resolution
authorized by this section.
   (B)   Refundment. A pro rata share of an annual license fee for a license to
sell alcoholic beverages, either on-sale or off-sale, shall be refunded to the
licensee, or to his or her estate, if:
      (1)   The business ceases to operate because of destruction or damage;
      (2)   The licensee dies; or
      (3)   The business ceases to be lawful for a reason other than a license
revocation or suspension.
(1989 Code, § 5.11) (Ord. 10, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-9-1994)
§ 112.012 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEES.
   (A)   Proof. No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued or renewed unless
and until the applicant has provided proof of financial responsibility, imposed
by statute, by filing with the city:
      (1)   A certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool
providing minimum coverages in the following amounts, effective May 12, 2011:
         (a)   At least $50,000 because of bodily injury to any one person in
any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of
$100,000 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence,
and in the amount of $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of
others in any one occurrence;
         (b)   Fifty thousand dollars for loss of means of support of any one
person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person,
$100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any one
occurrence; and
         (c)   Fifty thousand dollars for other pecuniary loss of any one
person in any one occurrence, and $100,000 for other pecuniary loss of two or
more persons in any one occurrence; an annual aggregate of $300,000 may be
included in the insurance coverage.
      (2)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as provided in
division (A)(1) of this section; or
      (3)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has
deposited with him or her $100,000 in cash or securities which may legally be
purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market value of
$100,000.
   (B)   Exception. This section does not apply to on-sale beer licensees with
sales of beer of less than $25,000 for the preceding year, nor to off-sale beer
licensees with sales of beer of less than $50,000 for the preceding year, nor
does it apply to holders of on-sale wine licenses with sales of wine of less
than $25,000 for the preceding year. An affidavit of the licensee shall be
required to establish the exemption under this division (B).
   (C)   Documents submitted to Commissioner. All proofs of financial
responsibility and exemption affidavits filed with the city under this section
shall be submitted by the city to the Commissioner.
(1989 Code, § 5.12) (Ord. 29, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-14-1999; Ord. 59, 2nd Ser.,
passed 5-3-2011)
§ 112.013 INSURANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS.
   Whenever an insurance certificate is required by this chapter the applicant
shall file with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer a certificate of
insurance showing that the limits are at least as high as required; that
coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and that the
insurance will not be canceled or terminated without 30 days’ written notice
served upon the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. Cancellation or termination
of the coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.
(1989 Code, § 5.13)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 112.025 MINORS AS DEFINED IN § 112.001; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any:
      (1)   Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic beverages on
licensed premises; or
      (2)   Minor to consume alcoholic beverages except in the household of the
minor’s parent or guardian, and then only with the consent of the parent or
guardian.
   (B)   Purchasing. It is unlawful for any:
      (1)   Person to sell, barter, furnish or give alcoholic beverages to a
minor unless the person is the parent or guardian of the minor, and then only
for consumption in the household of the parent or guardian;
      (2)   Minor to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage; or
      (3)   Person to induce a minor to purchase or procure any alcoholic
beverage.
   (C)   Possession. It is unlawful for a minor to possess any alcoholic
beverage with the intent to consume it at a place other than the household of
the minor’s parent or guardian. Possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor
at a place other than the household of the parent or guardian is prima facie
evidence of intent to consume it at a place other than the household of his or
her parent or guardian.
   (D)   Entering licensed premises. It is unlawful for any minor, as defined
in this chapter, to enter licensed premises for the purpose of purchasing or
consuming any alcoholic beverage. It is not unlawful for any person who has
attained the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises for the following
purposes: to perform work for the establishment, including the serving of
alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by statute; to consume meals;
and to attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment
where liquor is not sold. It is unlawful for a licensee to permit a person
under the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises unless attending a social
event at which alcoholic beverages are not served, or in the company of a
parent or guardian.
   (E)   Misrepresentation of age. It is unlawful for a minor to misrepresent
his or her age for the purpose of purchasing an alcoholic beverage.
   (F)   Proof of age. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming alcoholic
beverages may be established only by a valid driver’s license or identification
card issued by this state, another state or a province of Canada, and including
the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person; or by a valid military
identification card issued by the United States Department of Defense; or, in
the case of a foreign national, from a nation other than Canada, by a valid
passport.
(1989 Code, § 5.14) (Ord. 29, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-14-1999) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.026 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any licensee to keep, possess or operate, or permit the
keeping, possession or operation on licensed premises of dice or any other
gambling device, or permit raffles to be conducted, except those as are
authorized by statute or the city code.
(1989 Code, § 5.15) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.027 CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON STREETS, PUBLIC
PROPERTY AND PRIVATE PARKING LOTS TO WHICH THE PUBLIC HAS ACCESS.
   It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed
container, any alcoholic beverage on any city park, street, public property or
private parking lot to which the public has access, except on premises when and
where permission has been specifically granted or licensed by the Council;
provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed
container in a motor vehicle when the container is kept in the trunk of the
vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the
vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle
is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or
glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver
or passengers.
(1989 Code, § 5.16) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.028 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.
   It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon or have in his or her
possession upon or in any school ground, any schoolhouse or school building,
any alcoholic beverage, except for experiments in laboratories and except for
those organizations who have been issued temporary licenses to sell beer, and
for any person to possess beer as a result of a purchase from those
organizations holding temporary licenses.
(1989 Code, § 5.17) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.029 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; CERTAIN UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any:
   (A)   Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase
of an alcoholic beverage;
   (B)   Licensee to sell or serve an alcoholic beverage to any person who is
obviously intoxicated;
   (C)   Licensee to fail, where doubt could exist, to require adequate proof
of age of a person upon licensed premises;
   (D)   Licensee to sell an alcoholic beverage on any day or during any hour
when the sales are not permitted by law;
   (E)   Licensee to allow consumption of an alcoholic beverage on licensed
premises on any day or during any hour when the consumption is not permitted by
law; or
   (F)   Person to purchase an alcoholic beverage on any day or during any hour
when the sales are not permitted by law.
(1989 Code, § 5.18) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.030 NUDITY OR OBSCENITY.
   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, the postpuberal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is
considered UNCOVERED if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are
covered.
      OBSCENE PERFORMANCE.  A play, motion picture, dance, show or other
presentation, whether pictured, animated or live, performed before an audience
and which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes obscenities or explicit
verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct.
      OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular
use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts,
sexual conduct or excretory functions or products, either that have no other
meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or
excretory meaning.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who
is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the
part of one so clothed.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any touching of
the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals or the
breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual
experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person issued a license provided
for in this chapter to permit upon licensed premises any nudity, obscene
performance or continued use of obscenities by any agent, employee, patron or
other person.
(1989 Code, § 5.80) Penalty, see §
112.999
BEER
§ 112.045 BEER LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by
any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, charge for possession or otherwise
dispose of beer, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license
therefor from the city. This section shall not apply to sales by manufacturers
to wholesalers or to sales by wholesalers to persons holding beer licenses from
the city. Annual on-sale beer licenses may be issued only to drug stores,
restaurants, hotels, bowling centers, clubs and establishments used exclusively
for the sale of beer with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
(1989 Code, § 5.30) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.046 TEMPORARY BEER LICENSE.
   (A)   Applicant. A club or charitable, religious or nonprofit organization
shall qualify for a temporary on-sale beer license. The license may not
authorize the sale of beer in any school or school buildings.
   (B)   Conditions.
      (1)   An application for a temporary license shall state the exact dates
and place of proposed temporary sale.
      (2)   The Council may but at no time shall it be under any obligation
whatsoever to grant a temporary beer license on premises owned or controlled by
the city. The license may be conditioned, qualified or restricted as the
Council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed are owned or under the control
of the city, the applicant shall file with the city, prior to issuance of the
license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of
$100,000 for injury to any one person and $300,000 for injury to more than one
person, and $25,000 for property damage, naming the city as an insured during
the license period. The license shall be issued only on the condition that the
applicant will not sell in excess of $10,000 (retail value) worth of beer in
any calendar year, and thereupon shall be exempt from proof of financial
responsibility as provided for herein.
      (3)   The applicant shall comply with all other restrictions, limitations
and regulations for the sale of beer under the city code and statutes.
(1989 Code, § 5.31) (Ord. 29, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-14-1999)
§ 112.047 HOURS AND DAYS OF BEER SALES.
   No on-sale of beer shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Monday through Saturday, nor after 2:00 a.m. on Sunday. No off-sale
shall be made on Sundays, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
nor before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, nor on
Thanksgiving Day, nor on Christmas Day, December 25, or after 8:00 p.m. on
Christmas Eve, December 24. (This section does not prohibit sales during hours
when on-sale is permitted on Sunday as stated in §
112.061).
(1989 Code, § 5.32) (Ord. 80, passed 6-26-2017) Penalty, see §
112.999
LIQUOR
§ 112.060 LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense
or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of
liquor, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor from
the city.
   (B)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   To those potable liquors as are intended for therapeutic purposes
and not as a beverage;
      (2)   To industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or used for
beverage purposes;
      (3)   To wine in the possession of a person duly licensed under this
chapter as an on-sale wine licensee;
      (4)   To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by
the Commissioner; or
      (5)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding liquor licenses from the
city.
   (C)   The city may issue annual on-sale liquor licenses only to the
following:
      (1)   Hotels;
      (2)   Restaurants;
      (3)   Bowling centers;
      (4)   Clubs or congressionally chartered veterans’ organizations,
provided that liquor sales will be made only to members and bona fide guests;
and
      (5)   Exclusive liquor stores.
   (D)   The city may issue annual off-sale liquor licenses to exclusive liquor
stores and drug stores.
(1989 Code, § 5.40)
§ 112.061 SUNDAY SALES.
   (A)   License required. The electorate of the city having heretofore
authorized the same at a general or special election, a Sunday on-sale liquor
license may be issued to hotels, restaurants, clubs or bowling centers, in
conjunction with the sale of food, which have on-sale liquor licenses, kitchen
facilities and which also have seating capacity for not less than 30 guests at
one time. For the purposes of this division (A), a limited food license issued
by the County Health Department is the minimum means of qualifying kitchen
facilities. Prior to issuance of the license, the applicant shall provide the
city with proof of financial responsibility for Sunday sales.
   (B)   Limited Sunday licenses. The Council may issue a special limited
Sunday on-sale liquor license to holders of on-sale liquor licenses for a
period of one day and in connection with a selected community event, holiday or
celebration. The applicant shall comply with all statutory and city code
provisions relating to liquor sale and licensing, including Sunday sale
regulations as to serving of food and seating capacity.
   (C)   Hours of sale. The hours of Sunday on-sale liquor sales shall be from
8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. on Monday, provided that the licensee is in conformance
with the State Clean Air Act, being M.S. §§ 144.411 to 144.417, as they may be
amended from time to time.
   (D)   Unlawful acts. It is unlawful to sell on-sale liquor on Sunday unless
the sales are licensed in accordance with this section, in conjunction with the
sale of food, and during the hours of permitted sales.
(1989 Code, § 5.41) (Ord. 20, 2nd Ser., eff. 1-19-1996; Ord. 54, 2nd Ser.,
passed 12-16-2008; Ord. 61, 2nd Ser., passed 6-7-2011; Ord. 80, passed 6-26-
2017; Ord. 94, passed 12-6-2022) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.062 HOURS AND DAYS OF LIQUOR SALES.
   No on-sale of liquor shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Monday through Saturday, nor after 2:00 a.m. on Sunday. No off-sale
shall be made on Sundays, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
nor before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, nor on
Thanksgiving Day, nor on Christmas Day, December 25, or after 8:00 p.m. on
Christmas Eve, December 24. (This section does not prohibit sales during hours
when on-sale is permitted on Sunday as stated in §
112.061).
(1989 Code, § 5.42) (Ord. 46, 2nd Ser., passed 8-2-2005; Ord. 53, 2nd Ser.,
passed 11-18-2008; Ord. 80, passed 6-26-2017) Penalty, see §
112.999
WINE
§ 112.075 ON-SALE WINE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense
or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of wine
on-sale, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor from
the city.
   (B)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by
the Commissioner;
      (2)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale or off-sale
liquor licenses from the city;
      (3)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale wine licenses
from the city; or
      (4)   To sales by on-sale liquor licensees on days and during hours when
on-sale liquor sales are permitted.
(1989 Code, § 5.50) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.076 HOURS AND DAYS OF WINE SALES.
   No on-sale of wine shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Monday through Saturday, nor after 2:00 a.m. on Sunday. No off-sale
shall be made on Sundays, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
nor before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, nor on
Thanksgiving Day, nor on Christmas Day, December 25, or after 8:00 p.m. on
Christmas Eve, December 24. (This section does not prohibit sales during hours
when on-sale is permitted on Sunday as stated in §
112.061).
(1989 Code, § 5.51) (Ord. 47, 2nd Ser., passed 8-2-2005; Ord. 80, passed 6-26-
2017) Penalty, see §
112.999
LIQUOR AND ON-SALE WINE LICENSE RESTRICTIONS, REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTS
§ 112.090 LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES TO ONE PERSON OR PLACE.
   (A)   No off-sale liquor license may be issued to any one person for more
than one place in the city. Any person holding an interest in two or more
licenses in the city shall be deemed to hold more than one license.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the term INTEREST: 
      (1)   Includes any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation,
management or profits of a retail liquor establishment, and a person who
receives money from time to time directly or indirectly from a licensee, in the
absence of consideration and excluding gifts or donations, has a pecuniary
interest in the retail business; and
      (2)   Does not include loans; rental agreements; open accounts or other
obligations held with or without security arising out of the ordinary and
regular course of business of selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures,
supplies to the establishment; an interest in a corporation owning or operating
a hotel but having at least 150 or more rental units holding a liquor license
in conjunction therewith; or 10% or less interest in any other corporation
holding a license.
   (C)   In determining whether an “interest” exists, the transaction must have
been bona fide and the reasonable value of the goods and things received as
consideration for a payment by the licensee, and all other facts reasonably
tending to prove or disprove the existence of a purposeful scheme or
arrangement to evade the restrictions of this section must be considered.
(1989 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 1) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.091 LICENSES IN CONNECTION WITH PREMISES OF ANOTHER.
   A liquor license may not be issued to a person in connection with the
premises of another to whom a license could not be issued under the provisions
of this chapter. This section does not prevent the granting of a license to a
proper lessee because the person has leased the premises of a minor, a non-
citizen who is not a resident alien or a person who has been convicted of a
crime other than a violation of this chapter.
(1989 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 2) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.092 OFF-SALE LICENSES WHERE BEER IS SOLD.
   An off-sale liquor license may not be issued to a place where beer is sold
for consumption on the premises. This section does not apply to those places
where both an on-sale and off-sale license, or a combination license, have been
issued.
(1989 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 3) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.093 EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.
   No person under 18 years of age may sell or serve liquor or wine on licensed
premises.
(1989 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 4) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.094 PREMISES ELIGIBLE.
   On-sale wine licenses shall be granted only to restaurants as defined in
this chapter; provided, however, for purposes of this subchapter, the
restaurant shall have appropriate facilities for seating not less than 25
guests at one time.
(1989 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 5)
§ 112.095 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The Council may issue the number of licenses authorized by statute or
restrict the number from time to time as it may, in its discretion, deem
proper.
(1989 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 6)
CLUB LICENSES
§ 112.110 CLUB LICENSE RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      GUEST. A person not a member of the club but present on the club licensed
premises in the company of a host member.
      HOST MEMBER. A member who is entertaining a guest who is in the member’s
company at all times the guest is on the licensed premises.
      MEMBER. Any person in good standing according to rules and regulations of
the licensed club, wherever located, having evidence of current membership upon
his or her person.
   (B)   Daily register. In addition to all other general provisions,
restrictions and regulations set forth in this chapter, relating to beer or
liquor licensees, as the case may be, all club licensees shall keep a daily
register showing the names of guests present and the name of the host member.
The register shall be open to inspection by police officers at all times.
   (C)   Unlawful acts. The following are in addition to all other unlawful
acts set forth in this chapter relating to sales and purchases of beer or
liquor, as the case may be.
      (1)   It is unlawful for a club licensee to sell liquor or beer to any
person not a member, or a bona fide guest of a member, of the licensed club.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any club licensee to serve beer or liquor to any
non-member of the licensed club unless the non-member is a guest.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person who is not a member, or a bona fide
guest of a member, of the licensed club to purchase liquor or beer from the
club.
      (4)   It is unlawful for any club licensee to hinder or prevent a police
officer from determining compliance with this section and chapter and all other
laws.
      (5)   It is unlawful for any person to refuse, upon request of a licensee
or police officer, to provide information as to whether he or she is a member,
guest or host member, or to give false, fraudulent or misleading information in
response to the request.
(1989 Code, § 5.61) Penalty, see §
112.999
CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY LICENSES
§ 112.125 LICENSE REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Consumption and display license required. It is unlawful for any
business establishment or club, not holding an on-sale liquor license, to
directly or indirectly, or on any pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep
for sale or otherwise dispose of any liquid for the purpose of mixing the same
with liquor, or permit its members to bring and keep a personal supply of
liquor in lockers assigned to the members, without a license therefor from the
city.
   (B)   Consumption and display restrictions and regulations.
      (1)   Eligible licensees. If the applicant is otherwise eligible,
licenses may be issued only to persons who have not, within five years prior to
application, been convicted of a felony or of violating provisions of this
chapter or other law relating to the sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages;
a restaurant; a hotel; a beer licensee; a resort as defined by statute; or a
club or an unincorporated club otherwise meeting the definition of a club;
provided, that no license may be issued to a club holding an on-sale liquor
license.
      (2)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful to sell liquor on licensed premises.
      (3)   License expiration.  In order to coordinate the expiration of a
consumption and display license with a state permit, all licenses shall expire
on June 30 of each year.
      (4)   State permit required. Licenses shall be issued only to holders of
a consumption and display permit from the Commissioner.
      (5)   Lockers. A club to which a license is issued under this section may
allow members to bring and keep a personal supply of liquor in lockers on the
club’s premises. All bottles kept on the premises must have attached labels
signed by the member. No minor may keep a supply of liquor on club premises.
      (6)   Hours and days. No licensee may permit a person to consume or
display liquor, and no person may consume or display liquor, between 1:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon on Sundays and between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through
Saturday.
(1989 Code, § 5.70) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.126 ONE-DAY LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. Any nonprofit organization desiring to serve liquids
for the purpose of mixing with liquor and permitting the consumption and
display of liquor in conjunction with a social activity sponsored by it, shall
first obtain a license therefore from the city. It is unlawful for any
organization to fail to obtain the license.
   (B)   Term. The term of the license shall be no more than four days.
   (C)   Limitation on number. The city shall issue no more than ten licenses
in any calendar year.
   (D)   License fee. The fee for a temporary license is $25 per day requested.
   (E)   Approval. In addition to Council approval, the license must be
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(1989 Code, § 5.71) (Ord. 104, passed 6-4-2024) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.999 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1989 Code, § 5.99)
CHAPTER 113: TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
   
113.01   Purpose
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   License
   
113.04   Unlawful acts
   
113.05   Licensee responsibility
   
113.06   Compliance checks; inspections
   
113.07   Other illegal acts
   
113.08   License revocation
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 PURPOSE.
   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 21 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products and tobacco
related devices and the sales, possession and use are violations of both state
and federal laws; and because studies, which the city hereby accepts and
adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the
age of 21 years and that those persons who reach the age of 21 years without
having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and
because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health
problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of
government; this chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession and
use of tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or
lobelia delivery products and tobacco related devices for the purpose of
enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious
effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products and tobacco
related devices and to further the official public policy of the state in
regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in M.S. §
144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 95, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products and tobacco related devices are
following and complying with the requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE
CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this chapter.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase
tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products, or tobacco related devices for educational, research and
training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS
may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing
appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco,
tobacco products and tobacco related devices.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used
by a person to simulate smoking by delivery of nicotine or any other substance
through inhalation of vapor from the product, including any component part of
an electronic delivery device, whether or not it is sold or marketed
separately.
   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco
products shall include but not be limited to single cigarette packs, single
bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form and single cans or other packaging of
snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this definition shall not be
considered individually packaged.
   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged
cigarette.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 21 years.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck,
van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a
fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for
sales transactions.
   NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCTS. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption (or any part of such
product) that is not tobacco or an electronic delivery device.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or tobacco
related devices are available for sale to the general public. The phrase shall
include but not be limited to grocery stores, convenience stores, and
restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or tobacco
related devices in any manner where  any person shall have access to the
tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products, or tobacco related devices, without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or
intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco
product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or
tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. The
phrase shall not include vending machines. Self-service sales are interpreted
as being any sale where there is not an actual physical exchange of the tobacco
between the clerk and the customer.
   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Includes electronic delivery devices, nicotine
or lobelia delivery products, commonly called an electronic cigarette or an E-
cigarette and any substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including but not
limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, fine cut or other chewing
tobacco, cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-
rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff flowers, cavendish, shorts, plug and
twist tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in a
manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES. Includes electronic delivery devices, nicotine or
lobelia delivery products, commonly called an electronic cigarette or an E-
cigarette and any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers or other
device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables
the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices,
nicotine or lobelia delivery product, or tobacco related devices upon the
insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the machine
by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco
related device.
(Ord. 95, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 113.03 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco,
tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery
products, or tobacco related device without first having obtained a license to
do so from the city.
   (B)   Number of licenses. The city shall issue no more than five separate
licenses. They are issued generally on a first come, first served basis. Any
applicant with prior violations is considered as a last priority.
   (C)   Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco or tobacco
products shall be made on a form provided by the city. Upon receipt of a
completed application, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall forward the
application to the Police Department for the purpose of conducting a background
check on the applicant. The Police Department shall have ten days from receipt
of a complete application to complete the background check. Upon completion of
the background check, the Police Department shall forward the application and
investigation results to the City Council for action at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. If the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer determines that an
application is incomplete, he/she shall return the application to the applicant
with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
   (D)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it
may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the
City Council approves the license, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license,
notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the
applicant's right to appeal the decision.
   (E)   License fee. No license shall be issued under this chapter until the
appropriate license fee is paid in full. The annual fee for a license under
this chapter shall be established in the city's ordinance establishing fees and
charges, as may be amended from time to time. Initial license applications
covering a period of less than one year shall be charged a fee calculated on a
monthly pro rata basis.
   (F)   Restriction on issuance.
      (1)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. In the event an
action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Ch. 278, as it may
be amended from time to time, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the
Council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this
division. No waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof
which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due.
      (2)   No license shall be granted if the applicant, responsible party,
owner, manager, or any other person involved with the application:
         (a)   Is under the age of 21;
         (b)   Who is not of good moral character and repute;
         (c)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or
tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding five years of the date of
application; or
         (d)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of
any violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance provision or other
regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices.
      (3)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall
be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license
under this chapter.
   (G)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December
31 of each year.
   (H)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter.
   (I)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or
person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Council.
   (J)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be
licensed under this chapter.
   (K)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premises.
   (L)   Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days but not more than 60 days before the
expiration of the current license.
   (M)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license
issued under this chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute
right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal
of the license.
(Ord. 95, passed 12-20-2022) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Prohibited sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
device:
      (1)   To any person under the age of 21 years;
      (2)   By means of any type of vending machine;
      (3)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need
to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in
order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery devices,
nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related device and whereby
there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
device between the licensee, or the licensee's employee, and the customer;
      (4)   By means of loosies;
      (5)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, belladonna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances, except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured
cigarettes, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products
or other tobacco products;
      (6)   By any other means, to any other person or in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision or
other regulation.
   (B)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person to attempt to disguise his/her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
   (C)   Unlawful purchases. It shall be unlawful for any person who is under
the age of 21 years to purchase tobacco or tobacco products. Persons acting
under the direct supervision of the city, law enforcement, or other
governmental unit and which are actively engaged in a compliance check of the
licensed premises are exempted from this provision while engaged in the
compliance check.
   (D)   Distribution of tobacco or tobacco product samples. It shall be
unlawful for any licensee or any person, business or retailer to distribute or
give away tobacco or tobacco products free of charge to any person.
(Ord. 95, passed 12-20-2022) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Actions of employees. All licensees under this chapter shall be
responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the
sale of an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license
holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from
also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this
chapter, state or federal law or other applicable law or regulation.
   (B)   Maintenance standards. The property shall conform to all building and
zoning requirements of the City of Aurora and the laws of the State of
Minnesota. The storefront must be kept in a clean and orderly manner. No
customers or employees may cause a nuisance to neighboring properties.
(Ord. 95, passed 12-20-2022) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.06 COMPLIANCE CHECKS; INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the East Range Police
Department or other authorized city official during regular business hours.
From time to time, the East Range Police Department or city may conduct
compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or
guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than 21 years to enter the
licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised
by East Range Police Department designated law enforcement officers or other
designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be
guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices when
those items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in
compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting
the minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall
answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her
employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or
she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks
authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research or training
purposes or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
(Ord. 95, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 113.07 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter:
   (A)   Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related device to any
minor.
   (B)   Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
device. This division shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a
compliance check.
   (C)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to
smoke, chew, snuff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
device.
   (D)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco,
tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery
products or tobacco related device, and it shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain those items on behalf of a
minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to
coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco,
tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery
products or tobacco related device. This division shall not apply to minors
lawfully involved in a compliance check.
   (E)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
   (F)   Child resistant packaging. It shall be a violation of this chapter to
sell, purchase or possess any liquid intended for human consumption and use is
an electronic delivery device which has not been sold or purchased in child
resistant packaging as defined in CFR, Title 16, Section 1700.15(b)(l).
   (G)   Public buildings. It shall be a violation of this chapter to use or
operate any electronic delivery device in any building owned or operated by the
City of Aurora.
(Ord. 95, passed 12-20-2022) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.08 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Every tobacco license is subject to revocation for violations of this
section or any other provision of Minnesota or City of Aurora ordinances.
   (A)   Violations. Violations of this section shall be reported to the City
Clerk's Office. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall review the
violation and provide written notice to the license holder of the violation and
any necessary remedial actions.
   (B)   Revocation. If a license holder fails to correct a violation or
receives three violations within any 12 month period, the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer shall recommend revocation of the license to the City Council.
The City Council and City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall provide written
notice to the owner and any registered agent of the revocation. The notice
shall inform the owner and agent of the right to appeal the decision to the
Aurora City Council.
   (C)   Appeal. A license holder aggrieved by the revocation of a license may
appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City
Clerk's office within ten days after date of issuance of the written revocation
notice, a written statement requesting a hearing before the City Council and
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. A hearing shall be held within
30 days of receipt of the request. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the
City Clerk's Office in writing, setting forth the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the license holder at
his/her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for
hearing.
   (D)   Effect of revocation. If a license is revoked, it shall be unlawful
for anyone to thereafter allow any new sale of tobacco or tobacco products
until such time as a tobacco license is issued by the city. No person who has
had a license revoked under this section shall be issued a tobacco license for
five years from the date of revocation.
(Ord. 95, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   All persons violating any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 95, passed 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 114: FOOD AND BEVERAGE BUSINESSES
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   License requirement
   
114.04   Exemptions
   
114.05   Conditions of licensing
   
114.06   Suspension or revocation of a license
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is designed to permit the reasonable use of mobile food units
and food carts on publicly owned property, including streets and rights-of-way,
while preventing any adverse consequences to residents, businesses, and public
property.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and terms when used for this license shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. (1) A self-contained food service operation, located in a
motorized, wheeled or towed vehicle, that is readily movable without
disassembling and that is used to store, prepare, display, or serve food
intended for individual portion service; or (2) a mobile food unit as defined
in M.S. § 157.15, Subd. 9.
   FOOD CART. A food and beverage service establishment that is a non-motorized
vehicle that is self-propelled by the operator.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 114.03 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Type of license. Each applicant must indicate whether it is applying
for a temporary license or an annual license for any number of days in the
calendar year. A temporary license allows mobile food unit or food cart
operations in the city for up to seven days total during a calendar year. An
annual license allows mobile food unit or food cart operations in the city for
20 days or more during any calendar year. A licensee will only be issued one
temporary license per calendar year; however, nothing shall prohibit a
temporary licensee from applying for an annual license within the same year.
   (B)   License fees. Fees for both temporary and annual licenses are set
forth in the city’s fee schedule.
   (C)   License application requirements. It is unlawful for any person to
operate a mobile food unit or a food cart on publicly-owned property in the
city, including streets and rights-of-way, without first obtaining a license
from the city. An application for a license shall be filed, along with the
required fee, with the City Clerk. The applicant must be the owner of the
mobile food unit or food cart. The application shall be made on a form supplied
by the city and shall contain information requested by the city, including the
following:
      (1)   Name of the owner and operator (if different than the owner) of the
mobile food unit or food cart and permanent and temporary home and business
addresses;
      (2)   The applicant’s full legal name, date of birth, and driver’s
license number;
      (3)   A description of the nature of the business, the goods to be sold
and the license plate number and description for any motorized or unmotorized
vehicle to be used in conjunction with the activity;
      (4)   If applying only for a temporary permit, the applicant must provide
the exact dates and locations for each day up to seven days of proposed mobile
food unit or food cart operations;
      (5)   A phone number and email address of the applicant, with a
designation of a preferred mailing address for notices related to the license;
      (6)   The name, address, and contact information for the commissary with
which the mobile food unit or food cart is affiliated, if applicable;
      (7)   A certificate of insurance by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the State of Minnesota, evidencing the following forms of
insurance:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, with a limit of not less
than $1,000,000 each occurrence. If such insurance contains an annual aggregate
limit, the annual aggregate limit shall be not less than $2,000,000;
         (b)   Automobile liability insurance with a limit of not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit. The insurance shall cover liability arising
out of any auto, including owned, hired and non-owned vehicles;
         (c)   Workers compensation insurance (statutory limits) or evidence of
exemption from state law; and
         (d)   The city shall be endorsed as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability certificate of insurance; and
         (e)   Coverage afforded under the policies shall not be cancelled
without at least 30 days’ advanced written notice to the city, or ten days’
written notice for non-payment of premium.
      (8)   A signed statement that the licensee shall hold harmless the city
and its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the city and its officers
and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which
may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the license;
      (9)   A site plan that includes: number of off-street parking spaces,
description of food truck or food cart, location on the site where the food
truck/trailer or food cart will be set up;
      (10)   A copy of each related license or permit if applicable issued by
St. Louis County and the State of Minnesota required to operate a mobile food
unit or food cart; and
      (11)   A copy of the applicant’s state sales tax ID number.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 114.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Community events approved and licensed or permitted by the City
Council, provided that participating vendors are covered by the event license
or permit and are otherwise compliant with the Minnesota Department of Health
standards.
   (B)   Children conducting a neighborhood lemonade stand or similar type with
parent’s approval.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 114.05 CONDITIONS OF LICENSING
   A mobile food unit or food cart may only operate if compliant with the
following:
   (A)   Locations. A mobile food unit or food cart may only operate in the
locations set forth in this section. A mobile food unit or food cart may only
operate in commercial and industrial zoning districts, and must be placed on
either concrete or bituminous unless otherwise approved by the city. A mobile
food unit or food cart may only operate in a city park or on city property with
the prior written approval of the city; additional permits may be required for
such operations.
   (B)   Performance standards. A mobile food unit or food cart licensee is
subject to the following performance standards:
      (1)   Applicable license fee shall be paid.
      (2)   Only food and non-alcoholic beverages shall be sold.
      (3)   A mobile food unit or food cart shall be operated in strict
compliance with the laws, rules and regulations of the United States, State of
Minnesota, St. Louis County and the City of Aurora.
      (4)   Wastewater or gray water may not be drained into city storm water
drains.
      (5)   A mobile food unit or food cart shall provide and maintain at least
one clearly designated waste container for customer use per each food cart or
mobile food unit. The operator of a mobile food unit or food cart is
responsible for daily removal of trash, litter, recycling, and refuse. Public
trash cans shall not be used to dispose of waste generated by the operation.
The permittee shall provide a garbage receptacle with a tight-fitting lid. The
receptacle shall be easily accessible for customer use, and located within five
feet of the unit. The permittee shall be responsible for collecting any visible
trash or other debris from mobile food unit or food cart operations within a
100 foot circumference of the unit, which patrons have not properly disposed
of.
      (6)   A mobile food unit must provide a power supply that is screened
from public view and that complies with pertinent city noise regulations.
Electrical cords and hook ups to public utilities are not permitted.
      (7)   A mobile food unit or food cart may operate between 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. and must not create any unnecessary noise, disturbances, or disrupt
public traffic or safety in any way. An exemption to hours may be authorized by
City Council on a per event basis.
      (8)   Mobile food units or food carts shall be allowed to set up one hour
prior to conducting food vending and shall exit from the site within one hour
of the close of conducting business. The licensee shall ensure that the site is
free of refuse and debris prior to exiting the site.
      (9)   A mobile food unit or food cart may have a maximum footprint of 300
square feet unless otherwise approved by the city.
      (10)   One “A” frame sign not exceeding 12 square feet per side is
permitted during operation, not to impede on vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      (11)   Operators must clean around their mobile food unit or food cart at
the end of each day and the mobile food unit or food cart must be kept in good
repair and have a neat appearance.
      (12)   A mobile food unit or food cart operator must be licensed by the
Minnesota Department of Health and proof of the Minnesota Department of Health
licensing must be provided and posted on the mobile food unit or food cart.
      (13)   An out of service mobile food unit or food cart stored within the
city must comply with all applicable zoning ordinance requirements.
      (14)   A mobile food unit or food cart may not operate within 100 feet
from the public entrance to any restaurant and/or any portion of a restaurant’s
outdoor dining area during that restaurant’s hours of operation unless the
licensee obtains written permission from the restaurant owner/manager.
      (15)   Mobile food units or food carts cannot locate within 300 feet from
the perimeter of any pre-approved festival, sporting event or civic event
unless a license is issued to be a part of the festival or event.
      (16)   Mobile food units or food carts shall not be left on city property
after the daily hours of operation, except as otherwise provided by city code
pertaining to vehicle parking.
      (17)   A mobile food unit or food cart may not operate in city-owned
parking lots, except those parking lots adjacent to or inside a city park with
the approval of a special event permit.
      (18)   Free-standing food tents, not associated with a mobile food unit
or food cart, are not allowed on city-owned property unless they have obtained
a special event permit; or, unless they are operating through an organization
that has already obtained such permit.
   (C)   Non-transferable license. A mobile food unit or food cart license is
non-transferable. Proof of license shall be displayed at all times in the
mobile food unit or food cart.
   (D)   Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for any person engaged in the
business of a mobile food unit or food cart operation to do any of the
following:
      (1)   Call attention to that licensee’s business by crying out, blowing a
horn, ringing a bell, loud music, or by any loud or unusual noise, or by use of
any amplifying device;
      (2)   Fail to display proof of license and produce valid identification
when requested;
      (3)   Leave a mobile food unit or food cart unattended or at an
authorized location outside allowed hours of operation;
      (4)   Operate the mobile food unit or food cart in or on public sidewalks
or trails;
      (5)   Obstruct the ingress or egress from commercial buildings during the
building hours of operation;
      (6)   Claim endorsements by the city; or
      (7)   Conduct business in any manner as to create a threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of a specific individual or the general public.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 114.06 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.
   A license issued pursuant to this section may be suspended by the city if
the licensee has violated the terms of this chapter, or is otherwise conducting
business in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, fraudulent
conduct, or any other conduct that is prohibited by local, state or federal
laws or regulations. Falsification of information required for a license is
also grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a license. The license
shall be automatically revoked if the licensee does not file an appeal pursuant
to this section. When taking action on any license issued under this chapter,
the city shall provide the licensee with verbal or written notice of the
violation. The notice shall inform the licensee of its right to be heard before
the City Council. The notice shall also inform the licensee that the license
shall be automatically revoked if no appeal is filed within 21 days of the date
of the notice by the city. Verbal notice shall be confirmed within five days by
a mailed written notice to the licensee. The City Council shall not conduct a
hearing on a suspension or revocation unless a request is made by the next City
Council meeting. No City Council resolution or other notice calling for a
hearing shall be required.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   All mobile food trucks or food carts shall, at all times when so engaged,
carry their license on their person. All other licensees shall post their
licenses in their food trucks near the licensed activity; the city may provide
a sticker for the current license year which shall be affixed to each machine
or device requiring the sticker. All licensees shall display their licenses
upon demand by any officer or citizen.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-15-2025)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Offenses Against the Peace
   
130.01   Dangerous trespasses and other acts
   
130.02   Disorderly conduct
   
130.03   Disorderly conduct on school grounds and in school buildings
   
130.04   Curfew for minors
Offenses Against Public Property
   
130.15   Rules and regulations governing public parks
   
130.16   Obstructions on public property
Hazardous Conditions
   
130.30   Preamble
   
130.31   Unlawful acts and enforcement
   
130.32   Investigation and notice of hearing
   
130.33   Service of notice
   
130.34   Hearing, findings and decision
   
130.35   City to abate
   
130.36   City disposal
   
130.37   Allocation of proceeds and assessment
   
130.38   Failure to abate nuisance on business premises
Dangerous Weapons and Articles
   
130.50   Acts prohibited; exception
   
130.51   Discharge of firearms and explosives; exception
   
130.52   Possession and sale of fireworks
   
130.53   Exposure of unused container
   
130.54   Use of bow and arrow
Synthetic or Alternative Drugs
   
130.60   Prohibitions
   
130.61   Definitions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE
§ 130.01 DANGEROUS TRESPASSES AND OTHER ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Smoke in the presence of explosives or inflammable materials, or in a
building or area in which “No Smoking” notices have been prominently posted;
   (B)   Interfere with or obstruct the prevention or extinguishing of any
fire, or disobey the lawful orders of a law enforcement officer or firefighter
present at the fire;
   (C)   Show a false light or signal or interfere with any light, signal or
sign controlling or guiding traffic upon a highway, railway track or navigable
water;
   (D)   Place an obstruction upon a railroad track;
   (E)   Expose another or his or her property to an obnoxious or harmful gas,
fluid or substance, with intent to injure, molest or coerce;
   (F)   Trespass or permit animals under his or her control to trespass upon a
railroad track;
   (G)   Permit domestic animals or fowls under his or her control to go upon
the lands of another within the city;
   (H)   Interfere unlawfully with any monument, sign or pointer erected or
marked to designate a point of a boundary, line or a political subdivision or a
tract of land;
   (I)   Trespass upon the premises of another, and without claim of right
refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the lawful possessor;
   (J)   Occupy or enter the dwelling of another, without claim of right,
consent of the owner, or the consent of one who has the right to give consent,
except in an emergency situation;
   (K)   Enter the premises of another with intent to take or injure any fruit,
fruit trees or vegetables growing thereon without the permission of the owner
or occupant; or
   (L)   Without the permission of the owner tamper with or get into or upon a
motor vehicle, or ride in or upon the motor vehicle knowing it was taken and is
being driven by another without the permission of the owner.
(1989 Code, § 10.20) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing or
having reasonable grounds to know that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger
or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach of the peace, to do the
following:
   (A)   Engage in brawling or fighting;
   (B)   Disturb an assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its character;
   (C)   Engage in offensive, obscene or abusive language or in boisterous and
noisy conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or resentment in
others;
   (D)   Willfully and lewdly expose his or her person or the private parts
thereof, or procure another to so expose himself or herself; and any open or
gross lewdness or lascivious behavior or any act of public indecency;
   (E)   Whether or not posted with signs so prohibiting, voluntarily enter the
waters of any river or public swimming pool at any time when the waters are not
properly supervised by trained life-saving personnel in attendance for that
purpose, or enter the waters without being garbed in a bathing suit sufficient
to cover his or her person and equal to the standards generally adopted and
accepted by the public;
   (F)   Urinate or defecate in a place other than:
      (1)   If on public property, then in a plumbing fixture provided for that
purpose;
      (2)   If on the private property of another, then in a plumbing fixture
provided for that purpose; or
      (3)   If on private property not owned or controlled by another, then
within a building.
   (G)   Cause the making or production of an unnecessary noise by shouting or
by any other means or mechanism, including the blowing of any automobile or
other vehicle horn;
   (H)   Use a sound amplifier upon streets and public property without prior
written permission from the city;
   (I)   Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy or endanger
others;
   (J)   Cause defacement, destruction or otherwise damage to any premises or
any property located thereon;
   (K)   Strew, scatter, litter, throw, dispose of or deposit any refuse,
garbage or rubbish onto any premises except into receptacles provided for that
purpose;
   (L)   Enter any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the owner or
operator; or
   (M)   Fail or refuse to vacate or leave any premises after being requested
or ordered, whether orally or in writing, to do so, by the owner, or person in
charge thereof, or by any law enforcement agent or official; provided, however,
that this provision shall not apply to any person who is owner or tenant of the
premises involved, nor to any law enforcement or other government official who
may be present thereon at that time as part of his or her official duty; nor
shall it include the spouse, children, employee or tenant of the owner or
occupier.
(1989 Code, § 10.21) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT ON SCHOOL GROUNDS AND IN SCHOOL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Defacement of school buildings.  It is unlawful for any person to mark
with ink, paint, chalk or other substance, post handbills on or in any other
manner deface or injure any school building or structure used or usable for
school purposes; mark, deface or injure fences, trees, lawns or fixtures
appurtenant to or located on the site of the buildings; or post handbills on
the fences, trees or fixtures, or place a sign anywhere on the site.
   (B)   Breach of peace on school grounds.  It is unlawful for any person to
willfully or maliciously make or assist in making on any school grounds
adjacent to any school building or structure any noise, disturbance or improper
diversion or activity by which peace, quiet and good order shall be disturbed.
   (C)   Offensive language and conduct. It is unlawful for any person to use
offensive, obscene or abusive language or engage in boisterous or noisy conduct
tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or resentment in others on any school
grounds or in buildings or structures.
   (D)   Improper conduct while school in session. It is unlawful for any
person, in any school room or in any building or on the grounds adjacent to the
same, to disturb or interrupt the peace and good order of the school while in
session. It is also unlawful for any person, not in immediate attendance in the
school and being in the building or upon the premises belonging thereto, to
conduct or behave himself or herself improperly. It is also unlawful for any
person, upon the request of a teacher of the school or the person in charge
thereof to leave the building or premises, to neglect or refuse so to do.
   (E)   Loitering. It is unlawful for any person to loiter on any school
grounds or in any school building or structure.
(1989 Code, § 10.22) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock used by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor.
The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours. It is unlawful for any minor person to be or loiter upon the
streets or public places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the
day following from September 1 to June 1 next following, except on Friday and
Saturday nights when the hours shall be from 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the
day following, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the day
following from June 1 to September 1 next following.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business, trade, profession or occupation and the minor’s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor’s presence at work.
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor's
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor.
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew.
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city's designated law enforcement provider about the minor's presence.
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian,
or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section applies.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city's designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (I)   Law enforcement officer. A law enforcement officer must look into
whether a minor has an affirmative defense before making an arrest.
(1989 Code, § 10.23) (Ord. 13, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-9-1994) Penalty, see §
130.99
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 130.15 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING PUBLIC PARKS.
   (A)   Establishment.  Recreation areas and picnic grounds on lands owned by
the city and known as Pine Grove Recreation Area are hereby established and
shall include all other city recreation areas.
   (B)   Rules and regulations governing the use. It is unlawful for any person
using the picnic grounds or recreation areas of Pine Grove Recreation Area and
all other city recreation areas to fail to comply with the following rules and
regulations:
      (1)   Maintain the picnic grounds and recreational areas in a clean,
orderly and sanitary condition at all times, and shall deposit all garbage,
refuse and debris in the containers located in the areas as provided for by the
city;
      (2)   No animals, except household pets, shall be permitted in any of the
areas, and dogs, cats or other animals or pets shall not be permitted to run
loose;
      (3)   No fires of any kind shall be permitted in any area except in the
grills provided for in the picnic areas;
      (4)   It is unlawful to remove any object or property from any area; to
destroy, mutilate or deface any property within the Pine Grove Recreation Area
or any other city recreation area; to cut any tree or peel the bark of any tree
in the areas; or to make any excavations without the consent of the city;
      (5)   No firearms shall be discharged within any of the city recreation
areas;
      (6)   No person shall create any disturbance, engage in brawling or
fighting; disturb any meeting of persons using the recreation areas; engage in
offensive, obscene or abusive language or conduct himself or herself in a
boisterous or noisy manner tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or
resentment in others;
      (7)   No motor vehicle shall travel into the Pine Grove Recreation Area
except with permission;
      (8)   No overnight camping in the Pine Grove Recreation Area or any other
city recreation area; and
      (9)   No one shall loiter in the recreation area after 10:30 p.m.
(1989 Code, § 10.30) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 OBSTRUCTIONS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, display
or offer for sale any fence, goods or other obstructions upon, over, across or
under any public property without first having obtained a written permit from
the Council, and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and
conditions of the permit, and taking precautionary measures for the protection
of the public. An electrical cord or device of any kind is hereby included, but
not by way of limitation, within the definition of an obstruction.
   (B)   Fires. It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire upon
public property.
   (C)   Dumping on public property. It is unlawful for any person to throw or
deposit on public property any nails, dirt, glass or glassware, cans, discarded
cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or tree limbs, paper or
paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other petroleum products, or
to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemicals thereon. It is
a violation of this section to place or store any building materials or waste
resulting from building construction or demolition on public property without
first having obtained a written permit from the Council.
   (D)   Signs and other structures. It is unlawful for any person to place or
maintain a sign, advertisement or other structure on public property without
first having obtained a written permit from the Council.
   (E)   Snow or ice on public property. It is unlawful for any person not
acting under a contract with the city to dump snow or ice on public property.
   (F)   Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in violation
of this section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such.
   (G)   Condition.  Before granting any permit under any of the provisions of
this section, the Council may impose any insurance or bonding conditions
thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public or private property
or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding the persons and property. The
insurance or bond shall also protect the city from any suit, action or cause of
action arising by reason of the obstruction.
(1989 Code, § 10.31) Penalty, see §
130.99
HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS
§ 130.30 PREAMBLE.
   (A)   Private property. The Council finds that accumulation on private
property of unlicensed, unregistered or inoperable motor vehicles, household
furniture, furnishings or appliances or parts or components thereof, or metal,
wood, glass, paper, rubber, concrete or other material, whether organic or
inorganic, can facilitate the growth or spread of noxious weeds, the nesting
and breeding of rodents, insects and harmful bacteria, and be a threat of fire.
The Council also finds that unless the accumulation is stored in a lawfully
operated junk yard, housed within a lawfully erected building, or in a
container permitted and the contents disposed of under provisions of the city
code, it is a source of filth, cause of sickness and an immediate danger to the
health, safety and welfare of persons and property in the city. The Council
finds that if the unauthorized, unwholesome and dangerous accumulation is
permitted to continue to pose a threat, it is a hazardous condition and a
nuisance and must be abated, and this section is adopted to protect the
residents of the city and their property and, in addition, to protect the
rights of persons who may be found in violation of its provisions.
ACCUMULATION, as that term is used in this division (A), means prohibited items
in any number or amount.
   (B)   Business premises. The Council finds that accumulation, upon premises
to which the public has access or may be exposed, of food particles or other
material causing discomfort to patrons, or disrepair of seating, floor
covering, plumbing, heating or electrical facilities, or failure to maintain a
reasonable standard of cleanliness and absence of noxious odors, can facilitate
the nesting and breeding of rodents, insects and harmful bacteria and is a
source of filth, cause of sickness and an immediate danger to the health,
safety and welfare of persons and property in the city. The Council finds that
if the unauthorized, unwholesome and dangerous accumulation is permitted to
continue to pose a threat, it is a hazardous condition and a nuisance and must
be abated, and this section is adopted to protect the residents of the city and
their property and, in addition, to protect the rights of persons who may be
harmed in violation of its provisions. ACCUMULATION, as that term is used in
this division (B), means prohibited items or conditions in any number or
amount.
(1989 Code, § 10.32, Subd. 1)
§ 130.31 UNLAWFUL ACTS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It is unlawful to park or store any unlicensed, unregistered or
inoperable motor vehicle, household furniture, furnishings or appliances, or
parts or components thereof, or scrap metal, wood, glass, paper, rubber,
concrete or other material, whether organic or inorganic, on private property,
unless the accumulation is stored within a lawfully operated junk yard, housed
within a lawfully erected building, or in a container permitted and the
contents disposed of under other provisions of the city code.
   (B)   It is unlawful to permit, on premises to which the public has access
or may be exposed, any accumulation of food particles or other material causing
discomfort to patrons; disrepair of seating, floor covering, plumbing, heating
or electrical facilities; or failure to maintain a reasonable standard of
cleanliness and absence of noxious odors.
   (C)   As to any provision of this section which constitutes an unlawful act,
and in addition to all of the civil proceedings described in this section, each
day that a violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense in prosecution of the unlawful act.
(1989 Code, § 10.32, Subd. 2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.32 INVESTIGATION AND NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Upon receipt of any complaint of violation of §
130.31 or on its own initiative, but at least annually during the month of May,
the Council shall investigate the premises and if it is found that there is a
hazardous condition and a nuisance on any premises in violation of this
section, the same shall be reported to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
who shall prepare a notice of hearing on order to abate nuisance addressed to
owners, tenants, mortgagees and other lienholders, all of whose interests are
known to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or appear of record, and
bearing the legal description of the premises on which the alleged violation
appears. The notice shall state the date, time and place of hearing and
describe the violation in general terms.
(1989 Code, § 10.32, Subd. 3)
§ 130.33 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (A)   The notice shall be served at least 20 days before the date of hearing
in the following manner:
      (1)   If the person to whom it is addressed resides in the city, or can
readily be found therein, it shall be served personally on the addressee or
left at his or her residence with a person of suitable age and discretion;
      (2)   Addressees not served personally shall be served by certified mail
at their addresses appearing in records of the county; and
      (3)   By publication of the notice once in the official newspaper at
least ten days prior to the date of hearing.
   (B)   Inadvertent failure to serve any addressee personally or by certified
mail shall not invalidate the proceedings, but publication shall then suffice.
(1989 Code, § 10.32, Subd. 4)
§ 130.34 HEARING, FINDINGS AND DECISION.
   (A)   The hearing shall be held before the Council at a regular or special
meeting and conducted in the same manner as an administrative appeal. All
persons desiring to be heard shall be afforded an opportunity to present
evidence.
   (B)   At any time after the hearing is closed, but at least at its next
regular meeting, the Council shall decide whether or not the item or items
constitute a nuisance in violation of this section and direct the drawing and
serving of findings of fact and decision by certified mail on all addressees.
If the Council finds that there is a violation, the decision shall include an
order to abate the nuisance and specify the date by which the abatement shall
be completed.
   (C)   Estimated value, if any, of all offensive items described in §
130.31(A) shall be included in the evidence and in the findings. VALUE, for the
purpose of this section, means the amount of money, in cash, which can be
obtained in a negotiated sale on a known and ready market in the city.
(1989 Code, § 10.32, Subd. 5)
§ 130.35 CITY TO ABATE.
   If abatement of the items described in §
130.31(A) is not completed by the date stated in the order to abate nuisance,
the city may enter upon the premises, in accordance with §
10.20, remove the offending item or items and clean up the nuisance.
(1989 Code, § 10.32, Subd. 6)
§ 130.36 CITY DISPOSAL.
   If the city abates the nuisance it shall dispose of the items as follows:
   (A)   Any item or items of value shall be sold locally in a negotiated sale;
and
   (B)   Items of no value shall be disposed of in a landfill or other site
acceptable to governmental regulatory authority.
(1989 Code, § 10.32, Subd. 7)
§ 130.37 ALLOCATION OF PROCEEDS AND ASSESSMENT.
   If the city abates the nuisance, all costs thereof, including but not
limited to cost of sale, if any, shall be aggregated, sale proceeds deducted
and the remainder certified as a special assessment.
(1989 Code, § 10.32, Subd. 8)
§ 130.38 FAILURE TO ABATE NUISANCE ON BUSINESS PREMISES.
   If the hazardous condition and nuisance described in §
130.31(B) are not abated within the time limited, all present licenses issued
by the city to carry on the business on those premises shall be revoked, and no
future license shall be issued therefor until full abatement has been
completed.
(1989 Code, § 10.32, Subd. 9) Penalty, see §
130.99
DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES
§ 130.50 ACTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Prohibition.  It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or
explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;
      (2)   Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or
killing a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;
      (3)   Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon known as a
slung-shot or sand club;
      (4)   Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switchblade
knife opening automatically;
      (5)   Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of
being used unlawfully as a weapon against another;
      (6)   Sell or have in his or her possession any device designed to
silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm;
      (7)   Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under 14 years of age to
handle or use, outside of the parent’s or guardian’s presence, a firearm or air
gun of any kind, or any ammunition or explosive;
      (8)   Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm, air gun,
ammunition or explosive without the written consent of his or her parent or
guardian or of the Police Department; or
      (9)   Possess, sell, transfer or have in possession for sale or transfer
any weapon commonly known as a throwing star, nun chuck or sharp stud.    For
the purpose of this division (B)(9), the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         NUN CHUCK.  A pair of wood sticks or metallic rods separated by chain
links attached to one end of each stick or rod.
         SHARP STUD. A circular piece of metal attached to a wrist band, glove,
belt or other material which protrudes one-fourth inch or more from the
material to which it is attached, and with the protruding portion pyramidal in
shape, sharp or pointed.
         THROWING STAR. A circular metallic device with any number of points
projecting from the edge.
(1989 Code, § 10.03, Subd. 1)
   (B)   Exception. Nothing in division (A) of this section shall prohibit the
possession of the articles therein mentioned if the purpose of the possession
is for public exhibition by museums or collectors of art.
(1989 Code, § 10.03, Subd. 2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.51 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any cannon, gun,
pistol or other firearm, firecracker, sky rocket or other fireworks, air gun,
air rifle or other similar device commonly referred to as a B-B gun.
(1989 Code, § 10.03, Subd. 3)
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section shall apply to a display of
fireworks by an organization or group of organizations authorized in writing by
the Council, to a peace officer in the discharge of his or her duty, or to a
person in the lawful defense of his or her person or family. This section shall
not apply to the discharge of firearms in a range authorized in writing by the
Council.
(1989 Code, § 10.03, Subd. 4) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.52 POSSESSION AND SALE OF FIREWORKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess or have in possession for the
purpose of sale, except as allowed in §
130.51(B), any firecrackers, sky rockets or other fireworks.
(1989 Code, § 10.03, Subd. 5) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.53 EXPOSURE OF UNUSED CONTAINER.
   It is unlawful for any person, being the owner or in possession or control
thereof, to permit an unused refrigerator, ice box or other container,
sufficiently large to retain any child and with doors which fasten
automatically when closed, to expose the same accessible to children, without
removing the doors, lids, hinges or latches.
(1989 Code, § 10.03, Subd. 6) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.54 USE OF BOW AND ARROW.
   It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow except in the
physical education program in a school supervised by a member of its faculty, a
community-wide supervised class or event specifically authorized by the Chief
of Police, or a bow and arrow range authorized by the Council.
(1989 Code, § 10.03, Subd. 7) Penalty, see §
130.99
SYNTHETIC OR ALTERNATIVE DRUGS
§ 130.60 PROHIBITIONS.
   A person is guilty of a violation of this subchapter if they sell, possess,
transfer, or manufacture any substance or product containing any quantity of
synthetic or alternative drug as defined under this subchapter.
   (A)   All substances made unlawful by this subchapter shall constitute
contraband, subject to immediate seizure by law enforcement and shall be
destroyed upon a conviction for a violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   The substances defined in this subchapter shall not include
medications or substances for which the possessing party holds a valid
prescription or beer, wine, or intoxicating liquors as defined by local, state,
and federal laws.
   (C)   Products commercially available and sold which have common, proven and
lawful uses under local, state, and federal law shall not be deemed unlawful by
this subchapter. Such examples are prescription and over the counter
medications, health supplements where the ingredients are listed on the
packaging, food and drink products, etc.
   (D)   In addition to the definitions provided in this subchapter, the
following additional factors shall be considered in making the determination if
a substance is unlawful under this subchapter:
      (1)   Scope of legitimate uses of the product;
      (2)   Physical and testimonial evidence provided by officers and
prosecutors regarding known uses of the product;
      (3)   Statements made by persons selling, possessing, and using the
product;
      (4)   Availability of the product to include types and number of area
businesses selling it;
      (5)   The ratio of the price of the product compared to the quantity
sold; and
      (6)   The proximity of the product in relation to devices used to ingest
or consume controlled substances.
(Ord. 70, passed 9-2-2014) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.61 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MANUFACTURE. To complete, blend, formulate, package, repackage, or develop
by any means any substance made unlawful by this subchapter.
   POSSESSION. To possess on one’s own person or possession by a person
exercising dominion or control over the immediate area where contraband is
found whether in a vehicle, vessel, container, dwelling, building, or other
structure, whether upon public or private property.
   SALE/TRANSFER. To offer for sale, to advertise for sale, to sell, to
distribute, to furnish, to transfer, to barter, or to exchange to any person or
entity with or without an exchange of compensation or service.
   SYNTHETIC/ALTERNATIVE DRUG. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any substance containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant,
psychedelic, depressant, or hallucinogenic;
      (2)   Salvia Divinorum or any substance known by this name or any version
of this name;
      (3)   Substances described as herbal blends, botanical blends, botanical
sachet, herbal sachet, herbal potpourri, herbal incense, spice, salts, or any
blend or combination of these, regardless of if the substance is marketed as
"not for human consumption" which if ingested causes intoxication, euphoria,
giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner changes, distorts,
or disturbs the auditory, visual, or mental process;
      (4)   Any substance defined in subsequent portions of this subchapter;
      (5)   Any substance which has a stimulant, depressant, psychedelic,
psychotropic, or hallucinogenic effect on the body that is substantially
similar to or greater than that of any controlled substance or unlawful drug;
or
      (6)   Any substance marked or packaged under any name listed in Appendix
A attached to Ordinance 70, passed September 2, 2014.
   SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA/SYNTHETIC CANNABANOIDS/HERBAL SMOKING PRODUCT.
      (1)   A natural or man-made substance that elicits psychoactive or
psychotropic euphoric effects, or a natural or man-made compound that functions
similar to the active ingredient in marijuana (tetrahydrocannabinol "THC")
including, but not limited to any quantity of a synthetic material, mixture,
preparation, substance, and then analogs (including isomers, esters, ethers,
salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist,
regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being
consumed, including any of the following:
         (a)   2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl) phenol with substitution at the 5-
position of the phenolic ring by alkyl or alkenyl, whether or not substituted
on the cyclohexyl ring to any extent.
         (b)   3-(1-naphthoyl) indole or 3-(1-naphthylmethane) indole by
substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring, whether or not further
substituted on the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the
naphthoyl or naphthyl ring to any extent.
         (c)   3-(1-naphthoyl) pyrrole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of
the pyrrole ring, whether or not further substituted in the pyrrole ring to any
extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthoyl ring to any extent.
         (d)   1-(1-naphthylmethylene) indene by substitution of the 3-positon
of the indene ring, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to
any extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent.
         (e)   3-phenylacetylindole or 3-benzoylindole by substitution at the
nitrogen atom of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted in the
indole ring to any extent, whether or not substitution on the phenyl ring to
any extent.
         (f)   5-(1, 1-dimethylheptyl)-2-[1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol
(CP-47,497).
         (g)   5-(1, 1 dimethyloctyl)-2-[lR, #S)-3-hydroxycycloheyl] phenol
(cannabicyclohexanol or CP-47, 497 C8-homolog).
         (h)   1-pentyl-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-018 and AM678).
         (i)   1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-073).
         (j)   1-hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-019).
         (k)   1-[2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl]-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-200).
         (l)   1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (JWH-250).
         (m)   1-pentyl-3-[1-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-081).
         (n)   1-penryl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-122).
         (o)   1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-398).
         (p)   1-(5-flouropentyl)-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole (AM2201).
         (q)   1-(5-fluoropentyle)-3(2-iodobenzoyl)indole (AM694).
         (r)   1-pentyl-3-[(4-methoyxy)-benzoyl]indole (SR-19 and RCS-4).
         (s)   1-cyclohexylethyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (SR-18 and
RCS-8).
         (t)   1-pentyl-3-(2-chlorophenylacetyl)indole (JWH-203).
      (2)   Herbal smoking products, despite their labeling, are commonly
identified by being sold in small packets containing natural or man-made
substances, packaged under various retail names, identified as herbal
potpourri, herbal sachet, herbal aromatherapy, etc., sold without a listing of
ingredients, and sold with disclaimers warning against ingestion and stating
they are free of controlled substances. By virtue of this subchapter, such
projects are unlawful.
      (3)   SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA/SYNTHETIC CANNABANOIDS/HERBAL SMOKING PRODUCT
are commonly marketed under various commercial trade names, which change often,
and contain a common disclaimer that the products are "not safe for human
consumption," "novelty item," or similar disclaimer. Refer to Appendix A of
Ordinance 70, passed September 2, 2014, for a listing of commercial names
commonly used to advertise and portray these substances.
      (4)   SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA/SYNTHETIC CANNABANOIDS/HERBAL SMOKING PRODUCT
shall exclude typical, standard incense and potpourri that is sold as incense
sticks, oils, or cones that is commonly used for aromatic qualities and do not
contain any synthetic chemical compounds, do not provide a prohibition against
ingestion, and do not elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects.
   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELICS/HALLUCINOGENS.
      (1)   A substance that mimics the effects of any federally or state
controlled substance, including but not limited to, any natural or man-made
substance, compound, mixture, preparation, or is laced with a synthetic
chemical compound that elicits a psychedelic/hallucinogenic effect including
but not limited to the following:
         (a)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E).
         (b)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D).
         (c)   2-(4-Chloror-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C).
         (d)   2-(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I).
         (e)   2-[(4-Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl]ethanamine (2C-T-2).
         (f)   2-[(4-Isopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl]ethanamine (2C-T-4).
         (g)   2-[2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl]ethanamine (2C-H).
         (h)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N).
         (i)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
      (2)   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELICS/HALLUCINOGENS, despite their labeling, are
commonly identified by being sold in small packets, tubs, or vials and are
often in tablet, capsule, and liquid form and packaged under various retail
names, sold without a listing of ingredients, and often sold with disclaimers
warning against ingestion and stating they are free of controlled substances.
By virtue of this subchapter, such products are unlawful.
      (3)   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELICS/HALLUCINOGENS, are commonly marketed under
various commercial trade names, which change often, and contain a common
disclaimer that the products are "not safe for human consumption," "novelty
item," or similar disclaimer. They may also be marked in a consumable pill form
under various names. Refer to Appendix A attached to Ordinance 70, passed
September 2, 2014, for a listing of commercial names commonly used to advertise
and portray these substances.
      (4)   Salvia Divinorum/Salvinorum means all parts of the plant presently
classified botanically as salvia divinorum whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, any extract from any part of the plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its
seeds, or extracts.
   SYNTHETIC STIMULANT.
      (1)   A product that contains a synthetic chemical compound that elicits
psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects, especially where those products
are in a powder, crystal, or granular form, including but not limited to the
following:
         (a)   3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (Methylone).
         (b)   3,4-Methyenedioxpyrovalerone (MDPV).
         (c)   4-Methymethcathinone (Mephedrone).
         (d)   4-Methoxymethcathinone (Methedrone).
         (e)   4-Fluoromethcathinone (Flephedrone).
         (f)   3-Fluoromethcathinone (3-FMC).
         (g)   Naphthylpyrovalerone.
         (h)   2-amino-1phenyl-1-propanone (Cathinone).
      (2)   SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS, despite their labeling, are commonly
identified by being sold in small packets, tubs, and vials, packaged under
various retail names, often identified as bath salts, plant food, fertilizer,
insect repellant, etc., and are usually powder or granular in form, sold
without a listing of ingredients, and sold with disclaimers warning against
ingestion and stating they are free of controlled substances. By virtue of this
subchapter, such products are unlawful.
      (3)   SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS, often referred to as "Bath Salts," are
commonly marketed under various commercial trade names, which change often, and
contain a common disclaimer that the products are "not safe for human
consumption," "novelty item," or similar disclaimer. Refer to Appendix A
attached to Ordinance 70, passed September 2, 2014, for a listing of commercial
names commonly used to advertise and portray these substances.
      (4)   SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS, as defined in this subchapter, shall exclude
normal, typical bath salts and bath additives which do not contain synthetic
chemical compounds listed herein that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic
stimulant effects. Standard bath salts primarily contain magnesium sulfate
(Epsom salts), sodium chloride (table salt), sodium bicarbonate (baking soda),
sodium hexametaphosphate (Calgon), amorphous/glassy sodium metaphosphate,
sodium sesquicarbonate, and borax.
(Ord. 70, passed 9-2-2014)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when
the failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference
by this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
   (B)   (1)   Whereas the city deems synthetic and alternative drugs dangerous
and detrimental to the citizens, guests, and fabric of the community of the
city, it bans the sale, possession, transfer and/or manufacturing of synthetic
drugs or alternative drugs. Every person violates a section, division,
paragraph, or provision of §§
130.60 or
130.61 when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
      (2)   In addition to division (B)(1) above, a civil penalty of each
offense shall be as follows: $100 for the first offense; $300 for the second
offense; $500 for the third offense; $800 for the fourth offense; and $1,000
for every offense thereafter.
(1989 Code, § 10.99) (Ord. 70, passed 9-2-2014)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOODPLAINS
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
153.   ZONING
      
154.   LONG TERM RENTALS
      
155.   SHORT TERM RENTALS
      
156.   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
Adopted Codes
   
150.01   Housing Code adopted
Outdoor Swimming Pools
   
150.15   Definitions
   
150.16   Application
   
150.17   General construction requirements
   
150.18   Fencing required
   
150.19   Variance
   
150.20   Existing regulations
Signs
   
150.35   Purpose and definitions
   
150.36   Administration and enforcement
   
150.37   Non-conforming uses
 
   
150.99   Penalty
ADOPTED CODES
§ 150.01 HOUSING CODE ADOPTED.
   The Uniform Housing Code, 1996 edition, published by the International
Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference as though set
forth verbatim herein. One copy of the Code shall be marked “City of Aurora –
Official Copy” and kept on file in the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer and open to inspection and use by the public.
(1989 Code, § 4.10) (Ord. 28, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-14-1999)
OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS
§ 150.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, an OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOL is defined as any
temporary or permanent structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an
artificial body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing used in
connection with any dwelling and having the depth of more than 24 inches at any
point and a surface area exceeding 50 square feet.
(1989 Code, § 4.21, Subd. 1)
§ 150.16 APPLICATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to own, use, operate or lease any outdoor
swimming pool located within the city which fails to comply with the provisions
of this subchapter.
(1989 Code, § 4.21, Subd. 2) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.17 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No outdoor swimming pool shall be allowed in any front yard or corner
side yard.
   (B)   No outdoor swimming pool shall exceed six feet in depth.
   (C)   The swimming pool and all above-ground improvements related thereto,
including decks, concrete slabs, storage areas and equipment housings, shall
maintain a minimum lot line setback of ten feet.
   (D)   Placement of all pools will be subject to utility company approval.
(1989 Code, § 4.21, Subd. 3) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.18 FENCING REQUIRED.
   (A)   All outdoor swimming pools existing and hereafter constructed shall be
completely enclosed by a security fence or wall at least four but not more than
six feet high and located at least four feet from the edge of the pool. The
bottom of the fence or wall shall be no higher than four inches above the
surface of the ground. Fence openings or points of entry to the pool area shall
be equipped with self-closing and self-latching lockable gates.
   (B)   The security fence or wall shall be of the non-climbing type so as to
be impenetrable by toddlers and afford no external handholds or footholds. Each
entry shall be equipped with a locking mechanism inaccessible to small
children.
   (C)   This subchapter does not apply to above-ground outdoor swimming pools
having at least four- foot high vertical or outward inclined side walls,
provided that the pool has a self-closing and self-latching lockable gate or
sole access is by means of a removable ladder, ramp or stairs, which must be
removed when the pool is not in use.
   (D)   All existing outdoor swimming pools shall comply with this subchapter
by January 1, 1996.
(1989 Code, § 4.21, Subd. 4) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.19 VARIANCE.
   A variance from the requirements of this subchapter may be allowed under the
provisions of city code
Chapter 153.
(1989 Code, § 4.21, Subd. 5)
§ 150.20 EXISTING REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter are in addition to and not in replacement
of the provisions of the city code relating to building and land use, and state
statutes relating to swimming pool construction and operation.
(1989 Code, § 4.21, Subd. 6) (Ord. 9, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-2-1994)
SIGNS
§ 150.35 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Findings, purpose and effect.
      (1)   Findings. The City Council hereby finds as follows:
         (a)   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and
quality of the environment.
         (b)   Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may
convey a variety of messages.
         (c)   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and
detriments to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety
and welfare.
         (d)   The city's zoning regulations include the regulation of signs in
an effort to provide adequate means of expression and to promote the economic
viability of the business community, while protecting the city and its citizens
from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location and character that
would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community and threaten the
health, safety and welfare of the community. The regulation of the physical
characteristics of signs within the city has had a positive impact on traffic
safety and the appearance of the community.
      (2)   Purpose and intent. It is not the purpose or intent of this sign
subchapter to regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose
or intent of this subchapter to regulate any building design or any display not
defined as a sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building.
The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to:
         (a)   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and
other physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to promote the
public health, safety and welfare;
         (b)   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the
city by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the
community; and
         (c)   Improve the visual appearance of the city while providing for
effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and
the city's goals of public safety and aesthetics.
      (3)   Effect. A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in
the city if it is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. The
effect of this sign subchapter, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
         (a)   Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a
more limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set
forth in this subchapter;
         (b)   Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the
principal use of a site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements
of this subchapter;
         (c)   Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other
physical characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the
communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the
environment and the public health, safety and welfare; and
         (d)   Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this
subchapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
      ABANDONED SIGN. Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which
remains without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period
of one year or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose
which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Signs
applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership
or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the
property remains vacant for a period of one year or more. Any sign remaining
after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be abandoned.
Signs which are present because of being legally established non-conforming
signs or signs which have required a conditional use permit or a variance shall
also be subject to the definition of ABANDONED SIGN.
      AWNING. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass
designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative
embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure primarily
over a window, walk, or the like. Any part of an awning which also projects
over a door shall be counted as an awning.
      AWNING SIGN. A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion
attached directly to the awning material.
      BALLOON SIGN. A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material
supported by helium, hot or pressurized air which is greater than 24-inches in
diameter.
      BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
      BUILDING SIGN. Any sign attached or supported by any structure used or
intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
      CABINET SIGN. Any wall sign that is not of channel or individually
mounted letter construction.
      CANOPY. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass on a
support, which provides shelter over a doorway.
      CANOPY SIGN. Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made of
fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A
CANOPY SIGN is not a marquee and is different from service area canopy signs.
      CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters,
or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or
the surface of the sign. CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS do not include signs upon which
characters, letters or illustrations change or rearrange only once in a 24-hour
period.
      COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity,
service or entertainment.
      ELEVATION. The view of the side, front, or rear of a given structure(s).
      ELEVATION AREA. The area of all walls that face any lot line.
      ERECT. Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling, placing,
affixing, attaching, creating, painting, drawing or any other way of bringing
into being or establishing.
      FLAG. Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of
the material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the
material by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors,
patterns, symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices.
      FLASHING SIGN. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits
changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent
illumination which includes the illusion of intermittent flashing light by
means of animation. Also any mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
twinkling, or sparkling.
      FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign which has supporting framework that is placed
on, or anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any building or
other structure.
      FRONTAGE. The line of contact of a property with the public right-of-way.
      GRADE. Grade shall be construed to be the final ground elevation after
construction. Earth mounding criteria for landscaping and screening is not part
of the final grade for sign height computation.
      GROUND SIGN. Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the
ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a total
height not exceeding eight feet.
      HEIGHT OF SIGN. The height of the sign shall be computed as the vertical
distance measured from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign.
      HOTEL, MOTEL, MOTOR HOTEL. Any building or combination of buildings
containing six or more rooms used for sleeping purposes by guests on a
transient basis.
      ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which contains an element designed to emanate
artificial light internally or externally.
      INTERIOR SIGN. A sign which is located within the interior of any
building, or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building, and a sign for
and located within the inner or outer body, court or entrance of any theater.
      ISSUING AUTHORITY. The City of Aurora Planning and Zoning Commission.
      LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NON-CONFORMING SIGN. Any sign and its support
structure lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this subchapter which
fails to conform to the requirements of this subchapter. A sign which was
erected in accordance with a variance granted prior to the adoption of this
subchapter and which does not comply with this subchapter shall be deemed to be
a legal non-conforming sign. A sign which was unlawfully erected shall be
deemed to be an illegal sign.
      MARQUEE. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a theater
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
      MARQUEE SIGN. Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or attached
in any manner on a marquee.
      MONUMENT SIGN. Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the
ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a height
exceeding eight feet.
      MULTIPLE TENANT SITE. Any site which has more than one tenant, and each
tenant has a separate ground level exterior public entrance.
      NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Dissemination of messages not classified as
commercial speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational
topics.
      OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A commercial speech sign which directs the attention
of the public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at
a location not on the same premises where such business sign is located. For
purposes of this subchapter, easements and other appurtenances shall be
considered to be outside such platted parcel of land and any sign located or
proposed to be located in an easement or other appurtenance shall be considered
an off-premises sign.
      ON-PREMISES MESSAGES. Identify or advertise an establishment, person,
activity, goods, products or services located on the premises where the sign is
installed.
      PARAPET (WALL). That portion of building wall that rises above the roof
level.
      POLE SIGN. See PYLON SIGN.
      PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported,
including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign
may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted to another
sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this
characteristic is based on the design of such a sign.
      PORTE COCHERE. A roofed structure or roof-like cover, extending from the
entrance of a building and which provides shelter over a doorway.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The building in which the principal primary use of
the lot is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple
principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly
accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
      PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in such
a manner that its leading edge extends more than two feet beyond the surface of
such building or wall face.
      PROPERTY OWNER. Legal owner of property as officially recorded by St.
Louis County.
      PUBLIC NOTICES. Official notices posted by public officers, employees or
their agents in the performance of their duties, or as directed by such
officers, employees or agents.
      PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. The planned right-of-way for a public street.
      PYLON SIGN. Any freestanding sign which has its supportive structure(s)
anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level by
pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area below the sign face open.
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any district zoned for residential uses.
      ROOF. The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of a
building or structure; the structural make-up of which conforms to the roof
structures, roof construction and roof covering sections of the Uniform
Building Code.
      ROOF LINE. The upper-most edge of the roof, or in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the upper-most height of said facade.
      ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof
of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above
the highest portion of the roof.
      ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL. Any building sign erected or constructed as an
integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design,
so that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the
roof and so that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by
a space of more than six inches.
      ROTATING SIGN. A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an axis.
      SETBACK, FRONT. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
public right-of-way and a structure on the premises. In instances in which a
property fronts on more than one street, front setbacks are required on all
street frontages.
      SETBACK, REAR. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
property line opposite the principal street frontage and a structure on the
premises.
      SETBACK, SIDE. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the side
lot line and a structure on the premises.
      SHIMMERING SIGNS. A sign which reflects an oscillating, sometimes
distorted visual image.
      SIGHT TRIANGLE. A triangular area formed at the intersection of any
street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way
lines at a distance along each line of 20 feet from their point of
intersection.
      SIGN. Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading
matter or representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message
or visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or
constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires and
structures, which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
      SIGN FACE. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the
message of the sign is exhibited.
      SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure including the supports, uprights, bracing
and framework which supports, or is capable of supporting, any sign.
      SITE. A plot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land, which are intended, designated, and/or approved to function as
an integrated unit.
      STRINGER. A line of string, rope, cording, or an equivalent to which is
attached a number of pennants.
      SUSPENDED SIGN. Any building sign that is suspended from the underside of
a horizontal plane surface and is connected to this surface.
      TOTAL SITE SIGNAGE. The maximum permitted combined area of all
freestanding and wall identification signs allowed on a specific property.
      VISIBLE. Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity
(whether legible or not) without visual aid.
      WALL. Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a
building or structure and which has a slope of 60 degrees or greater with the
horizontal plane.
      WALL SIGN. Any building sign attached parallel to, but within two feet of
a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the
limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by
such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
      WINDOW SIGN. Any building sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity,
event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window
panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
(Ord. 65, 1st Ser., passed 10-18-2013)
§ 150.36 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Permit required. No sign shall be erected, altered,
reconstructed, maintained or moved in the city without first securing a permit
from the city. The content of the sign shall not be reviewed or considered in
determining whether to approve or deny a sign permit. Application for a permit
shall be in writing addressed to the issuing authority and shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   Names and addresses of the owners of the display structure and
property;
         (b)   The address at which any signs are to be erected;
         (c)   The lot, block and addition at which the signs are to be erected
and the street on which they are to front;
         (d)   A complete set of plans showing the necessary elevations,
distances, size and details to fully and clearly represent the construction and
place of the signs;
         (e)   The cost of the sign;
         (f)   Type of sign (i.e. wall sign, monument sign, etc.);
         (g)   Certification by applicant indicating the application complies
with all requirements of the subchapter; and
         (h)   If the proposed sign is along state trunk highway or interstate
highway, the application shall be accompanied by proof that the applicant has
obtained a permit from the state for the sign.
      (2)   The issuing authority shall approve or deny the sign permit in an
expedited manner no more than 60 days from the receipt of the complete
application, including applicable fee. All permits not approved or denied
within 60 days shall be deemed approved. If the permit is denied, the issuing
authority shall prepare a written notice within ten days of its decision,
describing the applicant's appeal rights under §
153.022, and send it by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
applicant.
   (B)   Retroactive effect. This subchapter shall apply to all sign
applications applied for and/or pending prior to its enactment.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following signs shall not require a permit. These
exemptions, however, shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign
from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter or any other law or ordinance regulating
the same.
      (1)   The changing of the display surface on a painted or printed sign
only. This exemption, however, shall apply only to poster replacement and/or
on-site changes involving sign painting elsewhere than directly on a building.
      (2)   Signs six square feet or less in size.
      (3)   Signs for directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic, not more than
three square feet per side, and not located on public property or a public
right-of-way, shall not be regulated.
      (4)   Any display of directional signs, street name signs or other signs
which have been authorized and erected by a governmental body. Temporary
political campaign, real estate sales signs in residential neighborhoods,
festival, yard sale and other like signs shall be subject only to:
         (a)   State or federal law;
         (b)   Limited to 15 square feet per side; and
         (c)   Shall be removed within 48 hours of the close of the matter
announced by the subject sign.
      (5)   Signs with a commercial message placed upon construction sites for
temporary use. Such signs may be erected 60 days prior to construction and
shall be removed within ten days after completion of construction. Total
temporary site signage shall not exceed 15 square feet.
      (6)   On-premise informational signs of six square feet or less.
      (7)   Building address signs of two square feet or less.
      (8)   Emergency signs as required by any governmental agency.
      (9)   Signs or posters attached or painted on the inside of a display
window including illuminated signs, but not flashing signs. These signs shall
be placed as not to obstruct or interfere with any window, doorway or fire
escape. Such signs shall not exceed 50% of the window area or 32 square feet,
whichever is more restrictive. Such signs shall be prohibited in residential
districts.
      (10)   Public signs, street signs, warning signs, or signs of public
service companies for the purpose of promoting safety.
      (11)   Noncommercial flags.
      (12)   Pedestrian, vehicular-traffic and parking directional signs in
parking lots, provided the face of such signs meet Minnesota Department of
Transportation standards and which do not contain commercial speech.
      (13)   Noncommercial directional signs not illuminated and not exceeding
two square feet. Signs are limited to one per avenue or street directly leading
to the establishment, with permission of the property owner.
      (14)   Temporary or permanent signs by public utilities erected to warn
the public.
      (15)   Easel and/or sandwich signs, as long as such signs do not exceed
24"x 48". Signs are limited to one per lot. These signs may not be permanent in
nature and must be able to be removed as deemed necessary.
      (16)   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection
when cut into are attached to any masonry surface or noncombustible material.
   (D)   Fees. Sign permit fees are set by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   Repairs. Any sign located in the city which may now be or hereafter
become out of order, rotten or unsafe, and every sign which shall hereafter be
erected, altered, resurfaced, reconstructed or moved contrary to the provisions
of this section, shall be removed or otherwise properly secured in accordance
with the terms of this section by the owners thereof or by the owners of the
grounds on which said sign shall stand, upon receipt of proper notice so to do,
given by the issuing authority. No rotten or other unsafe sign shall be
repaired or rebuilt except in accordance with the provisions of this section
and upon a permit issued by the issuing authority.
   (F)   Removal. In the event of the failure of the owner or person, company
or corporation having control of any sign, or the owner of the ground on which
the sign is located, to remove or repair said sign within 60 days after the use
is terminated, a notice shall be given pursuant to division (I) of this section
and the sign may be removed by the city at the expense of the owner or manager
of the sign, or the owner of the ground upon which the sign stands.
   (G)   Violations. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. Each day that
the violation continues is a separate offense.
   (H)   Unauthorized signs. The following signs are unauthorized signs:
      (1)   Signs are prohibited within any public right-of-way except that the
Council may grant a special permit for temporary signs and decorations to be
placed on a right-of-way for a period of time, not to exceed 90 days, subject
to the laws of this state.
      (2)   No flashing sign containing an intermittent or flashing light
source, which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means
of animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source, shall be
allowed. This prohibition shall not include electronic automatic changing signs
providing messages change not more frequently than at five-second intervals,
traveling message signs or signs providing time, temperature or date
information.
      (3)   No sign shall, by reason of its location, color or intensity,
create a hazard to the safe, efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
      (4)   Signs painted, attached or in any manner affixed to trees, rocks,
or similar natural surfaces, or attached to public utility poles, bridges,
towers, or similar public structures.
      (5)   All off-premises signs.
      (6)   Signs advertising by letters, words or figures painted upon any
sidewalk within the city.
      (7)   Signs that emit sound.
      (8)   Signs painted or attached to vehicles where the vehicle is parked
on a property and not intended to be moved for a period of 48 hours or more. At
all times, vehicles containing advertising and/or signage shall not be parked
along the property frontage.
      (9)   Vacant or abandoned building signs. Owner has 60 days to remove
such signs after notification by the City Administrator and/or Planning and
Zoning Official.
      (10)   Signs anchored by guy wires, chains, cables or similar devices
that project down to the ground in any way.
      (11)   Changeable copy signs.
   (I)   General provisions. The following provisions apply to signs in all
districts:
      (1)   All signs shall be constructed and maintained in a manner where
they will be safe to the general public. A sign shall be repainted whenever its
paint begins to fade, chip or discolor and defective parts shall be replaced
promptly.
      (2)   On premises signs shall be removed from a lot by the owner of such
property within 60 days after termination of the use for which the sign was
used.
      (3)   If the Administrator or Planning and Zoning Official shall find
that any sign is unsafe, adversely impacts upon the aesthetics of the community
and threatens the health, safety and welfare of the community, is a detriment
to the public, not maintained, or constructed, erected or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this section, the Administrator shall give
written notice to the property owner thereof. If the property owner fails to
comply with the standards of this section within 30 days after such notice, and
if no appeal is taken, or if no owner, occupant, or agent can be found, such
sign shall be removed or altered by the city. The cost of such city action
shall be specifically assessed against the subject property.
      (4)   All signs shall be constructed to meet the Uniform Building Code
standards for wind resistance, dead loads, wind loads and other applicable
sections of the Uniform Building Code. Signs shall be rigidly suspended by
means of fastening or support so as not to be free swinging or a menace to
persons or property.
      (5)   All electrical wiring of signs shall comply with the provisions of
the National Electrical Code and other applicable sections of the State
Building Code.
      (6)   No sign shall be erected as to obstruct access/egress to or from
fire escapes, windows, doors or exits and fire lanes.
      (7)   No pylon sign shall be erected in such a manner that projects or
will project over any building or public right-of-way.
      (8)   Canopies, marquees and fixed awnings are an integral part of the
structure to which they are attached. They are allowed in the Business and
Industrial Districts if they meet the following requirements and the applicable
square footage requirements:
         (a)   An awning, canopy or marquee may not project into the public
right-of-way nearer than 30 inches to the street curb or curb line;
         (b)   Awnings, canopies or marquees may have no part of the structure
other than supports nearer the ground surface than eight feet;
         (c)   The architectural style of the awning, canopy or marquee must be
consistent with the building being served; and
         (d)   Awnings, canopies or marquees built over the public right-of-way
must be included in a liability insurance policy holding the city free of all
responsibility.
      (9)   Monument signs shall be constructed with the entire bottom of the
sign structure in contact with the ground.
      (10)   Computation of the area of multifaceted signs. The sign area for a
sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of
all sign faces visible from any one point. Each surface utilized to display a
message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate sign and shall
be calculated in the overall square footage. Symbols, flags, pictures, wording,
figures or other forms of graphics painted on or attached to windows, walls,
awnings, free-standing structures, suspended by balloons, or kites, or on
persons, animals, or vehicles are considered a sign and are included in
calculating the overall square footage.
      (11)   When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that
both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign
faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42-inches
apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
      (12)   All signs may be illuminated as provided for in division (J) of
this section.
   (J)   Illumination. External illumination for signs shall be so constructed
and maintained that the source of light is not visible from the public right-
of-way or residential property.
   (K)   Setbacks. All signs shall not be less than the following setbacks
described in division (L) of this section in a given zoning district, unless
the sign is flat against the structure, as prescribed in §
153.060.
   (L)   Permitted signs by district. 
      (1)   Residential districts.
         (a)   The following regulations shall apply to non-residential
permitted, conditional or legal non-conforming uses:
            1.   Nameplates may be wall or monument mounted or a combination
thereof and shall not exceed ten square feet in area.
            2.   Monument signs shall have a maximum height of six feet and
shall have a setback of 15 feet from any property line, and shall not be placed
in the sight triangle.
         (b)   The following regulations shall apply to residential permitted,
conditional or legal non-conforming uses:
            1.   One subdivision identification sign per street frontage,
neighborhood, subdivision or development, not to exceed ten square feet in sign
area in each location.
            2.   One identification sign per entrance to apartment or
condominium complex, not to exceed ten square feet in sign area.
         (c)   Home occupations. One sign with a maximum area of six square
feet will be allowed and may not be illuminated. The sign must be located in
the front yard and shall not block visibility. Sign must also contain current
city license number.
         (d)   All allowed signs in a residential district shall have a maximum
height of six feet and shall have a setback as prescribed in division (K) of
this section from any property line and shall not be placed in the sight
triangle.
      (2)   Business districts.
         (a)   Within business zoning districts, signs are permitted as
follows:
 
District Maximum Sign Area of Single Sign Total Area of All Signs Max. Height
C-1      64 sq. ft.                       64 sq. ft.              15 ft.
C-2, C-3 64 sq. ft.                       64 sq. ft.              15 ft.
 
         (b)   Monument signs. Uses in a business district allow for a monument
sign that shall not exceed 64 square feet per surface area, and 15 feet in
height, and is setback as prescribed in division (K) of this section and shall
not be placed in the sight triangle.
      (3)   Industrial park district.
         (a)   Wall signs. Each tenant other than those in multi-tenant
buildings may have one flat wall sign, not extending more than 30 inches from
the face of the building, except that such signage may extend from the face of
the roof over a covered walk. Such wall signs shall not exceed 15% of the area
of the wall to which the sign is attached, to a maximum of 64 square feet.
         (b)   Monument signs. Uses other than those in multi-tenant buildings
may have a monument sign that shall not exceed 64 square feet per surface area,
and 15 feet in height, and must be setback as per setbacks prescribed in
division (K) of this section.
         (c)   Multi-tenant signs. Each tenant in a multi-tenant building may
have a flat wall sign, not extending more than 30 inches from the face of the
building. The aggregate area of such signs shall not exceed 15% of the area of
the wall to which they are attached. Maximum height shall be 15 ft.
         (d)   Multi-tenant monument signs. One monument sign shall be
permitted for each multi-tenant building provided the surface area of the sign
does not exceed 64 square feet per side, six feet in height, and is setback in
no case less than prescribed in division (K) of this section. Maximum height
shall be 15 ft.
         (e)   Canopies and awnings. The design of canopies shall be in keeping
with the overall building design in terms of location, size, and color. No
canopies with visible wall hangers shall be permitted. Signage on canopies may
be substituted for allowed building signage and shall be limited to 25% of the
canopy area. Internally illuminated canopies must be compatible with the
overall color scheme of the building.
(Ord. 65, 1st Ser., passed 10-18-2013)
§ 150.37 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Non-conforming signs: compliance. It is recognized that signs exist
within the zoning districts which were lawful before this subchapter was
enacted, which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of
this chapter or future amendments. It is the intent of this subchapter that
non-conforming signs shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be
used as grounds for adding other signs or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this subchapter to permit legal non-
conforming signs existing on the effective date of this subchapter, or
amendments thereto, to continue as legal non-conforming signs provided such
signs are safe, are maintained so as not to be unsightly, and have not been
abandoned or removed subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   No sign shall be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
non-conformity.
      (2)   Should such sign or sign structure be destroyed by any means to an
extent greater than 50% of its replacement cost and no building permit has been
applied for within 60 days of when the property was damaged, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (3)   Should such sign or sign structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
zoning district in which it is located after it is moved.
      (4)   No existing sign devoted to a use not permitted by the zoning code
in the zoning district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended or
moved except in changing the sign to a sign permitted in the zoning district in
which is it located.
      (5)   When a structure loses its non-conforming status all signs devoted
to the structure shall be removed and all signs painted directly on the
structure shall be repainted in a neutral color or a color which will harmonize
with the structure.
(Ord. 65, 1st Ser., passed 10-18-2013)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or
performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when the
failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by
this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1989 Code, § 4.99)
CHAPTER 151: FLOODPLAINS
Section
   
151.01   Statutory authorization and purpose
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Jurisdiction and districts
   
151.04   Permitted activities and standards in the floodplain district
   
151.05   Nonconformities
   
151.06   Administration
   
151.07   Amendments
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. This floodplain chapter is adopted pursuant
to the authorization and policies contained in M.S. Chapter 103F; Minn. Rules
parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200; the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) in 44 CPR § 59 to 80; and the planning and zoning
enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter 462.
   (B)   Purpose.
      (1)   This chapter regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the
City of Aurora. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation,
which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions.
      (2)   This chapter is adopted in the public interest to promote sound
land use practices, and floodplains are a land resource to be developed in a
manner which will result in minimum loss of life and threat to health, and
reduction of private and public economic loss caused by flooding.
      (3)   This chapter is adopted to maintain eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program.
      (4)   This chapter is also intended to preserve the natural
characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
   (C)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
private agreements. The standards in this chapter take precedence over any less
restrictive, conflicting local laws, ordinances, or codes. All other ordinances
inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
   (D)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. This chapter does not imply that
areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. Not all flood risk is
mapped. Larger floods do occur and the flood height may be increased by man-
made or natural causes, such as ice jams or bridge openings restricted by
debris. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the City of
Aurora or its officers or employees for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
   (E)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.
(Ord. 111, passed 3-4-2025)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined, words or phrases used in this chapter must be
interpreted according to common usage and so as to give this chapter its most
reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure, as defined in this chapter, that is on the
same parcel of property as, and is incidental to, the principal structure or
use; an accessory structure specifically excludes structures used for human
habitation.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. BASE FLOOD is synonymous with the term "regional flood” used in
Minn. Rules part 6120.5000.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the base flood, regional flood,
or 1% annual chance flood. The term BASE FLOOD ELEVATION is used in the flood
insurance study.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides, regardless of the depth of
excavation below ground level.
   BUILDING. See “Structure.”
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
materials or equipment.
   FARM FENCE. An open type offence of posts and horizontally run wire, further
specified in M.S. § 344.02, Subd. 1(a - d).
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the 1% annual chance floodplain located outside
of the floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has
been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map
(DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The study referenced in § 151.03(B), which is
an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards, and if
appropriate, corresponding surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation,
and determination of mudslide (i.e. mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion
hazards.
   FLOODPLAIN. The beds, channel and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse, or other source which have been or hereafter may be inundated by
the base flood.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which must be reserved to carry or
store the base flood discharge without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one-half foot.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of 44 CFR § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term "recreational vehicle."
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The main building or other structure on a lot that is
utilized for the property’s principal use.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. Those
vehicles not meeting this definition shall be considered a structure for the
purposes of this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, the term
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is synonymous with the term "travel trailer/travel
vehicle."
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (RFPE). An elevation no lower than one
foot above the elevation of the base flood plus any increases in water surface
elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway. These increases in water surface elevations are
typically identified in the Floodway Data Tables, found in the Flood Insurance
Study.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that
is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. Recreational
vehicles not considered travel ready, as detailed in §
151.04(B)(10), shall also be considered a nonconforming structure for the
purposes of this chapter.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial
damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
      (2)   Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure." For the purpose of this chapter, "historic structure" is
defined in 44 CFR § 59.1.
   VARIANCE. The same as that defined in 44 CFR § 59.1 and M.S. § 462.357,
Subd. 6(2).
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations.
(Ord. 111, passed 3-4-2025)
§ 151.03 JURISDICTION AND DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Lands to which chapter applies. This chapter applies to all lands
under the jurisdiction of the City of Aurora within the floodplain, shown as
Zones A on the flood insurance rate map panels referenced in §
151.03(B).
      (1)   The standards imposed in this overlay district are in addition to
any other requirements. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive standards
will apply.
      (2)   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated
on the official floodplain maps and actual field conditions (as illustrated in
Figure 1), the base flood elevation (BFE) shall be the governing factor in
locating the outer boundaries of the 1% annual chance floodplain.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/23d4abe9c53c5ef46d235325aa0a8f96c2a14b48/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1372.png]
 
      (3)   Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the city and to submit
technical evidence.
   (B)   Incorporation of maps by reference. The following maps together with
all attached material, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of the official zoning map and this chapter. The attached material
includes the Flood Insurance Study for St. Louis County, Minnesota, and
Incorporated Areas, dated March 25, 2025, and the flood insurance rate map
panel numbers 27137C2095E, 27137C2115E, all dated March 25, 2025, all prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. These materials are on file in the
city hall.
   (C)   Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels referenced in §
151.03(B) may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate
boundaries of the City of Aurora at the time of adoption of this chapter. If
any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of Aurora after
the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands will
be subject to the provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of
annexation. Annexations into panels not referenced in §
151.03(B) require ordinance amendment in accordance with §
151.07(B).
   (D)   Municipal boundary adjustments. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels
referenced in §
151.03(B) apply countywide. If at any point any lands come under the
jurisdiction of another local government, the following shall apply:
      (1)   City adjustments of corporate boundaries, including but not limited
to annexations and detachments, shall shift floodplain administrative authority
of all affected lands immediately upon the date of the boundary adjustment
occurring. Cities retain jurisdiction for all incorporated lands, and the
county retains jurisdiction under this section on all unincorporated lands.
(Ord. 111, passed 3-4-2025)
§ 151.04 PERMITTED ACTIVITIES AND STANDARDS IN THE FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted activities. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator to verify compliance with all applicable standards outlined in
this chapter prior to the following uses or activities:
      (1)   Any addition, modification, rehabilitation, repair, or alteration
to a nonconforming structure as specified in §
151.05. Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such work,
separately or in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a substantial
improvement as defined in §
151.02.
      (2)   Any use that requires fill, excavation, storage of materials, or
placement of anything that may cause a potential obstruction, as well as any
other form of development as defined in §
151.02.
   (B)   Minimum development standards.
      (1)   All development must:
         (a)   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Be constructed with materials and equipment resistant to flood
damage;
         (c)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage;
         (d)   Be constructed with heating, ventilation, duct work, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities elevated at least up to the
regulatory flood protection elevation (RFPE). Water, sewage, electrical, and
other utility lines below the RFPE shall be constructed so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within them during conditions of flooding;
         (e)   Be reasonably safe from flooding and consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
         (f)   Be assured to provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
         (g)   Not be detrimental to uses in adjoining areas; and
         (h)   Not adversely affect the efficiency or restrict the flood
carrying capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system.
         (i)   Ensure that any fill or other materials are protected from
erosion, discharge, and sediment entering surface waters by the use of
vegetative cover or other methods as soon as possible.
      (2)   Buildings and structures. No new structures, such as buildings or
accessory structures may be permitted in the regulatory floodplain.
Modifications and alterations of nonconforming structures is subject to the
standards in §
151.05.
      (3)   Subdivisions. All new lots must be able to accommodate for a
building site with a natural grade outside of the floodplain. All subdivisions
must have vehicular access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation (RFPE).
      (4)   Encroachment analysis. Development in the following areas requires
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed by a professional engineer, or
using other standard engineering practices (e.g. projects that restore the site
to the previous cross-sectional area).
         (a)   In a floodway, development may not result in any of the
following during the 1% annual chance flood: cause a stage increase of 0.00
feet or greater, obstruct flood flows, or increase velocities.
         (b)   In areas where a floodway has not been delineated, development
may not allow stage increases more than one-half foot at any point during the
1% chance flood. This evaluation must include the cumulative effects of
previous encroachments. A lesser water surface elevation increase than one-half
foot is required if, due to the water surface level increase, increased flood
damages would potentially result.
      (5)   Fences not meeting the definition of farm fences are not permitted.
      (6)   Transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges must
be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation (RFPE) where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area, or where
failure or interruption would result in danger to public health or safety.
Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation
where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety. All public transportation facilities should be
designed to minimize increases in flood elevations.
      (7)   Public utilities. All utilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and
water supply systems to be located in the floodplain must be elevated and/or
floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation (RFPE), be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and be designed to
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters. All public utilities should be designed to minimize
increases in flood elevations. New solid waste management facilities, as
defined in Minn. Rules part 7035.0300, are prohibited. Water supply systems are
subject to the provisions in Minn. Rules part 4725.4350.
      (8)   Potential pollutants. Materials that, in time of flooding, are
buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant
life, as well as those likely to cause pollution of the waters, such as sewage;
sand; rock; wrecked and discarded equipment; dredged spoil; municipal,
agricultural or industrial waste; and other wastes as further defined in M.S. §
115.01, are prohibited.
      (9)   Land alterations. In areas within 25 feet of the ordinary high
water level, land alterations shall be restricted to:
         (a)   The minimum required to accommodate beach and access areas, not
to exceed a volume greater than ten cubic yards; and
         (b)   The minimum required to accommodate for public utilities, roads,
railroad tracks, bridges, and shoreline stabilization projects to correct an
identified erosion problem, as verified by a qualified resource agency or the
Zoning Administrator.
      (10)   Recreational vehicles must be travel ready, meeting the following
criteria:
         (a)   The vehicles must be fully licensed.
         (b)   The vehicle must be ready for highway use, meaning on wheels or
the internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities.
         (c)   No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the
vehicle.
      (11)   Private on-site water supply, individual sewage treatment systems,
and other service facilities shall be subject to applicable provisions detailed
in §
151.04(B)(7). Replacement of on-site sewage treatment systems are to be
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during times
of flooding, shall not be located in a designated floodway, and are subject to
the provisions in Minn. Rules parts 7080.2270. No new private service
facilities may be permitted in the regulatory floodplain.
(Ord. 111, passed 3-4-2025)
§ 151.05 NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   Continuance of nonconformities. A use, structure, or occupancy of land
which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject
to the following conditions:
      (1)   Within the floodway, or where the floodway has not been delineated,
any expansion or enlargement of uses or structures is prohibited.
      (2)   Any addition, modification, rehabilitation, repair, or alteration
shall be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, shall not increase
the flood damage potential or increase the degree of obstruction to flood
flows, and where applicable, must be protected to the regulatory flood
protection elevation (RFPE).
      (3)   If any nonconforming structure is determined to be substantially
damaged or substantially improved based on the procedures in §
151.05(C), it may only be reconstructed or expanded if in conformity with the
provisions of §
151.05(B).
      (4)   If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure,
is discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the premises must
conform to this chapter.
   (B)   Standards for modifications and alterations of nonconforming
structures. In addition to the standards identified in §
151.04(B)(10), the following standards and procedures apply to additions,
modifications, rehabilitations, repairs, alterations, or maintenance of
nonconforming structures:
      (1)   All structures, including manufactured homes, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement)
is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation (RFPE). The finished
fill elevation shall be at or above the elevation associated with the base
flood plus any stage increases that result from designation of a floodway. Fill
must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of
the structure. Elevations must be certified by a registered professional
engineer, land surveyor or other qualified person designated by the Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, ductwork, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities are designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.
   (C)   Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. Prior
to issuing any permits for additions, modifications, rehabilitations, repairs,
alterations, or maintenance to nonconforming structures, the Zoning
Administrator is required to determine if such work constitutes substantial
improvement or repair of a substantially damaged structure. A determination
must be made in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Estimate the market value of the structure. In the case of repairs,
the market value of the structure shall be the market value before the damage
occurred and before any restoration or repairs are made.
      (2)   Estimate the cost of the project. The property owner shall
accommodate for inspection, and furnish other documentation needed by the
Zoning Administrator to evaluate costs.
         (a)   Improvement costs shall be comprised of the market rate of all
materials and labor, as well as the costs of all ordinary maintenance and
upkeep carried out over the past one year.
         (b)   Costs to repair damages shall be comprised of the market rate of
all materials and labor required to restore a building to its pre-damaged
condition regardless of the work proposed, as well as associated improvement
costs if structure is being restored beyond its pre-damaged condition.
      (3)   Compare the cost of the improvement, repairs, or combination
thereof to the estimated market value of the structure, and determine whether
the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of a
substantially damaged structure, as defined in §
151.02.
      (4)   Based on this determination, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare
a determination letter and notify the property owner accordingly. Structures
determined to be substantially damaged or substantially improved may not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 111, passed 3-4-2025)
§ 151.06 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Duties. A Zoning Administrator or other official must administer and
enforce this chapter.
      (1)   Permit application requirements. Permit applications must be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The permit application must include the
following, as applicable:
         (a)   A site plan showing all existing or proposed buildings,
structures, service facilities, potential obstructions, and pertinent design
features having an influence on the permit.
         (b)   Location and detail of grading, fill, or storage of materials.
         (c)   Copies of any required local, state or federal permits or
approvals.
         (d)   Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator
as necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
      (2)   Recordkeeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain applicable
records in perpetuity documenting:
         (a)   Encroachment analysis, as detailed in §
151.04(B)(4)
         (b)   Final elevations, as applicable, detailing the elevation to
which structures and improvements to structures are constructed or
floodproofed. Elevations shall be determined by an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified individual, as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
         (c)   Substantial damage and substantial improvement determinations,
as detailed in §
151.05(C), including the cost of improvements, repairs, and market value.
         (d)   All variance actions, including justification for their
issuance, and must report such variances as requested by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
   (B)   Variances.
      (1)   An application for a variance to the provisions of this chapter
will be processed and reviewed in accordance with M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 6(2)
and this chapter.
      (2)   Variances must not be issued within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
      (3)   Variances from the provisions in this chapter may only be issued by
a community upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause,
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (4)   Variances from the provisions in this chapter may only be issued
upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (5)   Variances must be consistent with the general purpose of these
standards and the intent of applicable provisions in state and federal law.
      (6)   Though variances may be used to modify permissible methods of flood
protection, no variance shall permit a lesser degree of flood protection than
the regulatory flood protection elevation (RFPE).
      (7)   The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a variance
that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
         (b)   Such construction below the base or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property. Such notification must be maintained with
a record of all variance actions.
   (C)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. Before authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must
notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work
in public waters pursuant to M.S. § 103G.245, this will suffice as adequate
notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to FEMA.
   (D)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease base
flood elevations. Where physical changes affecting flooding conditions may
increase or decrease the water surface elevation of the base flood, the City of
Aurora must notify FEMA of the changes in order to obtain a letter of map
revision (LOMR), by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific
data as soon as practicable, but no later than six months after the date such
supporting information becomes available. Within areas where the floodway has
not been delineated, a map revision is only required if development results in
stage increases greater than 0.5 feet.
   (E)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
      (1)   All notices of public hearings to consider variances or conditional
uses under this section must be sent via electronic mail to the Department of
Natural Resources respective area hydrologist at least ten days before the
hearings. Notices of hearings to consider subdivisions/plats must include
copies of the subdivision/plat.
      (2)   A copy of all decisions granting variances and conditional uses
under this section must be sent via electronic mail to the Department of
Natural Resources respective area hydrologist within ten days of final action.
(Ord. 111, passed 3-4-2025)
§ 151.07 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Ordinance amendments. Any revisions to the floodplain maps by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or annexations of new map panels require an
ordinance amendment to update the map references in §
151.03(B).
   (B)   Require approval. All amendments to this chapter must be submitted to
the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for review and approval prior to
adoption, for compliance with state and federal rules and requirements. The
floodplain chapter shall not be considered valid until approved.
(Ord. 111, passed 3-4-2025)
STANDARDS
§ 151.20 PERMITTED USES, STANDARDS AND FLOODPLAIN ELEVATION CRITERIA.
   (A)   Permitted uses in the floodplain.  The following uses of land are
permitted uses in the floodplain district:
      (1)   Any use of land which does not involve a structure, an addition to
the outside dimensions to an existing structure or an obstruction to flood
flows such as fill, excavation or storage of materials or equipment;
      (2)   Any use of land involving the construction of new structures, the
placement or replacement of manufactured homes, the addition to the outside
dimensions of an existing structure or obstructions such as fill or storage of
materials or equipment, provided these activities are located in the flood
fringe portion of the floodplain. These uses shall be subject to the
development standards in division (B) below, and the floodplain evaluation
criteria in division (C) below, for determining floodway and flood fringe
boundaries; and
      (3)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles as regulated by §
151.22.
   (B)   Standards for floodplain permitted uses.
      (1)   Fill. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria
for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
      (2)   Storage of materials and equipment.
         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
or, if placed on fill, to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (3)   Use prohibited. No use shall be permitted which will adversely
affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributary to the main
stream, or of any drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
      (4)   Structures. All structures, including accessory structures,
additions to existing structures and manufactured homes, shall be constructed
on fill so that the basement floor, or first floor if there is no basement, is
at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill
elevation must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection
elevation and shall extend at an elevation at least 15 feet beyond the limits
of the structure constructed thereon.
      (5)   All uses. Uses that do not have vehicular access at or above an
elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation to lands outside of the floodplain shall not be permitted unless
granted a variance by the Board of Adjustment. In granting a variance, the
Board shall specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the use
and only after determining that adequate flood warning time and local emergency
response and recovery procedures exist.
      (6)   Commercial and manufacturing uses. Accessory land uses, such as
yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots, may be at elevations lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit for the facilities to
be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the
absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if
the area would be inundated to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to
flood velocities greater than four feet per second upon occurrence of the
regional flood.
      (7)   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where public
utilities are not provided, on-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and new or
replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the state’s current state-wide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section.
      (8)   Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation
collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include but are not to
be limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
   (C)   Floodplain evaluation.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit, manufactured home park
development or subdivision approval within the floodplain district, the Zoning
Officer shall require the applicant to furnish sufficient site development
plans and a hydrologic/hydraulic analysis by a qualified engineer or
hydrologist specifying the nature of the development and whether the proposed
use is located in the floodway or flood fringe and the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the site. Procedures consistent with Minn. Rules 1983,
parts 6120.5600 (Technical Standards and Requirements for Floodplain
Evaluation) and 6120.5700 (Minimum Floodplain Management Standards for Local
Ordinances), shall be followed during the technical evaluation and review of
the development proposal.
      (2)   The Zoning Officer shall submit one copy of all information
required by division (C)(1) above, to the respective Department of Natural
Resources’ Area Hydrologist for review and comment at least 20 days prior to
the granting of a permit or manufactured home park development/subdivision
approval by the city. The Zoning Officer shall notify the respective Department
of Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist within ten days after a permit or
manufactured home park development/subdivision approval is granted.
(1989 Code, § 13.10)
§ 151.21 UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES IN THE FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   All utilities and transportation facilities, including railroad tracks,
roads and bridges, shall be constructed in accordance with state floodplain
management standards contained in Minn. Rules 1983, parts 6120.5000 through
6120.6200.
(1989 Code, § 13.11) (Ord. 21, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-30-1997)
§ 151.22 TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES.
   Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria
specified in division (A) below shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions (C) and (D) below.
   (A)   Exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in
division (B) below, and further they meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Have current licenses required for highway use;
      (2)   Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking
system, are attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities
commonly used in campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel trailer/travel
vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it; and
      (3)   The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be
permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
   (B)   Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational vehicles.
      (1)   Individual lots or parcels of record;
      (2)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds; and
      (3)   Existing condominium type associations.
   (C)   Loss of exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles exempted in
division (A) above lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel
exceeding $500 for a structural addition to the travel trailer/travel vehicle
or an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The travel
trailer/travel vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be
treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation requirements
and the use of land restrictions specified in §
151.20.
   (D)   Conditions. New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or
campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations
and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five units or dwelling
sites shall be subject to the following.
      (1)   Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be
allowed in the floodway or flood fringe districts, provided the trailer or
vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood
protection elevation determined in accordance with the provisions of §
151.20(C), and proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance
with §
151.20. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this section
shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood; and
      (2)   All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not
meeting the criteria of division (D)(1) above may, as an alternative, be
allowed if in accordance with the following provisions. The applicant must
submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people
during the 100-year flood. The plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer
or other qualified individual and shall demonstrate that adequate time and
personnel exist to carry out the evacuation. All attendant sewage and water
facilities for new or replacement travel trailers or other recreational
vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or
contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with §
151.20(B)(7).
(1989 Code, § 13.30) (Ord. 21, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-30-1997)
§ 151.23 SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Determination. No land shall be subdivided and no manufactured home
park shall be developed or expanded where the site is determined to be
unsuitable by the Zoning Officer for reason of flooding or inadequate drainage,
water supply or sewage treatment facilities. The Zoning Officer shall review
the subdivision/development proposal to ensure that each lot or parcel contains
sufficient area outside of the floodway for fill placement for elevating
structures, sewage systems and related activities.
   (B)   Information required. In the floodplain district, applicants for
subdivision approval or development of a manufactured home park or manufactured
home park expansion shall provide the information required in §
151.20(C). The Zoning Officer shall evaluate the proposed subdivision or mobile
home park development in accordance with the standards established, in §
151.20(B) and (C) and §
151.21.
   (C)   Required elevation.  For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the
floodway and flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation
and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all
required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
   (D)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated
on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate
specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-
structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated
prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard
area designation will be requested.
(1989 Code, § 13.40) (Ord. 21, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-30-1997)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.35 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A permit issued by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall be secured
prior to the construction, addition or alteration of any building or structure;
prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land; prior to
the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to excavation or the
placement of an obstruction within the floodplain.
(1989 Code, § 13.50, Subd. 1) (Ord. 21, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-30-1997)
§ 151.36 STATE AND FEDERAL PERMITS.
   Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a variance, the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall determine that the applicant has
obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
(1989 Code, § 13.50, Subd. 2) (Ord. 21, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-30-1997)
§ 151.37 CERTIFICATION OF LOWEST FLOOR ELEVATIONS.
   The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered
professional engineer, registered architect or registered land surveyor that
the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of
the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) for all new structures
and alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain district.
(1989 Code, § 13.50, Subd. 3) (Ord. 21, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-30-1997)
§ 151.38 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Defined. A VARIANCE means a modification of a specific permitted
development standard required in an official control including this chapter to
allow an alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the
official control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose
of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as
defined and elaborated upon in a community’s respective planning and zoning
enabling legislation.
   (B)   Authorization. The Board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases a
relief or variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to
the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship,
practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under
consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for
planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of
the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the
specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in the
respective enabling legislation which justified the granting of the variance.
   (C)   Determination.  Variances from the provisions of this chapter may be
authorized where the Board of Adjustment has determined the variance will not
be contrary to the public interest and the spirit and intent of this chapter.
No variance shall allow in any district a use prohibited in that district or
permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Variances may be used to modify permissible methods of flood
protection.
   (D)   Submission. The Board shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed variance sufficiently
in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten days’ notice of
the hearing. A copy of all decisions granting a variance shall be forwarded by
mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of the action.
   (E)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board may be made, and as
specified in the city’s official controls and also in state statutes.
   (F)   Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The Planning and Zoning
Official shall notify the applicant for a variance that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for
$100 of insurance coverage; and that construction below the 100-year or
regional flood level increases risks to life and property. This notification
shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. The city shall
maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their
issuance, and report the variances issued in its annual or biannual report
submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(1989 Code, § 13.60) (Ord. 21, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-30-1997)
§ 151.39 NONCONFORMITIES.
   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the effective date of this chapter but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions.
   (A)   No use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity.
   (B)   An alteration within the inside dimensions of a nonconforming use or
structure is permissible, provided it will not result in increasing the flood
damage potential of that use or structure.
   (C)   The cost of all structural alterations or additions both inside and
outside of a structure to any nonconforming structure over the life of the
structure shall not exceed 50% of the market value of the structure unless the
conditions of this section are satisfied. The cost of all structural
alterations and additions constructed since the adoption of city’s initial
floodplain controls must be calculated into today’s current cost which will
include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed
on all manpower or labor. If the current cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50% of the current market value of the
structure, then the structure must meet the standards of §
151.20 for new structures.
   (D)   If any nonconforming use of a structure or land or nonconforming
structure is destroyed by any means, including floods, to an extent of 50% or
more of its market value at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The
city may issue a permit for reconstruction if the use is located outside the
floodway and, upon reconstruction, is adequately elevated on fill in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(1989 Code, § 13.70) (Ord. 21, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-30-1997)
§ 151.40 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments to this chapter, including revisions to the Official
Floodplain Zoning District Map, shall be submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. The floodplain designation
on the Official Floodplain Zoning District Map shall not be removed unless the
area is filled to an elevation at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to lands outside of the floodplain. Changes in the
Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA)
technical conditions and criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before
adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten days’ written
notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this chapter and the notice
shall include a draft of the amendment or technical study under consideration.
(1989 Code, § 13.80) (Ord. 21, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-30-1997)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Uses in violation of the chapter. Every structure, fill, deposit, or
other use placed or maintained in the floodplain in violation of this chapter
shall be considered a public nuisance.
   (B)   Civil remedies. The creation of a public nuisance may be enjoined and
the maintenance of a public nuisance under this chapter may be abated by an
action brought by the City of Aurora or the Department of Natural Resources.
   (C)   Enforcement. Violations of the provisions of this chapter constitutes
a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. The Zoning Administrator may
utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not
limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders
for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program
for denial of flood insurance. The City of Aurora must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct chapter violations to the extent
possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 111, passed 3-4-2025)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions; Administration
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Scope
   
152.03   Definitions
   
152.04   Procedures
   
152.05   Specifications for plats
   
152.06   Variances, exceptions, planned unit development
   
152.07   Administration and enforcement
   
152.08   Amendments; procedures
Subdivision Design Standards
   
152.20   Streets
   
152.21   Intersections
   
152.22   Alleys
   
152.23   Easements
   
152.24   Blocks
   
152.25   Lots
   
152.26   Public sites, pedestrian ways, open spaces and natural features
   
152.27   Planting strips
Subdivision Improvements
   
152.40   Required improvements
   
152.41   Payment, improvement contract, financial guarantee
   
152.42   Construction plans and as-builts
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval shall comply in
all respects with the regulations set forth herein. It is the purpose of these
regulations to:
   (A)   Encourage well planned, efficient and attractive developments by
establishing adequate standards for design and construction;
   (B)   Provide for the health, safety and welfare of people by requiring
properly designed and coordinated streets and adequate sewage and drainage
facilities;
   (C)   Secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and
waters;
    (D)   Serve as a tool to carry out the objectives and policies of the
Comprehensive Guide Plan; and
   (E)   Provide for a means to provide adequate recreational areas and other
public facilities.
(1989 Code, § 12.01)
§ 152.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to the subdivision or re-subdivision of any parcel
of land in the city. No conveyance of land, in which the land conveyed is
described using an unplatted description, shall be made or recorded if the
conveyance creates five or more unplatted lots or unplatted parcels within a
Forty or Government Lot which are two and a half acres or less in size, or if a
new street is involved, unless the parcel was a separate parcel of record on
the effective date of this chapter.
(1989 Code, § 12.02) (Ord. 81, passed 7-11-2017)
§ 152.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear
of two or more properties abutting on a street.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a stream, reservoir or rail
line.
   BUTT LOTS. Any lot or lots at the end of a block, located between two corner
lots.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street so designated on the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
   COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE PLAN (COMPREHENSIVE MUNICIPAL PLAN). A compilation of
policy statements, objectives, standards and maps for guiding the physical,
social and economic development, both public and private, of the city and its
environs, as defined in the State Municipal Planning Act, being M.S. §§ 462.351
et seq.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A short, local street having only one outlet and a vehicular
turnaround.
   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot extending between and having frontage on a major
street and a local street with vehicular access solely from the latter.
   EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for the specific use of the land for a
public or quasi-public purpose.
   FINAL PLAT. A final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s plan of
a subdivision is presented to the Council for approval and which, if approved,
will be submitted to the County Recorder.
   LOCAL STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to
abutting properties and the local needs of the neighborhood.
   LOT. One unit of a recorded plat subdivision or registered land survey,
occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings and
including as a minimum any open spaces as are required under this chapter and
having frontage on a public street.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A local street which is parallel and adjacent to a
thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public right-of-way across or within a block or
development to provide access for pedestrians.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A tentative map, drawing or chart of a proposed
subdivision meeting requirements herein enumerated.
   PRIVATE STREET. A street serving as vehicular access to two or more parcels
of land which is not dedicated to the public but is owned by one or more
private parties.
   STREET. A public way for vehicular traffic whether designated as a STREET,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, arterial, lane, place or
however otherwise designated. The width of a STREET is measured between right-
of-way lines.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a
subdivision of land for himself, herself or others.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division of land resulting in the creation of five or more
unplatted lots or unplatted parcels within a Forty or Government Lot which are
two and a half acres or less in size, or if a new street is involved, any
division of a parcel of land. The term includes RE-SUBDIVISION and, when
appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to
the land subdivided.
   THOROUGHFARE. A street designated on the Comprehensive Guide Plan as a
freeway, arterial or collector street.
(1989 Code, § 12.03) (Ord. 81, passed 7-11-2017)
§ 152.04 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Pre-application. The subdividers or owners should meet with the
Planning Commission, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and other
appropriate officials (City Engineer and Planner) in order to be made fully
aware of all applicable city code provisions, regulations and plans in the area
to be subdivided. The subdivider is urged to avail himself or herself of the
advice and assistance of the Planning Commission and the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer in order to save time, money and effort to facilitate the
approval of the preliminary plat.
   (B)   Preliminary plat procedures.
      (1)   Application and fee. The subdivider or owner shall file with the
Planning Commission Secretary five copies of the preliminary plat and
supplementary information as may be required and a cash fee of $50 plus $2 for
each lot. In addition to the application and fee, the subdivider shall be
required to prepay all planning, engineering and legal expenses incurred by the
city for the review of the request, based on an estimate.
      (2)   Distribution to other agencies. The Secretary shall refer one copy
of the preliminary plat to each of the following agencies: County Highway
Engineer, County Surveyor, City Engineer and Planning Commission, and the
Utilities Superintendent, for review and report. If, within 30 days, any agency
fails to submit a report, the city may proceed on the assumption that the
agency has approved the plat.
      (3)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall submit a
recommendation to the Council within 60 days of receipt of the application. The
Council shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat after notice of the
time and place thereof has been published once in the official newspaper at
least ten days before the day of the hearing. The Council shall act to approve
or disapprove the preliminary plat. If disapproved, the reasons for disapproval
shall be set forth in the minutes of the Council.
   (C)   Final plat procedures.
      (1)   Final submittal. The owner or subdivider shall file three hardshell
and two linen copies of the final plat for consideration by the Council
incorporating all changes or modifications required as conditions of approval
of the preliminary plat. In all other respects, it shall conform to the
preliminary plat as approved. The plat shall be complete as to the information
required under §
152.05.
      (2)   Certificate of abstract. The owner or subdivider shall also submit
an up-to-date, certified abstract of title or any other evidence as required by
the City Attorney.
      (3)   Review. The Secretary shall refer the final plat to the Planning
Commission for its review, report and signature. The report shall be submitted
to the Council within 30 days of the receipt of the plat and approved within 60
days of its receipt, provided all improvement contract requirements have been
satisfied according to §§
152.40 through
152.42.
      (4)   Recording. Upon approval of the final plat by the Council, the
subdivider shall record the final plat with the County Recorder, as provided
for by that office, within 60 days after approval by the Council. The
subdivider, within 30 days of recording, shall furnish the City Administrator/
Clerk- Treasurer with one linen copy of the final plat showing evidence of the
recording.
(1989 Code, § 12.04)
§ 152.05 SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLATS.
   (A)   Information required. The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a
scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger, and shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Title of the proposed subdivision;
      (2)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor or engineer
preparing the plat;
      (3)   Location of the subdivision by section, township and range or by
legal description;
      (4)   Graphic scale, north arrow, date of preparation;
      (5)   The names of abutting subdivisions and boundary or property lines
of adjoining subdivided or unsubdivided lands;
      (6)   Boundary line survey;
      (7)   Total acreage (acreage or square footage of individual lots in
preliminary plat);
      (8)   Location of existing easements, streets, utilities, structures,
section lines and corporate lines within and adjacent to the proposed
subdivision;
      (9)   If a replat, the original lot and block arrangements shown in
dotted or dash lines;
      (10)   Streets, street names, right-of-way and roadway widths;
      (11)   Locations of all alleys, pedestrian ways and utility easements;
      (12)   Layout, numbers and dimensions of all lots and blocks;
      (13)   Areas intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use;
      (14)   Minimum front and side street setback lines as required by the
zoning chapter (see
Chapter 153);
      (15)   High water and floodplain boundaries where appropriate;
      (16)   The location of all monuments;
      (17)   Notarized certification by a registered land surveyor;
      (18)   Certification showing that all taxes and special assessments have
been paid; and
      (19)   A form for approval and for the signatures of the Planning
Commission Chairperson, Secretary and the Mayor and City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (B)   Supplementary information required. In addition to the plat, the
following information shall be required and filed with the preliminary plat:
      (1)   A topographic map at the same scale as the preliminary plat showing
proposed lot lines existing and proposed topography, street centerline grades,
watercourses, marshes, vegetation and other significant features;
      (2)   Soil absorption tests where septic tanks are proposed;
      (3)   A schematic utility plan for water, sanitary and storm sewers and
drainage and including the proposed location, gradient and size of the proposed
sewer and water lines; and
      (4)   A map indicating plans for the development of the entire area, if
the proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development.
   (C)   Qualifications governing approval of a preliminary plat.
      (1)   The approval of a preliminary plat by the Council shall only
constitute acceptance of the design as a basis for the preparation of the final
plat by the owners or subdividers. Subsequent approval by appropriate officials
having jurisdiction will be required of the proposals pertaining to water
supplies, storm drainage, sewage disposal, sidewalks, grading, gradients and
roadway widths and the surfacing of streets prior to the approval of the final
plat. The subdivider shall also present evidence that the plat has been
reviewed by, and meets the requirements of, those responsible for the provision
of gas, electric and telephone service.
      (2)   No plat will be approved for a subdivision which includes any area
subject to periodic flooding or which contains poor drainage capabilities which
would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible, unless the
subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, make the area completely safe for occupancy and provide adequate
street and lot drainage.
(1989 Code, § 12.05)
§ 152.06 VARIANCES, EXCEPTIONS, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Variances. The City Council, sitting as the Board of Adjustments and
Appeals, shall have the authority to grant variances from the requirements of
this chapter subject to the same procedures, conditions and findings required
by the zoning chapter.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Simple lot divisions. A simple, easily described division of a
platted lot of record (e.g., east one-half of lot 31, or west 100 feet of lot
32) may be exempt from the platting requirements of this chapter, provided the
resultant parcels meet all zoning requirements as to lot area and width. This
division requires the approval of the Council.
      (2)   Lot line adjustment. The relocation of a common ownership boundary
between two or more platted lots or two or more parcels of unplatted property,
may be exempt from the platting requirements of this chapter, provided the
resultant parcels meet all zoning requirements as to lot area and width. This
division requires the approval of the Council.
      (3)   Court ordered transfers. Transfers of land pursuant to a court
order shall be exempt from the platting requirements of this chapter, provided
the resultant parcels meet all zoning requirements as to lot area and width.
However, any such division that fails to meet the standards of the city land
use regulations shall not be deemed a lot of record for the purposes of issuing
land use permits.
      (4)   Small subdivisions.  The supplementary information required under §
152.05 may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Commission for small
subdivisions. This will be an administrative decision based on the specific
nature of the land involved.
   (C)   Planned unit development. The requirements of this chapter may be
waived by fulfillment of the planned unit development requirements established
in the zoning chapter.
(1989 Code, § 12.08) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976; Ord. 81, passed 7-11-2017)
§ 152.07 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Authority. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or the Building
Inspector shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and for
the purpose of this chapter shall have the power of a peace officer.
   (B)   Building permits. No building permit shall be issued by any
governmental official for the construction of any building, structure or
improvement on any land required to be subdivided by this chapter until final
plat approval has been granted.
(1989 Code, § 12.20)
§ 152.08 AMENDMENTS; PROCEDURES.
   The Council may amend, supplement or repeal the provisions of this chapter
after a public hearing has been held thereon. This amendment may be initiated
by the Council, the Planning Commission or by petition. A notice of the time,
place and purpose of hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of
the city at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
(1989 Code, § 12.21) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.20 STREETS.
   (A)   Widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the
Comprehensive Guide Plan and where applicable shall conform to county and state
standards for trunk highways. In general, minimum widths should be as follows:
 
Expressways   300 feet
Thoroughfares 100 feet
Collectors    60 feet
Local streets 50 feet
 
   (B)   Horizontal alignment. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a
minimum radius of 300 feet for collector streets and 100 feet for local
streets.
   (C)   Vertical alignment. Different connecting street gradients shall be
connected with vertical curves. Minimum sight distance shall be 200 feet for
local streets and 300 feet for collector streets measured from points five feet
above street centerline.
   (D)   Minimum and maximum grades.  
      (1)   Minimum: 0.5%.
      (2)   Maximum: 5% for collector streets, 7% for local streets.
   (E)   Minimum carrying capacity. Seven-ton axle loading for local streets.
Nine-ton axle loading based on traffic volumes for arterial and collector
streets.
   (F)   Local streets. Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
   (G)   Cul-de-sacs.  
      (1)   Maximum length: 700 feet.
      (2)   Minimum radius of turnaround (right-of-way): 60 feet.
      (3)   Where certain topographic features or other unusual circumstances
dictate, special consideration may be given to longer cul-de-sacs.
   (H)   Direct access to major thoroughfares. In the case where a proposed
plat is adjacent to a freeway, thoroughfare or collector street as defined by
the Guide Plan, there shall be no direct access from individual lots to the
major thoroughfares. In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on major
thoroughfares, where no other access is available, a temporary entrance permit
may be granted by the State or County Highway Department. Provision shall be
made in the plats for the connection of roads to neighboring land. As the
neighboring land is platted and developed, and alternate means of access
becomes possible, the temporary entrance permits shall become void.
   (I)   Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where it will be
practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half street may be
permitted. The probable length of time elapsing before dedication of the
remainder shall be considered in this decision.
   (J)   Private streets. Private streets shall not be permitted, nor shall
public improvements be approved for private streets.
   (K)   Street names. Street names shall comply with the city street naming
and numbering system.
   (L)   Stub streets.  Where adjoining lands are not subdivided, some of the
streets in the new subdivision shall be required to be extended to the boundary
line of the tract to make provision for future access into adjacent areas.
   (M)   Street continuation and extension.  The arrangement of streets shall
provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new
subdivisions where appropriate.
   (N)   Street location and dedication. All subdivisions shall be required to
conform to the Comprehensive Guide Plan. Thoroughfare and collector streets
shown on the Guide Plan shall be dedicated, in the locations and widths shown,
to the city as a condition of plat approval.
(1989 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 1)
§ 152.21 INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Angle of intersection. Streets shall intersect as nearly to 90 degrees
as possible. In no case shall streets intersect at less than 75 degrees.
   (B)   Number of streets. No more than two streets shall cross at any one
intersection.
   (C)   Centerline offsets. The minimum distance between the centerlines of
offset intersections shall be 125 feet.
(1989 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 2)
§ 152.22 ALLEYS.
   Alleys should have a minimum right-of-way width of 30 feet and shall conform
to the gradient requirements of local streets.
(1989 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 3)
§ 152.23 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Utilities. Easements at least 12 feet wide centered on the rear and
side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary. They shall have
continuity of alignment from lot to lot and block to block.
   (B)   Drainage. Easements shall be provided along each side of any
watercourse to establish a storm sewer, drainage or floodway right-of-way. Its
boundaries shall conform substantially with the centerline alignment of the
watercourse.
(1989 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 4)
§ 152.24 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Arrangement.  A block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of
lots, except where lots back onto a major street, natural feature, railroad or
subdivision boundary, in which case it may have a single tier of lots.
   (B)   Length. The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,500 feet and the
minimum length, 400 feet. Blocks over 900 feet long may require pedestrian ways
at least ten feet wide at their approximate center.
(1989 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 5)
§ 152.25 LOTS.
   (A)   Location.  All lots shall abut for their full frontage on a publicly
dedicated street.
   (B)   Size. The lot dimensions shall be so as to comply with the minimum lot
areas specified in the zoning chapter.
   (C)   Butt lots.  Butt lots shall be prohibited.
   (D)   Side lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   (E)   Watercourses. Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel
or stream shall have sufficient depth and width to provide a minimum area of
land not subject to flooding equal to the minimum lot area specified in the
zoning chapter for the district in which the lots are located.
   (F)   Drainage. Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage away from
building locations.
   (G)   Width related to depth. To prevent narrow, deep lots, the depth of a
lot should not exceed two and one-half times the width as measured at the
building line.
   (H)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots (lots with frontage on two
parallel streets) shall not be permitted except where lots back to a major
thoroughfare street.
   (I)   Future arrangements. Where parcels of land are subdivided into
unusually large lots, such as when large lots are required for septic tank
operations, the plat shall be designed and shall show, in dashed lines, how
lots can be resubdivided at some future date when public sanitary sewers are
available.
(1989 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 6)
§ 152.26 PUBLIC SITES, PEDESTRIAN WAYS, OPEN SPACES AND NATURAL FEATURES.
   (A)   Public uses. Where a proposed park, playground, school, trail system
or other public use shown on the Comprehensive Guide Plan is located in whole
or in part within a subdivision, the area shall be dedicated to the public or
reserved for public purchase at fair market value. If, within two years of
recording of the plat, the purchase is not consummated, the reservation shall
be cancelled.
   (B)   Dedication. In all new subdivisions, the city shall require that a
sufficient portion of the land be used aside and dedicated to the public for
parks, schools, playgrounds or other public use exclusive of property dedicated
for streets and other public ways. It shall be presumed that a sufficient
amount of land has been dedicated for parks, schools and playgrounds for the
present and future residents if the subdivider dedicates at least 10% of the
land in the subdivision. The city, upon consideration of the particular type of
development proposed in the subdivision, may require larger or lesser amounts
of land to be dedicated if it determines that the present and future residents
of the subdivision would require greater or lesser amounts of land for those
purposes. In lieu of dedication of the land, the Council shall have the option
to require a cash payment equivalent to the fair market of the land in lieu of
a land dedication.
   (C)   Private parks. Subdividers shall be encouraged to provide small,
privately owned parks and open spaces in all commercial, industrial and
residential developments to satisfy the needs of employees, shoppers and small
children.
   (D)   Natural features. Existing natural features which add value to and
enhance the attractiveness of the development and the community (trees,
watercourses and the like) shall be preserved, insofar as possible, in the
design of the subdivision.
(1989 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 7)
§ 152.27 PLANTING STRIPS.
   Planting strips shall be placed along highways and railroad lines to screen
the view and to reduce the noise levels in residential areas.
(1989 Code, § 12.06, Subd. 8)
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
§ 152.40 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   Prior to the approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have agreed in
the manner set forth below to install, in conformity with construction plans,
approved by the City Engineer, and in conformity with all applicable standards
and city code provisions, the following improvements on the site.
   (A)   Monuments. Monuments of a permanent character shall be placed at each
corner or angle on the outside boundary of the subdivision. Pipes or steel rods
shall be placed at each corner of each lot and at each intersection of street
centerlines.
   (B)   Streets and alleys. All streets and alleys shall be graded to their
full width except in areas where tree cover and topography can and should be
preserved. All streets and alleys shall have an adequate sub-base, and shall be
improved with an all-weather permanent surface in accordance with city design
standards.
   (C)   Curb and gutter. Permanent curb and gutter shall be installed on both
sides of each improved street dedicated in the plat.
   (D)   Water supply.
      (1)   When a proposed subdivision is located adjacent to or reasonably
near the existing service area of a public water system, water lines shall be
extended and service connections shall be stubbed into the property line of
each lot. Fire hydrants shall also be provided.
      (2)   In areas where it is impractical to provide public water service,
individual wells or approved private community systems shall be provided on
each lot or grouping of lots, properly placed in relationship to the individual
sewer disposal facilities on the same and adjoining lots. Well location and
construction must meet approved state health standards.
   (E)   Sewage disposal.
      (1)   Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be installed to
service all lots less than five acres in size and shall be connected to the
public system.
      (2)   In areas being platted with lots five acres or larger in size,
individual on-site sewage disposal facilities shall be provided on each lot,
properly located with reference to the wells on the same and adjoining lots.
      (3)   The on-site disposal facilities shall meet approved state health
standards.
   (F)   Storm drainage. A system that will adequately take care of the surface
water runoff within the subdivision shall be provided, including storm sewers,
drain inlets, manholes, culverts and the like.
   (G)   Street signs.  Street signs of a standard design approved by the
Council shall be installed at each street intersection.
   (H)   Public utilities. All utility lines for telephone and electrical
services shall be placed underground.
   (I)   Street lighting. Street lighting shall be required in all
subdivisions, and plans shall be approved by the Council.
   (J)   Pedestrian ways.  All walkways adjacent to streets or otherwise
defined by easement shall be improved to adequately accommodate pedestrian
traffic.
(1989 Code, § 12.07, Subd. 1)
§ 152.41 PAYMENT, IMPROVEMENT CONTRACT, FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
   (A)   Payment. The required improvements to be furnished and installed by
the subdivider, which are listed and described above, are to be furnished and
installed at the sole expense of the subdivider and at no expense to the
public. If any improvement installed within the subdivision will be of
substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, the
Council may make provision for causing a portion of the cost of the
improvement, representing the benefit to those lands, to be assessed against
the same, and in that case the subdivider will be required only to pay for
those portions of the whole cost of the improvements as will represent the
benefit to the property within the subdivision.
   (B)   Required improvement contract. Prior to installation of required
improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall
enter into a contract with the city requiring that the subdivider furnish and
construct the improvements at his or her expense and in accordance with plans
and specifications to be approved by the City Engineer. The contract shall
stipulate the type and extent of the improvements to be constructed, the cost
of the construction, the city’s authority to inspect the construction and the
amount of the escrow deposit or performance bond to be furnished in accordance
with division (C) of this section. Alternatively, the city, in its discretion
may require that, or, at the request of the subdivider may agree to undertake
the installation of the required improvements, in which event the subdivider
shall enter into a contract with the city agreeing to pay the expense thereof,
including all construction, engineering, legal, financing and administrative
costs incurred by the city by reason thereof; by this contract the developer
shall agree to the method and schedule of payment to the city as determined by
the city and, if required, shall agree to furnish the escrow deposit or surety
bond described in division (C) below.
   (C)   Financial guarantee. Prior to the approval of the final plat, if the
subdivider is to undertake the installation of the required improvements, he or
she shall make an escrow deposit or, in lieu thereof, furnish a performance
bond equal to the total construction cost of the improvements as estimated by
the City Engineer, and including the cost of inspection by the city, or if the
city undertakes the installation of the improvements, and if requested by the
city, the subdivider shall make an escrow deposit or, in lieu thereof, furnish
a surety bond in the amount of the sum he or she has agreed to pay the city for
the installation of the improvements. Any deposit or bond shall accrue to the
city in case of default of the subdivider. In case of default, the city shall
appropriate the deposit and pursue its remedies provided by the bond. The term
of any deposit or bond shall be specified by the city. Any bond must be subject
to approval by the city. Deposits shall be made with the Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer of the city or with a responsible escrow agent acceptable to the
city. The city may agree to provide for reduction of the amount of any bond or
deposit by reason of completion of, or payment for, the improvements for which
the bond or deposit has been made. Nothing herein shall preclude the city from
making special assessments against benefitted property for improvements made on
it.
(1989 Code, § 12.07, Subd. 2)
§ 152.42 CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND AS-BUILTS.
   (A)   Construction plans. Construction plans for the required improvements
conforming in all respects to the standards of the city and the applicable city
code provisions, shall be prepared at the subdivider’s expense by a
professional engineer who is registered in this state and the plans shall
contain his or her seal. These plans together with the quantity of construction
items shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his or her approval.
   (B)   As-builts. Upon the City Engineer’s certificate of compliance, the
subdivider shall furnish the city with as-built drawings prepared by a
registered engineer showing the improvements as-built or in place.
(1989 Code, § 12.07, Subd. 3)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1989 Code, § 12.99) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Statement of policy
   
153.002   Definitions
   
153.003   Permitted uses
   
153.004   Nonconforming uses
   
153.005   Rezoning
   
153.006   Plan approval
   
153.007   Variances
   
153.008   Appeals
   
153.009   Zoning and improvement permit and fee requirement
Planning Organizations
   
153.020   Comprehensive planning
   
153.021   Planning Commission
   
153.022   Duties of the Planning Commission and the Board of Adjustments and
Appeals
Zoning Districts
   
153.035   Zoning Districts listed; map
   
153.036   LR – Low Density Residential
   
153.037   R-1 – One- and Two-Family Residential
   
153.038   R-2 – Mobile Home Park
   
153.039   R-2A – Mobile Home (Standard Residential Lot)
   
153.040   R-3 – Multi-Family Residential
   
153.041   C-1 – Business Commercial District
   
153.042   [Reserved]
   
153.043   [Reserved]
   
153.044   I-1 – Industrial Commercial District
   
153.045   [Reserved]
   
153.046   PUB – Public Open Space
Special Requirements and Standards
   
153.060   Table of minimum district requirements
   
153.061   Special requirements in R-2 Zoning District
   
153.062   Special requirements in R-3 District
   
153.063   Special requirements in C-1 Districts
   
153.064   Special requirements in I-1 District
   
153.065   Substandard lots and parcels
   
153.066   Off-street parking requirements
   
153.067   Location of off-street parking
   
153.068   Parking space standards
   
153.069   Access to parking space
   
153.070   Minimum parking spaces required
   
153.071   Surfacing, drainage and curbing
   
153.072   Parking lot screening
   
153.073   Lighting
   
153.074   Joint parking facilities
   
153.075   Home occupations
   
153.076   Fences
   
153.077   Garage, rummage and yard sales
   
153.078   Opt-out of M.S. § 462.3593
   
153.079   Solar and wind energy installations
PUD – Planned Unit Development Procedure
   
153.095   Purpose
   
153.096   Required conditions
   
153.097   Procedure
Adult Oriented Establishments
   
153.110   Purpose and findings
   
153.111   Definitions
   
153.112   Application of this subchapter
   
153.113   Licensing
   
153.114   Inspection
   
153.115   Location; conditions of license
   
153.116   Expiration, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of license
   
153.117   Sign restrictions
   
153.118   Effective date
Enforcement
   
153.130   Enforcement
   
153.131   Validity
   
153.132   Interpretation
   
153.133   Supremacy
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   The Council finds that the city is faced with mounting problems in providing
means of guiding future development of land so as to ensure a safer, pleasant
and more economical environment for residential, commercial, industrial and
public activities, and to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare. Through the enactment of this chapter, the Council intends to prepare
for anticipated changes and by those preparations, to bring about a significant
savings in both private and public expenditures. This chapter is intended to be
one means of effectuating the Comprehensive Guide Plan undertaken by the city.
Through this chapter, the city intends to encourage the wise development of
lands within the city and to serve its citizens more effectively and to make
the provision of public services less costly and to achieve a more secure tax
base. Specifically, these provisions are designed to achieve the foregoing
objectives through the regulation of the location, height, bulk, number of
stories, size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot area
which may be occupied, the size of yards and other open spaces, the density and
distribution of population, the uses of buildings and structures for trade,
industry, residence, recreation, public activities or other purposes, and the
uses of land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public activities or
other purposes, through the establishment of standards and procedures
regulating uses within the city.
(1989 Code, § 11.01)
§ 153.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUTTING LOTS OR PARCELS.  Any lots or parcels which have a common boundary
line.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building which is used in relation to an accessory
use.
   APARTMENT BUILDING.  A building with three or more dwelling units attached
both horizontally and vertically.
   APARTMENT, WALK-UP. A multiple-family dwelling whose upper floors are
accessible only by stairs.
   BOARDING HOUSE.  A building within which rooms are rented and meals are
provided to two or more persons not members of the owner’s or lessee’s family.
   BUILDING. Any structure erected for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind.
   BUSINESS. Any establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise wherein
merchandise is manufactured, exhibited or sold, or where services are offered
for compensation.
   CONDITIONAL USE.  A use, that because of special control problems the use
presents, requires effectuation of reasonable, but special, unusual and
extraordinary limitations or conditions peculiar to the use for the protection
of the public welfare and the integrity of the City Land Use Plan.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit specially and individually granted by the
Council upon written application and after formal review thereon by the
Planning Commission for any conditional use so permitted in any use district.
   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial enterprise that customarily offers
goods, services or entertainment to clientele within automobiles (example:
automobile service stations, drive-in restaurants, outdoor theaters and car
washes, but not drive-in cleaners where the customer must leave his or her
automobile to pick up or deliver goods).
   DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used predominantly for
residential occupancy of a continued nature, including one-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings and multiple- family dwellings, but not including hotels,
motels, commercial boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes and trailers.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY (APARTMENT AND FLAT). A residential building, or
portion thereof, containing three or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY.  A residential building containing one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX). A residential building containing two
dwelling units.
   EFFICIENCY UNITS. A dwelling unit with one primary room which doubles as a
living room (in its ordinary sense) and a bedroom and may, in addition, serve
for other residential uses.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following definitions shall apply:
      (1)   A distinct business entity situated in a single building;
      (2)   A distinct business entity located in a structure attached to other
similar structures by common walls and ceilings or floors, or attached by means
of an enclosed arcade; or
      (3)   A distinct business entity contained within a single structure and
not separated by walls or other physical barriers, but made distinct due to its
existence as a single lease space and operation by separate entrepreneurs, or
by its singularity of purpose (such as clothing sales, furniture sales and so
on) carried on by a single or separate proprietor.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of
a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the centerline of party walls separating two buildings.
      (1)   In particular, GROSS FLOOR AREAS shall include:
         (a)   Basement space, if at least 50% of its story height is above the
average level of the finished grade;
         (b)   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
         (c)   Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the structural
headroom exceeds seven and one-half feet, except equipment, open or enclosed,
located on the roof, i.e., bulkheads, water tanks and cooling towers;
         (d)   Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds seven
and one-half feet;
         (e)   Interior balconies and mezzanines, where the structural headroom
exceeds seven and one-half feet;
         (f)   Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways; and
         (g)   Accessory uses other than floor space devoted exclusively to
accessory off-street parking or loading.
      (2)   But shall not include the following: garages, open porches and open
patios.
   FLOOR/AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross
floor area of a building or buildings by the total area of the lot or parcel of
land on which the building is located.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the
dwelling building intended for or used to store private passenger vehicles of
the families resident upon the premises and in which no business, service or
industry connected directly or indirectly with automotive vehicles may be
carried on.
   GREEN STRIP. An area containing only vegetation such as grass, trees,
flowers, hedges and other related landscaping materials, and maintained
expressly for that purpose.
   HOTEL. A building which provides a common entrance, lobby and stairways, and
in which lodging is commonly offered with or without meals for periods of less
than a week.
   LOADING SPACE. A space accessible from a street, alley or way in a building
or a lot for the use of motor vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise
or materials.
   LOT. A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated
from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision of record or
survey map, or by metes and bounds, for the purpose of sale or lease or
separate use thereof.
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets.
   LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in a single or separate
ownership.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which is along an existing or
dedicated street. In the case of corner lots, the Zoning Official shall
determine, but only for the purpose of this chapter, which lot line or lines
shall be considered front lot lines; this determination shall not be construed
as stating in which direction buildings shall face. In general, the narrower of
the lines abutting streets shall be the front line for the above stated
purpose.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot line which is most distant from and is
approximately parallel to the front line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at the front yard setback line.
   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL. A point of assembly or disassembly of people
arriving or departing by means of public transportation.
   REST HOME (NURSING HOME). A private home for the care of children, of the
aged or infirm or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. The
terms NURSING HOME and REST HOME shall include NURSING HOMES, BOARDING CARE
HOMES and CHILD CARE INSTITUTIONS, licensed and regulated by the State
Commissioner of Public Welfare, but shall not include maternity care homes or
hospitals which are so regulated.
   RETAIL SALE. A transfer of title or possession of personal property to a
purchaser for a price.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The property within the boundary of a street or highway
easement, or the property owned by a governmental body for roadway purposes;
generally the RIGHT-OF-WAY line is coincident with the property line of
abutting property, and is the line generally used in calculating setbacks.
   SERVICE STATION (GAS OR FILLING STATION). Any building or premises used for
dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail any automotive fuels or oils,
and where battery, tire and other similar services may be rendered. When the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale of any fuels or oils is incidental to the
conduct of a public repair garage, the premises shall be classified as a public
repair garage.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance from a building, hedge, fence, wall
or structure to the street or lot line.
   SIGN. Any message-bearing device for visual communication that is used
primarily for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of
the public, including any banner, pennant, valance or similar display.
   STORY. Each of the stages, separated by floors, one above another, of which
a building consists.
   STREET. A public right-of-way for roadway purposes.
   STREET LINE. The common boundary of the street right-of-way and abutting
property.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders or any substantial changes in the roof or
exterior walls.
   TOWNHOUSE/GARDEN APARTMENT.  Three or more dwelling units horizontally
attached in a linear or cluster arrangement, with the separate dwelling units
within the building separated from each other by a wall or walls extending from
foundation to roof. Characteristic features of TOWNHOUSES or GARDEN APARTMENTS
are their private entrances and small private yards for outdoor living. A
TOWNHOUSE or GARDEN APARTMENT development includes at least one large common
area of open space for aesthetic or recreational purposes.
   USED CAR LOT.  Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and
selling second-hand passenger cars and/or trucks.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any self-service device which, upon insertion of a coin,
coins or tokens, or by other similar means, dispenses unit servings of food or
other goods, either in bulk or in packages without the necessity of
replenishing the device between each vending operation.
   YARD. An open space which is unoccupied and unobstructed, except as
otherwise permitted by this chapter. A YARD extends along a lot line and at
right angles to the lot line to a depth or width specified in the YARD
regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line
between the side lot lines.
   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line
between the two side lot lines.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along the side lot line between the front and
rear lot lines.
(1989 Code, § 11.02) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976; Ord. 14, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-9-
1994)
§ 153.003 PERMITTED USES.
   Except as provided for in §
153.004, no building or premises may hereafter be used or occupied within a
given land use district unless it is a permitted use in that district.
(1989 Code, § 11.03)
§ 153.004 NONCONFORMING USES.
   Unless specifically provided otherwise herein, the lawful use of any land or
building existing on the effective date of this chapter may be continued even
if the use does not conform to the regulations of this chapter, provided:
   (A)   No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged or increased or occupy
a greater area of land than that occupied by the use on the effective date of
this chapter;
   (B)   The nonconforming use shall not be moved to any other part of the
parcel of land upon which the same was conducted on the effective date of this
chapter;
   (C)   A nonconforming use of a building existing on the effective date of
this chapter may be extended throughout the building, provided no structural
alterations except those required by this chapter, law or other regulation are
made therein;
   (D)   If a nonconforming use occupies a building and ceases for a continuous
period of two years, any subsequent use of the building shall be in conformity
to the use regulation specified by this chapter for the district in which the
building is located;
   (E)   Any nonconforming use shall not be continued following 60% destruction
of the building in which it was conducted by fire, wind, earthquake or
explosion, according to the estimate of a qualified Building Inspector and as
approved by the Council; and
   (F)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, where there is a
nonconforming use of land on a parcel with no structure or where there is a
nonconforming use of land (such as storage of equipment and supplies), on which
there is a conforming structure, the use shall be terminated within two years
following the effective date of this chapter.
(1989 Code, § 11.04)
§ 153.005 REZONING.
   The following rules shall govern applications for amendments to the zoning
provisions hereinafter referred to as “rezoning applications.”
   (A)   Procedures.
      (1)   A rezoning application may be initiated by the Council, the
Planning Commission or by the owner of the subject property. The application
shall be referred to the Planning Commission for public hearing, study and
report and may not be acted upon by the Council until it has received the
recommendation of the Commission, or until 90 days have elapsed from the date
of referral of the application without a report by the Planning Commission. The
date of referral is defined as the date of the public hearing.
      (2)   The applicant or his or her authorized agent shall fill out and
submit to the Secretary of the Planning Commission a planning and zoning
application, copies of which are available at the city offices, together with a
fee of $150. The application shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning
Commission at least 14 days before the date of the public hearing.
      (3)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall refer the matter to
the Planning Commission by placing the application upon the agenda of the
Commission’s next regular meeting; provided, however, that the Secretary may,
with the approval of the Chairperson of the Commission, place the application
on the agenda for a special meeting of the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Not less than ten days before the date of the hearing, the
Secretary of the Planning Commission shall mail notice of the hearing to the
applicant and to the property owners within 350 feet (including streets) of the
subject property. The failure of the owner or occupant to receive the notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings hereunder.
      (5)   Not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing, the
Secretary shall publish a notice of hearing in the official newspaper.
      (6)   The Planning Commission shall report its recommendations to the
Council not later than 60 days following the date of referral to the
Commission.
      (7)   The application and recommendation of the Planning Commission shall
be placed on the agenda of the Council within 30 days following the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, or in the event the Commission has
failed to make a recommendation within 90 days of the date of referral to the
Commission.
      (8)   The Council shall make a final determination of the application
within 60 days of the recommendation of the Planning Commission or in the event
the Commission has failed to make any recommendation, within 120 days of the
date of referral to the Commission.
      (9)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission, following the
Commission’s action upon the application, and the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, following the Council’s action upon the application, shall give the
applicant a written notice of the action taken. A copy of this notice shall be
kept on file as a part of the permanent record of the application.
      (10)   The applicant or his or her agent shall appear at each meeting of
the Commission and of the Council during which the application is considered.
Furthermore, each applicant shall provide for the Commission or the Council, as
the case may be, the maps, drawings, plans, records or other information
requested by the Commission or the Council for the purpose of assisting the
determination of the application.
   (B)   Review of rezoning. Where property within the city has been rezoned
for a less restrictive land use upon petition of the owner or his or her agent
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and where no structural work
thereon has commenced within two years of the date of the rezoning action by
the Council, the Planning Commission may review the zoning classification of
the property in the light of the Comprehensive Plan and make appropriate
recommendations to the Council, which may include the recommendation that the
subject property be rezoned to permit a more restrictive use in conformance
with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan.
(1989 Code, § 11.12) (Amended by City Council 8-16-2022)
§ 153.006 PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Generally.  It is declared to be the policy of the city to preserve
and promote an attractive, stable residential and business environment for its
citizens through encouraging well conceived, high quality developments. To this
end, imaginative architectural concepts shall be employed in the design of
buildings and in the development of respective sites. In this regard, every
person, before commencing the construction or major alteration of a structure,
except single-family detached dwellings and buildings accessory thereto, shall
make application for the plan approval from the Council. The following rules
shall govern applications for plan approval.
   (B)   Procedures.
      (1)   A plan approval application shall be initiated by the owner of the
subject property or by his or her authorized agent. The applicant shall fill
out and submit to the Secretary of the Planning Commission a planning and
zoning application, copies of which are available at the city offices, together
with a fee of $100. The application shall be filed with the Secretary of the
Planning Commission at least 14 days prior to the next regular meeting of the
Planning Commission.
      (2)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall refer the matter to
the Planning Commission by placing the application upon the agenda of the
Commission’s next regular meeting; provided, however, that the Secretary may,
with the approval of the Chairperson of the Commission, place the application
on the agenda for a special meeting of the Planning Commission.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall report its recommendations to the
Council not later than 60 days following the date of referral to the
Commission. The DATE OF REFERRAL is defined as the date upon which the
application is first considered by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   The application and recommendation of the Commission shall be
placed on the agenda of the Council within 30 days following the recommendation
of the Planning Commission, or in the event the Commission has failed to make a
recommendation, within 90 days of the date of referral to the Commission.
      (5)   The Council shall make a final determination of the application
within 60 days of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, or in the
event the Commission has failed to make any recommendation, within 120 days of
the date of referral to the Commission.
      (6)   The applicant or his or her agent shall appear at each meeting of
the Commission and the Council to answer questions regarding the maps,
drawings, plans and to furnish any information as may be required.
      (7)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission, following the
Commission’s action upon the application, and the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, following the Council’s action upon the application, shall give the
applicant a written notice of the action taken. A copy of this notice shall be
kept on file as a part of the permanent record of the application.
   (C)   Required documents. Concurrent with filing application for plan
approval, the applicant shall submit, as required, to the Secretary of the
Planning Commission the following documents and information:
      (1)   A survey drawing by a registered engineer or land surveyor showing
pertinent existing conditions, accurately dimensioned; and
      (2)   A complete set of preliminary drawings prepared by an architect,
landscape architect, engineer or planner showing:
         (a)   An accurately scaled and dimensioned site plan indicating
parking layout including access provisions, designation of locations of
possible accessory buildings, landscaping, including trees and shrubbery with
indication of species, planting, size and location;
         (b)   Fences or walls or other screening, including height and type of
material;
         (c)   Lighting provisions, type and location;
         (d)   Curbs;
         (e)   Building elevations, sections and outline specifications,
including materials proposed; and
         (f)   Existing and proposed land elevations, drainage provisions, and
utility provisions as may be required.
   (D)   Conditions and restrictions. The Planning Commission may recommend and
the Council may impose any conditions and restrictions as deemed necessary to
protect the public interest and to secure compliance with the requirements of
this chapter. The conditions may include the execution and submission of a
performance agreement with a supporting financial guarantee that the subject
property will be constructed, developed and maintained in conformance with the
plans, specifications and standards.
(1989 Code, § 11.13)
§ 153.007 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally. In instances where the strict enforcement of the literal
provisions of this chapter would cause undue hardship because of circumstances
unique and distinctive to an individual property under consideration, the
Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustments and Appeals, shall have the power to
grant variances, in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter. The
provisions of this chapter, considered in conjunction with the unique and
distinctive circumstances affecting the property must be the proximate cause of
the hardship; circumstances caused by the property owner or his or her
predecessor in title shall not constitute sufficient justification to grant a
variance. The following rules shall govern applications for a variance from the
strict requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Procedures.
      (1)   A variance application shall be initiated by the owner of the
subject property or his or her authorized agent. The application shall be
referred to the Planning Commission for public hearing, study and report and
may not be acted upon by the Council until it has received the recommendation
of the Planning Commission, or until 90 days have elapsed from the date of
referral of the application without a report by the Planning Commission. The
DATE OF REFERRAL is defined as the date of the public hearing.
      (2)    The applicant shall fill out and submit to the Secretary of the
Planning Commission a planning and zoning application, copies of which are
available at the city offices, together with a fee as set by resolution of the
City Council. The application shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning
Commission at least 14 days before the date of the public hearing.
      (3)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall refer the matter to
the Planning Commission by placing the application upon the agenda of the
Planning Commission’s next regular meeting; provided, however, that the
Secretary may, with the approval of the Chairperson of the Planning Commission,
place the application on the agenda for a special meeting of the Planning
Commission.
      (4)   Not less than ten days before the date of the hearing, the
Secretary of the Planning Commission shall mail notice of the hearing to the
applicant and to the property owners or occupants within 350 feet (including
streets) of the subject property. The failure of the owner or occupant to
receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings hereunder.
      (5)   The Planning Commission shall report its recommendations to the
Council not later than 60 days following the date of referral to the Planning
Commission.
      (6)   The application and recommendation of the Planning Commission shall
be placed on the agenda of the Council within 30 days following the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, or in the event the Planning
Commission has failed to make a recommendation, within 90 days of the date of
referral to the Planning Commission.
      (7)   The Council shall make a final determination of the application
within 60 days of the recommendation by the Planning Commission, or in the
event the Planning Commission has failed to make any recommendation, within 120
days of the date of referral to the Planning Commission.
      (8)   The applicant or his or her agent shall appear at each meeting of
the Planning Commission and of the Council during which the application is
considered. Furthermore, each applicant shall provide for the Planning
Commission or the Council, as the case may be, the maps, drawings, plans,
records or other information requested by the Planning Commission or the
Council for the purpose of assisting the determination of the application.
      (9)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission, following the Planning
Commission’s action upon the application, and the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, following the Council’s action upon the application, shall give the
applicant a written notice of the action taken. A copy of this notice shall be
kept on file as a part of the permanent record of the application.
   (C)   Standards for variances.  The Planning Commission may recommend and
the Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustments and Appeals, may grant variances
from the literal provisions of this chapter in instances where their strict
enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique and
distinctive to the individual property under consideration. However, the
Planning Commission shall not recommend and the Council shall in no case permit
as a variance any use that is not permitted under this chapter in the district
where the affected person’s land is located. A variance may be granted by the
Council after demonstration by evidence that all of the following
qualifications are met.
      (1)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific parcels of land involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out.
      (2)   The conditions upon which the application for a variance is based
are unique to the parcel of land for which the variance is sought, and are not
common, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification.
      (3)   The alleged hardship is related to the requirements of this chapter
and has not been created by any persons presently or formerly having an
interest in the parcel of land.
      (4)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other land or improvements in the neighborhood in which
the parcel of land is located.
   (D)   Conditions and restrictions. The Planning Commission may recommend and
the Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustments and Appeals, may impose
conditions and restrictions in the granting of variances so as to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the spirit and intent
of the Comprehensive Plan and to protect adjacent properties.
(1989 Code, § 11.14) (Ord. 67, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 153.008 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal matters. The Planning Commission shall hear and recommend and
the Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustments and Appeals, shall make a final
determination in the following appeal matters:
      (1)   Appeals from the denial of a building permit made pursuant to the
adoption of an official map as provided for in state law; and
      (2)   Appeals from an order, requirement or determination made by an
administrative officer in the enforcement of the zoning chapter, where it is
alleged that some error in interpretation or judgment exists as provided for in
M.S. § 462.367, Subdivision 6(1).
   (B)   Procedures.
      (1)   A written appeal stating the position of the appellant shall be
filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission at least 14 days prior to
the next regular meeting of the Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustments and
Appeals.
      (2)   The Secretary shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission by
placing the application upon the agenda of the Planning Commission’s next
regular meeting.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall report its recommendations to the
Council not later than 30 days following the date of referral to the Planning
Commission.
      (4)   The application and recommendation of the Planning Commission shall
be placed on the agenda of the Council within 30 days following the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, or in the event the Planning
Commission has failed to make a recommendation, within 60 days of the date of
referral to the Planning Commission.
      (5)   The Council shall make a final determination of the application
within 30 days of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, or in the
event the Planning Commission has failed to make any recommendation, within 90
days of the date of referral to the Planning Commission.
      (6)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission following the Planning
Commission’s action upon the application, and the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, following the Council’s action upon the application, shall give the
applicant a written notice of the action taken. A copy of this notice shall be
kept on file as a part of the permanent record of the application.
(1989 Code, § 11.15) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
§ 153.009 ZONING AND IMPROVEMENT PERMIT AND FEE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit fees. Any applications for a permit to construct or renovate a
dwelling, business, or property that is submitted by any business or owner of
any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any
premises shall be accompanied by the required fee, with said fee to be set by
resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Construction permits required.
      (1)   A zoning permit is required for any construction that physically
changes or adds structures to the property, or for work regulated by Minnesota
State Building Code such as:
         (a)   New building. Examples include but are not limited to:
dwellings, garages, detached storage sheds, carports, pole barns, commercial
buildings, manufactured housing, or mobile homes.
         (b)   Additions. Examples include but are not limited to: buildings,
swimming pools, decks, retaining walls, and fences.
      (2)   An improvement permit is required for any construction that is
cosmetic alterations and/or repairs to the existing features of the property:
         (a)   Alterations. Beyond cosmetic, examples include but are not
limited to: converting a garage to a family room, re-roofing, dry-walling,
insulating, finishing a basement, window replacement, and re-siding.
         (b)   Repairs. Any repair involving structural members.
   (C)   Collection of building permit fees.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section:
         (a)   The act by the city of granting an application for a zoning and/
or an improvement permit, and the subsequent issuance of the permit, are deemed
improvements to real estate; and
         (b)   The act by the owner of real estate of employing or entering
into an agreement with a contractor or other person for construction, requiring
a building permit, shall be deemed an appointment of such contractor or other
person as the agent of such owner for the purpose of applying for such permit
and incurring fees therefor, and the owner and the agent shall be jointly and
severally liable for payment thereof.
      (2)   Any business or owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or
other person in control of any premises who begins construction and/or repair
that requires either a zoning permit or an improvement permit without first
securing said permit shall be in violation of this subchapter.
      (3)   Notice of violation of this subchapter shall be prepared by the
city and mailed to the owner. Any property or resident of a dwelling, or other
person in control of any premises who fails to submit an application for the
permits required by division (B) of this section prior to beginning
construction shall be assessed the permit fee at two times the regular rate.
      (4)   If such fee remains unpaid for a period of more than 30 days after
mailing, the city may collect the same in a civil action or, in the alternative
and at the option of the city, as otherwise provided in this section.
      (5)   Each such account is hereby made a lien upon the premises improved.
All such accounts which are more than 45 days past due may, when authorized by
resolution of the Commission, be certified by the City Clerk to the County
Auditor, and the City Clerk in so certifying shall specify the amount thereof,
the description of the premises improved, and the name of the owner thereof.
The amount so certified shall be extended by the Auditor on the tax rolls
against such premises in the same manner as other taxes, and collected by the
County Treasurer, and paid to the city along with other taxes.
      (6)   Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with,
assists, or participates in any way in the violation of any provisions or
requirements of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and for each such
violation is subject to the maximum penalty prescribed by state law for a
misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 77, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 103, passed - -)
PLANNING ORGANIZATIONS
§ 153.020 COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING.
   The Council hereby undertakes to carry on comprehensive study and planning
as a continuing guide for land use and development legislation within the city.
For this purpose, the Council has adopted a Comprehensive Guide Plan for the
city, and designates an advisory planning agency to aid in the planning.
(1989 Code, § 11.05) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
§ 153.021 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   A Planning Commission composed of seven members is hereby established and
continued as a planning agency advisory to the Council. Any vacancy in an
office of Planning Commissioner, by expiration of his or her term, resignation
or removal shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor and confirmed by a
majority vote of the Council. Upon appointment, each Commissioner shall serve
for a term of two years or until a successor has been appointed. Each
Commissioner shall be a resident of the city and shall subscribe to the
appropriate oath of office. No Commissioner shall take part in the
consideration of any matter wherein he or she is the applicant, petitioner or
appellant, nor in the consideration of any application, petition or appeal
wherein his or her interest might reasonably be expected to affect his or her
impartiality. The Planning Commission shall annually elect its Chairperson and
by majority vote may adopt rules of parliamentary procedure for the conduct of
the Commission meetings. The meetings of the Commission shall be held at least
once a month and shall be open to the public. The City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer shall serve as Secretary to the Planning Commission and in that
capacity shall prepare the minutes of the meetings of the Commission and shall
maintain the files and records of same.
(1989 Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.022 DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND
APPEALS.
   (A)   Planning.
      (1)   Comprehensive planning.
         (a)   The Commission shall, from time to time, upon its own motion or
upon direction of the Council, review the Comprehensive Plan and by a majority
vote of all members of the Commission recommend appropriate amendments to the
Council.
         (b)   Before recommending any such amendments to the Council, the
Commission shall hold at least one public hearing to consider the proposed
amendment. The Secretary to the Commission shall publish notice of the time,
place and purpose of the hearing once in the official newspaper of the city at
least ten days before the date of the hearing. Furthermore, the Secretary shall
transmit copies of the proposed amendment to the Council prior to the
publication of the notice of hearing.
         (c)   Following the review and recommendation by the Commission, the
Council shall consider the proposed amendment and may, by resolution of a
majority of its members, amend the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
      (2)   Coordination with other agencies. In the performance of its
planning activities, the Commission shall consult with other departments and
agencies of the city to ensure conformity with and to assist in a development
of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan. Furthermore, the Commission shall take due
cognizance of the planning activities of adjacent units of government and other
affected public agencies.
   (B)   Platting. Before dividing any tract of land into two or more lots or
parcels, an owner or subdivider shall, unless a variance is authorized, proceed
under the provisions of the subdivision regulations provisions of the city
code, codified in
Chapter 152.
   (C)   Rezoning applications. The Commission shall hear and review all
applications for amendments to this zoning chapter, hereinafter referred to as
planning and zoning applications. The Secretary of the Planning Commission
shall maintain permanent files and records for each application to the
Commission. The record for each application shall consist of a written
application on a form provided by the city, the minutes of the Commission upon
the hearing of the application and the written recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
   (D)   Plan approval. Every person, before commencing the construction or
major alteration of a structure (except single-family detached dwellings),
shall submit information as set out herein.
   (E)   Board of Adjustments and Appeals.
      (1)   The Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustments and Appeals and
shall hear applications for variances as provided for in this chapter.
      (2)   The rules of parliamentary procedure governing the conduct of
Planning Commission meetings shall also govern the conduct of the meetings of
the Council when acting as the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. The Secretary
of the Planning Commission shall maintain permanent files and records for each
application, petition or appeal to the Board of Adjustments and Appeals and
shall place in the file the record pertaining to each proceeding which shall
consist of the written application, petition or appeal; a copy of the minutes
of the hearing of the Board; and a copy of the written recommendation of the
Board.
(1989 Code, § 11.11)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 153.035 ZONING DISTRICTS LISTED; MAP.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the city is hereby classified into
the following Zoning Districts:
LR   Low Density Residential
R-1  One- and Two-Family Residential
R-2  Mobile Home Park
R-2A Mobile Home (Standard Residential Lot)
R-3  Multi-Family Residential
C-1  Business Commercial District
I-1  Industrial Commercial District
PUB  Public or Quasi-Public Open Space
 
   (B)   Zoning map. The boundaries of these districts are hereby defined and
established as shown on the map entitled “Zoning Map, City of Aurora,
Minnesota.” Unless otherwise indicated by relation to established lines, points
or features, the district boundary lines are the centerlines of streets, alleys
or railroad rights-of-way, existing or extended.
(1989 Code, § 11.20) (Ord. 82, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 153.036 LR – LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL.
   Permitted uses include:
   (A)   Single-family detached and two-family dwellings on parcels of not less
than five acres if not served by public sanitary sewer and water; and
   (B)   Accessory buildings, provided they do not exceed 50% of the gross
floor area of the principal dwelling.
(1989 Code, § 11.21)
§ 153.037 R-1 – ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   Permitted uses include:
   (A)   One-family detached dwellings.
      (1)   All family dwellings in the city limits must meet recommended
foundation requirements as stated in State Building Code, except those
dwellings in designated mobile home parks.
      (2)   All family dwellings must meet a minimum width requirement of 24
feet.
      (3)   All family dwellings must have approved siding.
      (4)   All family dwellings must meet approved requirements restricting
pitch of the roof.
      (5)   All family dwellings must meet a minimum length requirement of 24
feet.
   (B)   Two-family dwellings, provided they do not exceed 25% of the units in
a block;
   (C)   Off-street parking and off-street loading;
   (D)   Renting of not more than two indoor parking spaces;
   (E)   One accessory building which does not exceed 50% of the gross floor
area of the principal building;
   (F)   Public recreational structures in parks, playgrounds and athletic
fields;
   (G)   Playground equipment and installations, including private swimming
pools and tennis courts;
   (H)   A temporary real estate tract office for the purpose of selling lots
on the tract upon which it is located;
   (I)   Chapels, churches, temples and synagogues, provided primary vehicular
access shall be gained to the uses by a collector or arterial street;
   (J)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools offering a regular
course of study accredited by the State Department of Education, provided
primary vehicular access shall be gained to the uses by a collector or arterial
street;
   (K)   Golf courses and accessory buildings essential to the operation of a
golf course; and
   (L)   Cemeteries.
(1989 Code, § 11.22) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976; Ord. 17, 2nd Ser., eff. 1-13-
1995; Ord. 34, 2nd Ser., passed 2-17-2000; Ord. 74, passed 1-13-2015)
§ 153.038 R-2 – MOBILE HOME PARK.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Mobile home dwellings and uses necessarily incidental
to a mobile home park but excluding the sale of mobile homes.
   (B)   Special requirements. See §
153.061.
   (C)   One-family detached dwellings.
      (1)   All family dwellings in the city limits must meet recommended
foundation requirements as stated in the State Building Code.
      (2)   All family dwellings must meet a minimum width requirement of 24
feet.
      (3)   All family dwellings must have approved siding.
      (4)   All family dwellings must meet approved requirements restricting
pitch of the roof.
      (5)   All family dwellings must meet a minimum length requirement of 24
feet.
(1989 Code, § 11.23) (Ord. 74, passed 1-13-2015)
§ 153.039 R-2A – MOBILE HOME (STANDARD RESIDENTIAL LOT).
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Existing mobile home units (single occupancy) located on platted
parcels of land prior to May 1, 1976; and
      (2)   One accessory building which does not exceed 50% of the gross floor
area of the principal building.
   (B)   Special requirements.
      (1)   Any parcel of land designated for R-2A zoning which is not used or
occupied for a continuous period of one year shall, upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission and approval by the Council, revert to an R-1 zoning
classification.
      (2)   Any dwelling with HUD seal must be placed in a mobile home park,
except mobile homes presently established within the city limits.
   (C)   One-family detached dwellings.
      (1)   All family dwellings in the city limits must meet recommended
foundation requirements as stated in the State Building Code.
      (2)   All family dwellings must meet a minimum width requirement of 24
feet.
      (3)   All family dwellings must have approved siding.
      (4)   All family dwellings must meet approved requirements restricting
pitch of the roof.
      (5)   All family dwellings must meet a minimum length requirement of 24
feet.
(1989 Code, § 11.24) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976; Ord. 17, 2nd Ser., eff. 1-13-
1995; Ord. 74, passed 1-13-2015)
§ 153.040 R-3 – MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Townhouse, garden apartments and multi-family dwellings not to
exceed three stories in height;
      (2)   Parks, playgrounds, athletic fields and other recreational uses of
a noncommercial nature;
      (3)   Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses when
located on the same property with the use to which they are accessory, but not
including any business or industrial accessory use:
         (a)   Off-street parking and off-street loading;
         (b)   Garages, carports, screen houses, conservatories and the like,
for use by the occupants of the principal use;
         (c)   Public recreational structures in parks, playgrounds and
athletic fields;
         (d)   Playground equipment and installations, including private
swimming pools and tennis courts; and
         (e)   A temporary tract office for the purpose of promoting the
development in which it is located.
   (B)   Special requirements. See §
153.062.
(1989 Code, § 11.25) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
§ 153.041 C-1 – BUSINESS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   Permitted uses.
   (A)   The following services/office uses:
      (1)   Nursing care homes, maternity care homes, child care homes and
boarding care homes; provided, however, that the institutions shall, where
required by state law or regulations of the licensing authority, be licensed by
the appropriate state authority;
      (2)   Banking, finance, insurance, real estate and investment offices;
      (3)   Medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic and optometric offices;
      (4)   Legal offices, engineering and architectural offices, educational
and scientific research offices (excluding laboratory facilities), accounting,
auditing and bookkeeping offices;
      (5)   Religious uses, welfare and charitable uses, libraries and art
galleries;
      (6)   Beauty and barber services;
      (7)   Funeral and crematory services;
      (8)   Photographic services;
      (9)   Apparel repair, alteration and cleaning pickup stations, shoe
repair;
      (10)   Advertising offices, provided that the fabrication of signs shall
not be a permitted use;
      (11)   Consumer and mercantile credit reporting services office,
adjustment and collection service offices;
      (12)   Duplicating, mailing and stenographic service offices;
      (13)   Employment agency offices;
      (14)   Business and management consultant offices;
      (15)   Detective and protective agency offices;
      (16)   Contractor's offices;
      (17)   Governmental offices;
      (18)   Business association, professional membership organizations, labor
unions, civic, social and fraternal association offices;
      (19)   The compounding, dispensing or sale (at retail) of drugs,
prescription items, patient or proprietary medicines, sick room supplies,
prosthetic devices or items relating to any of the foregoing when conducted in
the building occupied primarily by medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic
or optometric offices; and
      (20)   The sale of food and grocery products.
   (B)   The following retail uses:
      (1)   The retail sale of heating and plumbing equipment, paint, glass and
wallpaper, electrical supplies and building supplies;
      (2)   The retail sale of tires, batteries and automobile accessories and
marine craft accessories;
      (3)   The retail sales of apparel and related accessories;
      (4)   The retail sale of furniture, home furnishings and related
equipment;
      (5)   The retail sale of miscellaneous items such as the following:
         (a)   Drugs and proprietary items;
         (b)   Liquors;
         (c)   Antiques and second-hand merchandise;
         (d)   Books and stationery;
         (e)   Garden supplies;
         (f)   Jewelry;
         (g)   Flowers and floral accessories;
         (h)   Tobacco and tobacco products;
         (i)   Cannabis and cannabis products;
         (j)   Newspapers and magazines;
         (k)   Computers, cameras, and photographic supplies;
         (l)   Gifts, novelties and souvenirs;
         (m)   Pets;
         (n)   Optical goods;
         (o)   Sporting goods and bicycles; and
         (p)   Ceramic materials and related items.
      (6)   Automobile service stations;
      (7)   Bars, restaurants, and coffee shops; and
      (8)   Hotels and motels.
(1989 Code, § 11.30) (Ord. 82, passed 4-16-2018; Ord. 105, passed 8-6-2024)
§ 153.042 [RESERVED].
§ 153.043 [RESERVED].
§ 153.044 I-1 – INDUSTRIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   The following manufacturing activities:
         (a)   Food and kindred products as illustrated by:
            1.   Dairy products;
            2.   Bakery products;
            3.   Confectionery and related products;
            4.   Beverages, with the exception of malt or malt liquors; and
            5.   Macaroni, spaghetti and noodles.
         (b)   Textile mill products;
         (c)   Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather
and similar materials;
         (d)   Lumber and wood products, except saw mills and planing mills
producing dimensioned lumber;
         (e)   Furniture and fixtures;
         (f)   Converted paper and paperboard products;
         (g)   Printing, publishing and allied industries;
         (h)   Chemicals and allied products as follows:
            1.   Drugs; and
            2.   Soaps, detergents and cleaning preparations, perfumes,
cosmetics and other toilet preparations.
         (i)   Miscellaneous plastic products;
         (j)   Fabricated metal products as illustrated by:
            1.   Office computing and accounting machines;
            2.   Household appliances;
            3.   Electrical lighting and wiring equipment;
            4.   Communication equipment, including radio and television
receiving sets;
            5.   Electronic components and accessories;
            6.   Screw machine products; and
            7.   Coating, engraving and allied services.
         (k)   Professional, scientific, electronic and controlling
instruments, photographic and optical goods, watches and clocks;
         (l)   Cultivation, processing, and extraction of cannabis, hemp, and
other related products; and
         (m)   Miscellaneous manufacturing goods, such as jewelry and
silverware, musical instruments and parts, toys, amusement, sporting and
athletic goods and pens, pencils and other office and artistic materials.
      (2)   The following wholesale trade activities:
         (a)   Motor vehicles and automotive equipment;
         (b)   Drugs, chemicals and allied products;
         (c)   Dry goods and apparel;
         (d)   Groceries and related products;
         (e)   Electrical goods;
         (f)   Hardware, plumbing, heating equipment and supplies;
         (g)   Machinery, equipment and supplies; and
         (h)   Other wholesale trade similar in nature to the aforementioned
uses, such as paper and paper products, furniture and home furnishings and
beer, wine and distilled alcoholic beverages, but expressly excluding petroleum
bulk stations and scrap and waste materials and similar uses.
      (3)   The following service activities:
         (a)   Laundering, dry cleaning and dyeing;
         (b)   Warehousing and storage;
         (c)   Automobile and truck repair and wash;
         (d)   Contract construction;
         (e)   Kennels;
         (f)   Veterinarian and animal hospitals;
         (g)   Automobile and truck rental and leasing;
         (h)   Truck terminals or exchange stations;
         (i)   Banking, finance, insurance, real estate, investment offices,
legal offices and call centers for any of the above; and
         (j)   Adult entertainment uses.
      (4)   The following mining and outdoor-related activities when allowed by
conditional use permit:
         (a)   Mineral mining and related use of land, including, but not
limited to, the excavation, extraction, removal, storage or processing of
minerals, sand, gravel, rock or other natural deposits;
         (b)   A minimum one-half mile buffer zone when blasting operations and
procedures are located or are occurring adjacent to all other zoning districts
within the city;
         (c)   Speed motor sports events and speed motor sports equipment
testing;
         (d)   Trails and other recreational uses of a non-commercial nature;
and
         (e)   Non-recreational burning. For recreational fires, see §
93.03.
      (5)   Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing uses when located on the
same property with the use to which they are accessory. The accessory uses
shall include but not be restricted to the following:
         (a)   Off-street parking and off-street loading;
         (b)   Storage of materials, provided that when the use abuts or is
adjacent to any residential zone, the storage shall be within completely
enclosed buildings and effectively screened by a solid wall or fence, including
solid entrance and exit garages not less than six feet nor more than eight feet
in height; and
         (c)   Foundries, provided that the foundry operation is necessary to
the principal use.
      (6)   Retail sales of products manufactured, processed or wholesaled at
the use site;
      (7)   Accessory off-site parking not located on the same property with
the principal use, subject to the provisions of this chapter; and
      (8)   Other uses similar in nature to the aforementioned uses, as
determined by the Council.
   (B)   Special requirements. See §
153.064.
(1989 Code, § 11.40) (Ord. 41, 2nd Ser., eff. 5-7-2002; Ord. 42, 2nd Ser.,
passed 9-3-2002; Ord. 82, passed 4-16-2018; Ord. 105, passed 8-6-2024)
§ 153.045 [RESERVED].
§ 153.046 PUB – PUBLIC OPEN SPACE.
   Permitted uses include:
   (A)   Public parks, playgrounds, athletic fields and other recreational uses
of noncommercial nature;
   (B)   Commercial recreational facilities of a semi-open nature such as golf
courses and golf driving ranges;
   (C)   Municipal, school district and public hospital facilities; and
   (D)   Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses when located
on the same property with the use to which they are accessory, but not
including any business or industrial uses. These accessory uses shall include
but not be restricted to the following:
      (1)   Off-street parking; and
      (2)   Public recreational buildings and parks, playgrounds and athletic
fields.
(1989 Code, § 11.50) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS
§ 153.060 TABLE OF MINIMUM DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
   Every use of land within the city shall conform to the following minimum
requirements which are applicable to the zoning district in which the use is
contemplated.
District Land Area (Sq. Front Width  Yard Setback
         Ft. or Ac.)    (feet)       Front Rear Side (Interior) Side (Corner)
                 Land Area   Front Width  Yard Setback
District         (Sq. Ft. or (feet)       Front  Rear       Side       Side
                 Ac.)                                       (Interior) (Corner)
LR Low Density   (1) 5 Ac./  300          25     40         10         25
Residential      unit
R-1 One- and Two-Family
Residential:
   One-Family 9,500/unit  (4) 75       25     (3) (5) 40 (3) 10     25
Dwelling
   Two-Family 6,200/unit  (4) 100      25     (3) (5) 40 (3) 10     25
Dwelling
R-2 Mobile Home  5,000/unit  (4) 50       See §
Park                                      153.061
R-2A Mobile Home
(Standard        5,000/unit  (4) 50       25     (3) (5) 40 (3) 10     25
Residential Lot)
R-3 Multi-Family 3,600/unit  (4) 100      50     (3) (5) 50 (3) 20     50
Residential
C-1 Business
Commercial       N/A         (4)(2) 75    (2) 50 (2) (5) 50 (2) 20     (2) 50
District
I-1 Industrial
Commercial       N/A         (4) 150      50     (5)  50    20         50
District
PUB Public Open  N/A         N/A          50     50         50         50
Space
Notes:
(1)   Without public sanitary sewers
(2)   Setbacks apply to only new centers; does not apply to Business Commercial
District existing on the effective date of this chapter or to the extension of
same
(3)   5 feet for detached garages and accessory buildings
(4)   At the front yard setback line
(5)   Not within ten feet from existing alley line
 
(1989 Code, § 11.60) (Ord. 82, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 153.061 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS IN R-2 ZONING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Required conditions for mobile home parks. Mobile homes and mobile
home parks have special characteristics which require full consideration of
their locational needs, their site layout and design, their demand upon
community services and their relationship to and effect upon surrounding uses
of land. Because of these characteristics, mobile home parks are permitted in
the city only by planned unit development procedures in accordance with the
following design and locational standards in addition to the requirements of
the State Health Department.
   (B)   Site requirements.
      (1)   Minimum size. Ten acres.
      (2)   Site location. The proposed site shall have at least one property
line abutting upon a major thoroughfare street or collector street, as defined
by the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
      (3)   Site yard dimensions. All buildings and mobile homes within the
mobile home park shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property
lines. The setback shall be provided with a dense combination of plant
materials and earth mounds to form a buffer to adjoining property and streets.
Plans for screening and landscaping shall be approved by the Planning
Commission.
      (4)   Public utilities. All mobile home parks shall be serviced by a
public water and sewer system. All utilities shall be installed underground.
   (C)   Design requirements.
      (1)   Maximum density of development. Six units per gross acre (gross
acres being the total number of acres in the parcel, including all interior
streets and open space).
      (2)   Off-street parking. A minimum of one and one-half spaces per mobile
home shall be provided, exclusive of on-street parking.
      (3)   Setback. A minimum of 15 feet from all interior property lines and
private streets.
      (4)   Park streets. Each home shall have direct access to a park street
which shall be paved to a minimum width of 30 feet where on-street parking is
permitted on one side only. Where no on-street parking is permitted and where
“no parking” signs are posted, a minimum street width of 24 feet shall be
permitted.
      (5)   Building height. No building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
      (6)   Parks, recreation and open space.  All mobile home parks shall
provide private recreation and open space areas within the park of not less
than 15% of the total gross acreage therein. The Planning Commission shall
recommend to the Council whether the land to be used shall be dedicated to the
public or retained in the ownership of the mobile home park.
      (7)   Storage.  All boats, trailers and vehicles other than automobiles
shall be parked in an area specifically approved and adequately screened for
that purpose. All other storage shall occur within a building or within a
container designed specifically for that purpose.
(1989 Code, § 11.61)
§ 153.062 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS IN R-3 DISTRICT.
   (A)   All storage shall be contained wholly within an enclosed building.
   (B)   The incineration of waste matter shall be conducted in approved
equipment located within the building wherein the permitted use is conducted.
   (C)   Where a proposed R-3 development abuts an R-1 District other than a
public street line, buffer provisions shall be established. The protective
strip shall contain an opaque fence or a Council-approved substitute. The
protective strip of at least 15 feet shall be landscaped and not used for
parking, garages, driveways, off-street loading or storage. The screening
device design must be approved by the Council as being in harmony with the
residential neighborhood and providing sufficient screening of the multiple-
dwelling area. A proposed fence shall be no less than four feet in height and
shall not extend within ten feet of any street right-of-way.
   (D)   No building permit shall be issued until a site and parking layout has
been approved as provided in §§
153.066 through
153.074. No parking shall be permitted within 15 feet of the street right-of-
way, and the 15-foot area shall be maintained as a green strip.
   (E)   In developments of sufficient magnitude so as to require on-site water
main or sewer main construction, plans for the facilities shall be designed by
and installed under the supervision of a civil engineer registered in this
state and shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer.
   (F)   Computation of the maximum number of units on a proposed site in the
R-3 District shall be computed and adjusted as follows.
      (1)   The minimum land area required per unit may be reduced by 250
square feet per efficiency unit in a multiple-family dwelling.
      (2)   The required total minimum land area may be reduced 500 square feet
for each required parking stall in or under a multiple residence or otherwise
completely underground.
      (3)   The required total minimum land area shall be increased 250 square
feet for each bedroom in excess of two in any one multiple-family dwelling
unit.
   (G)   Certain commercial uses intended for the convenience and enjoyment of
the residents of multi-family developments shall be permitted, including retail
grocery shops, laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, beauty parlors, barber
shops and valet shops, within multiple-family dwellings containing 30 or more
dwelling units, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The shops shall be accessible to the residents through a common
hall or lobby;
      (2)   No advertising or display shall be visible from outside the
building;
      (3)   The shops shall be restricted to the ground floors or sub-floors;
      (4)   The total area of the shops shall not exceed 50% of the total floor
area of the ground level of the building;
      (5)   Any shop or shops not indicated on the initial approved plans shall
be considered and approved by the Planning Commission and the Council before
the commercial use is established; and
      (6)   The size and number of the shops shall represent a factor in the
determination of required parking spaces for the building.
(1989 Code, § 11.62)
§ 153.063 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS IN C-1 DISTRICTS.
   (A)   All storage, display, service, repair, or processing shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building or behind an opaque fence or wall
not less than six feet high, except for the outdoor storage of merchandise
during business hours.
   (B)   Incineration of waste matter shall be conducted in approved equipment
located within the building wherein the permitted use is conducted.
   (C)   Where a proposed C-1 development abuts an R-1, R-2, or R-3 District,
other than at a public street line, buffer provisions shall be established.
There shall be provided a protective strip of not less than 35 feet in width.
The protective strip shall not be used for parking, driveways, off-street
loading, or storage, and shall be landscaped. The landscape treatment shall
contain an opaque fence or wall which shall not extend within ten feet of any
street right-of-way. The fence or wall design must be approved by the Council
as being in harmony with the residential neighborhood and providing sufficient
screening of the commercial area. The fence or wall shall be eight feet in
height. The protective strip shall contain no structures other than the
approved fence or wall.
   (D)   No improvement and zoning permit shall be issued until a site and
parking layout has been approved as provided in §§
153.066 through
153.074. No parking shall be permitted within 15 feet of the street right-of-
way, and this 15-foot area shall be maintained as a green strip.
   (E)   In developments of sufficient magnitude so as to require on-site water
main or sewer main construction, plans for the facilities shall be designed by
and installed under the supervision of a civil engineer registered in this
state and shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer.
(1989 Code, § 11.63) (Ord. 82, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 153.064 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS IN I-1 DISTRICT.
   (A)   Buffer and setback.
      (1)   Where a proposed I-1 development abuts an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District
other than at a public street line, buffer provisions shall be established.
There shall be provided a protective strip of not less than 100 feet in width.
The protective strip shall not be used for parking, driveways, off-street
loading or storage and shall be landscaped. The landscape treatment shall
contain an opaque fence or wall which shall not extend within ten feet of any
street right-of-way. The fence or wall design must be approved by the Council
as being in harmony with the residential neighborhood and providing sufficient
screening of the industrial area. The fence or wall shall be eight feet in
height. The protective strip shall contain no structures other than the
approved fence or wall.
      (2)   Where a proposed I-1 development faces any residential district
across a street, buffer provisions shall be established consisting of a
protective strip along the street. The protective strip shall be no less than
50 feet in width, shall contain no structures, shall not be used for parking,
off-street loading, storage or any other activity and shall be landscaped.
Activity areas shall be effectively screened from view of the residential
district in a manner to be approved by the Council.
   (B)   Explosives. No activities involving the storage, utilization or
manufacture of materials or products which could be detonated shall be
permitted except those as are specifically licensed by the Council. The
prohibited materials shall include but not be confined to all primary
explosives, such as lead oxide and lead sulphate; all high explosives and
boosters such as TNT and RDS, tetryl and ammonium nitrate; propellants and
components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, ammonium perchlorate
and nitroglycerin, blasting explosives such as dynamite powder, magnesium,
potassium chlorite, potassium permanganate, potassium nitrate and reactive
propellant materials.
   (C)   Noise. Noise shall not exceed 40 decibels on any octave band frequency
measured at any point along the property line of the use and operation. Decibel
levels shall be measured by equipment meeting the specifications of the
American Society for Testing and Materials.
   (D)   Vibration.  No activity or operation shall at any time cause earth
vibrations perceptible beyond the limits of the immediate site on which the
operation is located.
   (E)   Incineration. The incineration of waste matter shall be conducted in
approved equipment located within the building wherein the permitted use is
conducted. No smoke or other effusive or particulate matter shall be discharged
more opaque or darker than No. 1 classification of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart
published by the United States Bureau of Mines. Measurements shall be at the
point of emission. No solid or liquid particulates of any type shall be emitted
in a concentration that they become detectable at the limits of the immediate
site.
   (F)   Odor. None of the uses shall at any time cause the discharges of
toxic, noxious or odorous matters in concentrations as to be detectable beyond
the limits of the immediate site.
   (G)   Glare and heat. Glare and heat, whether directed or reflected, shall
not be detectable beyond the limits of the immediate industrial site from which
they originate.
   (H)   Wastes.  All solid waste materials, debris, refuse or garbage not
disposed of through the public sanitary sewage system shall be kept in a
completely enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container
designed for those purposes. All wastes shall be treated in compliance with
existing State Pollution Control Agency regulations.
   (I)   Outdoor storage and activity.  In the Industrial Park District (I-1),
all production, storage, servicing or merchandising, except off-street parking
and off-street loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings. Fuel storage facilities not located within a completely enclosed
building or buried below grade shall be completely screened from view utilizing
earth or opaque structural materials. The screening device shall be
appropriately landscaped and shall be aesthetically compatible with other
structures and landscaping on the site. Detailed plans for the screening shall
be submitted to and approved by the Council.
   (J)   Site layout. No building permit shall be issued until a site and
parking layout has been approved as provided in §§
153.066 through
153.074. No parking shall be permitted within 15 feet of the street right-of-
way and this 15-foot area shall be maintained as a green strip.
   (K)   Compliance. None of the permitted uses in the Industrial Park
District, during the period of their operations, shall fail to satisfy any of
the standards set forth above. In determining compliance with those standards,
the majority vote of the Council shall be the test of detectability for
vibration, particulate matter and odor, glare and heat. Before making this
determination, the Council shall personally observe any alleged noncompliance.
For noise, odor, smoke and wastes, determination of compliance shall be by any
independent testing organization satisfactory to all parties concerned, or if
there is failure to agree, by any testing organizations as may be selected by
the Council after ten days’ notice to the alleged violator.
   (L)   Utilities. On developments of sufficient magnitude so as to require
on-site water main or sewer main construction, plans for the facilities shall
be designed by and installed under the supervision of a civil engineer
registered in this state and shall be submitted to and approved by the City
Engineer.
(1989 Code, § 11.64)
§ 153.065 SUBSTANDARD LOTS AND PARCELS.
   Any lot or parcel which was held in single ownership of record on the
effective date of this chapter which does not meet the requirements of this
chapter as to area, width or other open space may nevertheless be utilized for
single-family detached dwelling purposes, provided the measurements of the
area, width or open space are within 70% of the requirements for them under the
terms of this chapter.
(1989 Code, § 11.65)
§ 153.066 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in all districts in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. There shall be no off-street
parking, storage of vehicles nor perimeter parking lot driveway within 15 feet
of any street right-of-way and this 15-foot strip shall be planted and
maintained as a green strip. Off-street parking in any residence district may
include not more than one commercial vehicle of 25 feet or less in length per
dwelling unit if used by the occupant of the premises for transportation to and
from his or her job. It shall be parked off the street on a space adequate for
its storage as set forth in this section.
(1989 Code, § 11.66)
§ 153.067 LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING.
   All accessory off-street parking facilities required herein shall be located
as follows.
   (A)   Spaces accessory to one- and two-family dwellings shall be on the same
lot as the principal use served.
   (B)   Spaces accessory to multiple-family dwellings shall be on the same lot
as the use served, within 400 feet of the main entrance to the principal
building served.
   (C)   Spaces accessory to uses located in a business or industrial district
shall be on the same lot as the uses served unless the Council authorizes
supplemental accessory off-site parking not located on the same property with
the principal use.
(1989 Code, § 11.67)
§ 153.068 PARKING SPACE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following minimum parking standards are hereby established for all
districts other than LR, R-1 and R-2A.
 
Angle         Space Width 2 Space Lengths Curb to      One Center Aisle With
                          Curb                         Curb Overlap
90° (Two-Way)8 ft. 8 in. 19.5+19.5+24.0 = 63 ft.      18.0+18.0+24.0 = 60 ft.
                          0 in.                        0 in.
60° (One-Way)9 ft. 0 in. 20.0+20.0+20.0 = 60 ft. Plus 18.5+18.5+20.0 = 57 ft.
                          0 in.                        0 in.
45° (One-Way)9 ft. 2 in. 18.0+18.0+16.5 = 52 ft.      17.0+17.0+16.5 = 50 ft.
                          6 in.                        6 in.
30° (One-Way)9 ft. 6 in. 15.0+15.0+16.5 = 46 ft.      14.0+14.0+16.5 = 44 ft.
                          6 in.                        6 in.
0° (Parallel)8 ft. 0 in. wide by 24 ft. 0 in. long, with 24 ft. 0 in. aisle
 
   (B)   An accurate, dimensioned parking layout which complies with the
aforegoing shall be submitted for approval with a site plan, and parking
arrangements shall thereafter comply with the layout. Parking spaces shall be
clearly designated by lines painted upon the surface of the parking area.
(1989 Code, § 11.68)
§ 153.069 ACCESS TO PARKING SPACE.
   In LR, R-1 and R-2A Districts, tandem parking spaces may be permitted. In
all other zoning districts, there shall be provision for unobstructed ingress
and egress for each single car space. Access to off-street areas shall be
restricted to driveways 30 feet or less in width. No two driveways on any
single parcel of land in a business or industrial district shall be less than
50 feet apart at the property line.
(1989 Code, § 11.69)
§ 153.070 MINIMUM PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Residence. Two spaces per dwelling unit.
   (B)   Commerce (retail and service/office).
      (1)   Eating and drinking places. One space for every two seats, and one
space for every two employees on the average maximum shift. (Parking spaces for
“drive-in” customers shall not be credited as a part of the off-street parking
area needed to serve the sales operation conducted within the buildings.)
      (2)   Automobile service stations. Three spaces for each enclosed bay
plus one space for each day shift employee plus a minimum of two spaces for
service vehicles and one additional space for each service vehicle over two in
number.
      (3)   Other retail stores or centers. Eleven spaces for the first 1,000
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof; eight spaces for each
1,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet, but not
exceeding 15,000 square feet; six spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area in excess of 15,000 square feet, but not exceeding 30,000 square
feet; five and one-half spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
exceeding 30,000 square feet.
      (4)   Motels and hotels. One space for each unit plus one space for each
employee on any one shift.
      (5)   Bowling establishments.  Five spaces for each lane. Additional
parking for food and refreshment facilities shall be determined according to
division (B)(1) above.
      (6)   Medical and dental clinics. Three spaces for each doctor or
dentist, plus one space for every two employees or one space for each 150
square feet of gross floor area, whichever requirement is the greater.
      (7)   Other commercial uses, excluding wholesale. One space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area.
   (C)   Industry and wholesale.  One space for every two employees based upon
maximum planned employment during any work period or one space for each 800
square feet of gross floor area, whichever requirement is greater. In the event
the latter requirement is greater, adequate land area shall be provided for the
required off-street parking area, but improved space need only be provided
according to the employees ratio.
   (D)   Miscellaneous.
      (1)   Places of public assembly, such as churches, theaters, auditoriums
(other than school auditoriums), mortuaries, stadiums, arenas, dance halls. One
space for every three seats.
      (2)   Rest homes, nursing homes, sanitariums and homes for the aged and
for children. One space for every four beds plus one space for each staff
doctor.
      (3)   Hospitals. One space for every two beds plus one space for every
two employees and one space for each staff doctor.
      (4)   Uses not covered by this list. Spaces as required for the most
similar use as determined by the Council.
(1989 Code, § 11.70)
§ 153.071 SURFACING, DRAINAGE AND CURBING.
   (A)   In all districts, other than LR, R-1 and R-2A, all open off-street
driving and parking areas shall be improved within a minimum of two inches of
hot mixed paver laid bituminous mat, or a comparable concrete slab, placed over
a well compacted subgrade and gravel base. The base gravel shall conform to the
State Highway Department specifications for Class 5 gravel.
   (B)   In other than LR and R-2A Districts, drainage plans shall be submitted
to and approved by the City Engineer; drainage shall be discouraged across
sidewalks or driveways. The perimeters of all driving and parking areas shall
be bounded by cast-in-place concrete curb and gutter which conforms with the
State Highway Department Type B-612.
(1989 Code, § 11.71)
§ 153.072 PARKING LOT SCREENING.
   All open off-street parking areas having more than six parking spaces and
all off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be effectively screened from
any abutting residential lots by a solid wall or opaque fence six feet high, or
by any other device as may be approved by the Council. The screening device
shall not extend within ten feet of any street right-of-way. These off-street
parking and loading areas within any yard which abuts along a street which is
residentially zoned on the side opposite shall be screened from street view by
a screening device as approved by the Council.
(1989 Code, § 11.72)
§ 153.073 LIGHTING.
   All exterior lighting shall be provided with lenses, reflectors or shades,
so as to concentrate illumination on the property of the owner or operator of
the illumination devices. Rays of light shall not pass beyond the property
lines of the premises utilizing the illumination at an intensity greater than
three footcandles measured at property lines abutting residentially zoned
property, or ten footcandles measured at property lines abutting street right-
of-way or nonresidentially zoned property. No glare shall emanate from or be
visible beyond the boundaries of the illuminated premises.
(1989 Code, § 11.73)
§ 153.074 JOINT PARKING FACILITIES.
   (A)   With respect to development complexes, the required parking facilities
to serve two or more uses may be located on the same lot or in the same
structure, provided that the total number of parking spaces furnished shall not
be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use.
   (B)   With respect to non-development complexes, the Council may approve the
joint use of common parking facilities under the following conditions.
      (1)   The building or use for which application is made to utilize the
off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be
located within 800 feet of and contiguous to the parking facilities.
      (2)   The applicant shall show and the Council must determine that there
is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours and parking demands
of the two buildings or uses contemplating joint use of off-street parking
facilities.
      (3)   A properly drawn legal instrument providing for joint use of off-
street parking facilities, duly approved by the Council as to form and manner
of execution, shall be filed as an easement encumbrance upon the title of the
property.
(1989 Code, § 11.74) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
§ 153.075 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Application. All occupations conducted in the home shall comply with
the provisions of this section. This section shall not be construed to apply to
home occupations accessory to farming.
   (B)   Procedures and permits. Any permitted home occupation shall require a
permit. The city staff shall establish the application form(s) and required
information. A fee schedule shall be set by resolution of the Council. In
applying for and accepting a permit, the permit holder agrees that his or her
monetary investment in the home occupation will be fully amortized over the
life of the permit and that a permit renewal will not be needed to amortize the
investment. The permits shall be issued subject to the conditions of this
section. The Planning Commission shall review the application and make a
recommendation to the Council, which shall make the final decision. When the
city has reason to believe that there has been a change in conditions or that
the provisions of this section have been breached, a public hearing shall be
held before the Planning Commission to determine continuing eligibility. The
Council shall make the final decision on revocation.
      (1)   Special home occupation. Any home occupation which does not meet
the specific requirements for a permitted home occupation as defined in this
section shall require a conditional use permit.
      (2)   Declaration of conditions. The Planning Commission and the Council
may impose conditions on the granting of a home occupation permit as may be
necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this section.
      (3)   Effect of permit. A home occupation permit may be issued for a
period of up to three years each. The permit shall continue for the permit
period, until there has been a change in conditions, or until the provisions of
this section have been breached.
      (4)   Transferability. Permits shall not run with the land and shall not
be transferable.
      (5)   Lapse of home occupation permit by non-use. Whenever within one
year after granting a permit the approved use has not been established, or the
use has been discontinued for more than six months, the permit shall terminate.
      (6)   Reconsideration. Whenever an application for a permit has been
considered and denied by the Council, a similar application for a permit
affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the
Planning Commission or the Council for at least six months from the date of its
denial, unless a decision to reconsider the matter is made by vote of the
Council.
      (7)   Renewal of permits. An applicant shall not have a vested right to a
permit renewal by reason of having obtained a previous permit. Each application
for the renewal of a permit will be considered de novo. The previous granting
of a permit shall not constitute a precedent for the renewal of a permit.
   (C)   Requirements and general provisions.  All home occupations shall
comply with the following.
      (1)   General provisions.
         (a)   No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, odor or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
         (b)   No equipment shall be used which creates electrical interference
to surrounding properties.
         (c)   Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the residential use of the premises, shall not change the residential character
thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the
surrounding residential uses.
         (d)   No home occupation shall require internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customarily found in
dwellings, except where required to comply with local and state fire and police
recommendations.
         (e)   There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials
used in the home occupation, except personal automobiles used in the home
occupation may be parked on the site.
         (f)   The home occupation shall meet all applicable Fire and Building
Codes.
         (g)   All signage shall be in accordance with the sign regulation
provisions of the city code, codified in Chapter 150.
         (h)   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the occupation is contained entirely within the
principal building and will not require any on-street parking facilities.
      (2)   Requirements; permitted home occupations.
         (a)   No person other than those who customarily reside on the
premises shall be employed.
         (b)   All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely
within the principal dwelling and may not be conducted in accessory buildings.
         (c)   Permitted home occupations shall not create a parking demand in
excess of that which can be accommodated in a residential driveway, where no
vehicle is parked closer than 15 feet from the curb line or edge of paved
surface.
         (d)   Examples of permitted home occupation include art studio,
dressmaking, secretarial services, professional offices and teaching with
musical, dancing and other instructions with no more than three pupils at a
time.
      (3)   Requirements; conditional uses.
         (a)   If nonresident assistance is required to conduct the home
occupation business, a home occupation conditional use permit is required.
         (b)   Examples of special home occupations include barber and beauty
services, photography studio, group lessons, saw sharpening, small appliance
and small engine repair (maximum of 75 horsepower) and the like.
         (c)   The special home occupation under a conditional use permit may
involve any of the following: stock-in-trade incidental to the performance of
the service; repair service or manufacturing which requires equipment other
than customarily found in a residence; the teaching with musical, dancing and
other instruction of more than three pupils at a time.
         (d)   Home occupations may be allowed to accommodate their parking
demand through utilization of on-street parking. In the cases where on-street
parking facilities are necessary, the Council shall have the right to establish
the maximum number of on-street spaces permitted and increase or decrease the
maximum number when and where changing conditions require additional review.
   (D)   Nonconforming use. Existing home occupations lawfully existing on the
effective date of this section may continue as nonconforming uses. The use
shall be required to register under this section and obtain permits as
permitted home occupations for their continued operation. Any existing
nonconforming home occupation that is discontinued for a period of more than 30
days, or is in violation of the provisions under which it was initially
established, shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this
section.
   (E)   Inspection. The city hereby reserves the right upon issuing any home
occupation permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being
conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section or any
conditions additionally imposed.
(1989 Code, § 11.75) (Ord. 14, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-9-1994)
§ 153.076 FENCES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall erect a fence without first having
received a zoning permit.
   (B)   Prohibited fences.  Except as specifically provided below in division
(C) of this section, the following types of dangerous or hazardous fences shall
not be permitted in the city:
      (1)   Barbed wire fences;
      (2)   Electrical fences;
      (3)   Spiked fences;
      (4)   Fences with broken glass or other sharp points imbedded;
      (5)   Any other type of fence that could result in injuries to persons
climbing over; and
      (6)   Fences that are leaning in a manner that an angle of 15 degrees or
more is produced when measured from the vertical.
   (C)   Exceptions for hazardous fencing. Hazardous or dangerous fences, such
as those listed in division (B) above, shall only be permitted in the city for
the following uses:
      (1)   Public utility structures (at least eight feet above grade level);
and
      (2)   Communication support structures (at least eight feet above grade
level).
   (D)   General requirements.
      (1)   All fences shall be maintained in good and sound condition and
shall not create a harborage for rodents.
      (2)   No fence shall be constructed in a manner as to impede or alter the
natural surface water drainage of the property upon which the fence is
constructed or any adjoining property.
      (3)   If a fence is to be painted, it shall be painted with a non-lead
base paint.
      (4)   The finished side of all fences shall face out.
      (5)   No fence in a residential district may exceed six feet in height.
      (6)   In any residential district, except as provided in division (D)(7)
below, no fence shall be constructed in a front setback past the front building
line.
      (7)   In any residential district, an open fence may be erected on a
premises anywhere, including the front setback past the building line and the
front and side setbacks past the building lines in the case of corner lots. The
height of the fences shall not exceed four feet.
      (8)   Fences or screening on a side lot line common with an adjoining
property may be placed upon the lot line where the owners of the subject
properties agree to the type, size, placement and maintenance thereof.
      (9)   Fencing and screening shall not be placed or encroach within five
feet of any underground or above-ground utility located within a utility
easement.
      (10)   Fences that are constructed in a nonresidential district may be
either open or solid fences and shall not exceed eight feet in height.
      (11)   Any fence erected around a recreational activity, such as a tennis
court or a baseball backstop, may exceed the height requirement set forth in
this section.
   (E)   Nonconforming use. Should an applicant request a permit for a fence
that does not meet the requirements listed in division (D) above, he or she may
apply for a variance. As part of this application, the applicant shall explain
in writing how the proposed fence does not meet the general requirements of
division (D) above and why those requirements cannot be met.
   (F)   Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effective from
and after its passage, approval and publication on August 12, 2010, as provided
by law.
(1989 Code, § 11.76) (Ord. 15, 2nd Ser., eff. 12-9-1994; Ord. 57, 2nd Ser.,
passed 8-3-2010)
§ 153.077 GARAGE, RUMMAGE AND YARD SALES.
   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      GARAGE, RUMMAGE OR YARD SALE. Any display and sale of personal property,
conducted on premises located in any residentially zoned district by the
occupant and which garage or rummage sale does not require a business license
or make taxable sales, leases or services.
   (B)   Restrictions and prohibitions.
      (1)   None of the items offered for sale shall have been obtained for
resale or received on consignment for sale.
      (2)   Any garage, rummage or yard sale (community or neighborhood sale)
shall be conducted solely within the boundaries of the property owned or
occupied by the occupant who is conducting the sale.
      (3)   There shall be no more than four garage, rummage or yard sales
conducted at any one premises during any period of 12 calendar months.
      (4)   No garage, rummage or yard sale shall be conducted during any part
of more than three consecutive days.
      (5)   No garage, rummage or yard sale may be conducted before 8:00 a.m.
or after 6:00 p.m.
      (6)   Any related signage shall be limited to the premises and to other
residential property, provided permission from the property owner is obtained,
and shall be removed at the termination of the sale. The signs shall not exceed
six square foot area and may not exceed four feet in height.
      (7)   There shall be no more than two consecutive sales with 30-day
separation between all others.
      (8)   No garage, rummage or yard sale may be conducted along a detour
route.
      (9)   No garage, rummage or yard sale may be conducted on days when
garbage collection service is operating in alleys.
      (10)   No food or beverage sales allowed except when properly licensed
and approved by the County Health Department.
   (C)   Exceptions.  This chapter shall not apply to any sale under court
order, nor to any bona fide auction sale, nor to a sale of farm or garden
products by the person producing same.
   (D)   Effective date. This section shall become effective upon the adoption
and publication according to law.
(Ord. 55, 2nd Ser., passed 9-1-2009) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.078 OPT-OUT OF M.S. § 462.3593.
   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, Subdivision 9, the city
opts-out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates
temporary family health care dwellings.
(Ord. 78, passed 7-12-2016)
§ 153.079 SOLAR AND WIND ENERGY INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. In order to accommodate the renewable energy needs of
residents and businesses and enhance the sustainability of local energy
production and consumption, while protecting the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community, the city finds that these regulations are
necessary in order to:
      (1)   Allow property owners the opportunity to capture their on-site
solar and wind energy resources;
      (2)   Enhance the economic use of local resources and foster the
development of solar and wind energy business within the city; and
      (3)   Minimize adverse visual effects of solar energy installations
through careful design and siting standards.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BUILDING INTEGRATED SOLAR. A solar energy system that is an integral part
of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device,
replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of the
building. Building-integrated systems include but are not limited to
photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems that are contained within
roofing materials, windows, skylights, and awnings.
      GROUND- OR POLE-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system
mounted on a rack or pole that rests on the ground or on a foundation, and is
not connected to a building except by the electric system.
      ROOF- AND BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system
mounted on top of the finished surface of a building roof or another component
of the finished building surface.
      SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE. The surface and framing of a solar collector,
excluding the rack, rail, or other device upon which the collector is mounted.
      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A mechanical or electrical device whose primary
purpose is to harvest energy by transforming solar energy into another form of
energy or transferring heat from a collector to another medium using
mechanical, electrical, or chemical means.
      WIND GENERATOR. An energy facility that consists of one of more wind
turbines or other such devices and their related or supporting facilities that
produce electric power from wind for onsite use.
   (C)   Required permits.
      (1)   In LR, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, C-1, and I-1 zoned properties, a zoning
permit will be required for any installation of a building integrated or roof-
and building-mounted solar energy systems.
      (2)   For a ground- or pole-mounted solar energy system, a variance will
be required.
      (3)   In LR, R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 zoned properties, wind generator
systems are not permitted.
      (4)   In C-1 and I-1 zoned properties, a variance is required for any
wind generator system.
   (D)   All wind and solar energy systems cannot cast shadows and/or obstruct
solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property. These
apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning regulations, including
setbacks, height requirements, or any other building requirements.
   (E)   Permitted accessory use.
      (1)   Solar energy systems are required to meet set-back standard for the
district in which the systems are located.
      (2)   Building or roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be designed to
blend into the architecture of the building, as viewed from the front public
right-of-way. Solar energy systems that meet the following design standards
shall be in compliance with the visibility requirements:
         (a)   On pitched roofs on a corner lot, roof-mounted systems shall be
flush-mounted.
         (b)   The solar collector shall not extend beyond the edge of the
finished roof.
   (F)   Restrictions on energy systems.
      (1)   Noise generated by the system shall not exceed 30 decibels,
measured at the property line.
      (2)   Operation of the system at the proposed location shall be
consistent with reasonable enjoyment of adjacent property.
      (3)   System shall be kept in good repair and sound condition. Upon
abandonment of its use, the structure shall be immediately dismantled and
removed from the property.
      (4)   System will be so equipped that in the case of a loss of
electricity by the city electrical system, the solar system will be shut down
and no electricity will be put into the city electrical distribution lines.
      (5)   No homeowners' agreement, covenant, common interest community
standard, or other contract between multiple property owners shall prohibit
property owners from installing solar energy systems for the capture of direct
sunlight.
(Ord. 92, passed 10-18-2022)
PUD – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE
§ 153.095 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The planned unit development (PUD) provision is applicable to all uses
and districts and is optional except where specifically required by this
chapter.
   (B)   Its purpose is to allow variation from the provisions of this chapter
in order to:
      (1)   Encourage more creative design in the development of land;
      (2)   Promote variety in the physical development pattern of the city;
      (3)   Create larger expanses of usable open space and preserve unique
natural features;
      (4)   Preserve and provide a more desirable environment than would be
possible under strict requirements of this chapter; and
      (5)   Establish a confidence between the developer, the city and the
residents of the city that is impossible with traditional zoning procedures.
(1989 Code, § 11.55, Subd. 1) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
§ 153.096 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   In no case shall planned unit development be construed to permit a variation
in the sanitary sewer, screening, landscaping or performance standards as set
forth in this chapter.
(1989 Code, § 11.55, Subd. 2) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
§ 153.097 PROCEDURE.
   The following procedural and informational requirements shall be followed
for planned unit development requests:
   (A)   Planning Commission review. The applicant shall meet with the Planning
Commission prior to the preparation of plans to relate his or her intent. The
Planning Commission will evaluate the consistency of his or her intent with the
Comprehensive Guide Plan and thereafter authorize preparation of a Concept Plan
and supportive information. The applicant shall provide 20 copies of complete
set of materials in booklet form.
   (B)   Concept plan and supportive information. The applicant shall prepare
graphic and written material as follows in booklet form:
      (1)   Property description and acreage, identification of owner and
developer;
      (2)   Existing conditions, regional relationships, surrounding property
ownership, relationship to Guide Plan, existing land use, transportation,
zoning, utilities and the like;
      (3)   Natural features, water, topography, soils, vegetation and the
like, and their implications, if any, for development;
      (4)   Concept Plan showing land use areas, land use intensities,
acreages, numbers of units, proposed circulation, open space, recreation and
development staging; and
      (5)   Written information describing proposed land use objectives, the
type and character of buildings and the methods of providing utilities and the
like.
   (C)   Review. The applicant shall allow a minimum of two weeks for staff
review and the staff shall take no more than four weeks to review the Concept
Plan and supportive information prior to submission to the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall review the information and recommend approval of
the Concept Plan, revision or reapplication or denial of the Concept Plan.
   (D)   Findings. In approving the Concept Plan, the Planning Commission must
find as follows and forward its findings to the Council:
      (1)   The plan provides sufficient usable open space and evidences a
substantial preservation of natural features to warrant the granting of
variances through planned unit development;
      (2)   The plan complies with the intent of the Comprehensive Guide Plan;
      (3)   The proposed development will not be detrimental to surrounding
properties; and
      (4)   The plan is more creative and will provide a better living, working
or shopping environment than is possible under strict requirements of this
chapter.
   (E)   Public hearing; Concept Plan. The Council shall conduct a public
hearing and may after having reviewed the Concept Plan and heard public
comment, reject the Concept Plan, request revision or reapplication, approve
the Concept Plan and incorporate the booklet along with the conditions of
approval into the zoning chapter as an amendment thereto, the Concept Plan
becoming the regulation for the site thereafter.
   (F)   Final development plan; rezoning. The applicant shall prepare a final
development plan for that part of the site to be rezoned and shall prepare
graphic and written material as follows in booklet form (20 copies):
      (1)   Legal descriptions of all parcels to be rezoned;
      (2)   Zoning classifications requested;
      (3)   Detailed site plan showing all dimensions, structures, parking and
streets, utilities, common open spaces and grading;
      (4)   Covenants and restrictions, if any, applying to each tract and to
open spaces and including the responsibility for the maintenance and operation
of common areas and facilities;
      (5)   Density and gross building computations;
      (6)   Preliminary architectural drawings for each different building
type, except single-family dwellings, showing building elevations, schematic
floor plans, unit relationships, activity areas, building materials and the
like;
      (7)   Landscape plan and schedule showing types, quantity, sizes and
location of plant materials;
      (8)   Construction-occupancy schedule; and
      (9)   A description of the nature and character of nonresidential
developments, including a description of waste emissions activities conducted
on the premises and the like.
   (G)   Formal application; rezoning.  The applicant shall file a rezoning
petition, pay fees and submit graphic information for review by the staff and
Planning Commission.
   (H)   Review. The Planning Commission and staff shall review the final
development plan to determine if it conforms with the Guide Plan and the
approved Concept Plan and shall recommend approval of the final development
plan, revision or reapplication, or denial of the plan.
   (I)   Public hearing, final development plan. The Council shall conduct a
public hearing and may reject the plan, request revision or reapplication,
approve the final development plan and incorporate the booklet into the zoning
chapter as an amendment thereto, the plan to be placed permanently on record in
the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s office to serve as the zoning
regulations for the site thereafter. Requested changes in the final development
plan after approval has been granted will require a public hearing and the
submission of an amended plan document unless the changes are minor enough to
be authorized by administrative directive.
(1989 Code, § 11.55, Subd. 3) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
ADULT ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 153.110 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose.  
      (1)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate adult oriented
establishments to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulation to:
         (a)   Prevent additional criminal activity within the city;
         (b)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent
adverse effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood;
         (c)   To locate adult oriented establishments away from residential
areas, schools, churches, parks and playgrounds; and
         (d)   Prevent concentration of adult oriented establishments within
certain areas of the city.
      (2)   The provisions of this subchapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including adult oriented materials. Similarly, it is
not the intent nor effect of this subchapter to restrict or deny access by
adults to adult oriented materials protected by the First and Fourteenth
Amendments to the Constitution of the United States or to deny access by
distributors and exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended
market.
   (B)   Findings. The City Council makes the following findings about the
effect adult oriented establishments have on the character of the city’s
neighborhoods.
      (1)   In making these findings, the City Council accepts the
recommendations of staff who have reviewed the many reports, studies, judicial
decisions and experiences of other cities around the state and country
concerning the secondary effects on the areas in which the activities are
located or take place, including: The Report of the Attorney General Working
Group on Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6, 1989,
prepared by then State Attorney General Hubert H. Humphrey, III; the City of
St. Cloud, MN; the City of St. Paul, MN; the City of Los Angeles, CA; the City
of Austin, TX; and various other cities throughout the country that have
studied the impact of adult oriented businesses. These studies have concluded
that adult uses and sexually oriented businesses have adverse impacts on the
surrounding neighborhoods.
      (2)   Based on these studies the City Council concludes:
         (a)   Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can contribute to an
increase in crime in the area where these businesses are located. This can be a
burden to the city crime prevention programs and law enforcement services;
         (b)   Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can significantly
contribute to the deterioration of residential neighborhoods and can increase
neighborhood blight. These businesses also can impair the character and quality
of the residential housing in the area where these businesses are located. This
situation could reduce the amount of desirable housing and cause residents to
flee the neighborhood;
         (c)   The concentration of adult uses and sexually oriented businesses
in one area can greatly affect the area where the businesses are concentrated.
A cycle of decay can result from the influx and concentration of adult uses and
sexually oriented businesses. Others may perceive the presence of the
businesses as an indication that the area is deteriorating and results in other
businesses and residents moving or fleeing from the area. Lower property values
that can result from the concentration of these businesses, erode the city’s
tax base and contribute to blight;
         (d)   Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can have a
dehumanizing and distractive influence on young people and students attending
schools, using parks, playgrounds and other public recreational areas. They can
interfere with or even destroy the spiritual experience of persons attending
church, synagogue or other place of worship and can interfere with or even
destroy the opportunity for solemn and respectful contemplation at cemeteries
and similar facilities;
         (e)   It is necessary to provide for the special and express
regulations of business establishments or commercial enterprises that operate
as adult body painting studios, adult book stores, adult cabarets, adult car
washes, adult companionship establishments, adult hotels or motels, adult
massage parlors or health clubs, adult motion picture arcades or theaters,
adult modeling studios, adult novelty businesses, adult saunas and similar
adult oriented services operating under various names to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, and to guard against inception and transmission of
disease;
         (f)   Businesses such as the types described in division (B)(2)(e)
above and all other similar establishments whose services include sessions
offered to adults conducted in private by members of the same or opposite sex,
and employing personnel with no specialized training, are susceptible to
operations contravening, subverting or endangering the morals of the city by
being the site of acts of prostitution, illicit sex and occasions of violent
crimes, and thus requiring close inspection, permitting and regulations;
         (g)   Control and regulation of businesses of these types, in view of
the abuses often perpetrated, require intensive efforts by the Police
Department and other departments of the city. It is necessary for the city to
provide services to all of the city without concentrating the public services
in one area. The concentrated use of city services detracts from and reduces
the level of services available to the rest of the city. Thus, these types of
establishments can diminish the ability of the city to protect and promote the
general health, welfare, morals and safety of the city;
         (h)   The limitation on the hours of operation and the regulation of
exterior appearance, including signage, of adult oriented business activities
is necessary to protect and secure neighboring uses, to control adverse noise
and traffic impacts associated with those activities, and otherwise address,
mitigate and, if possible, eliminate the adverse impacts and secondary effects
of sexual oriented business activities on the areas in which the activities are
located or taking place; and
         (i)   The City Council adopts the following land use and permitting
regulations, recognizing that it has an interest in the present and future
character of the city’s residential and commercial neighborhoods. These
regulations are to lessen the detrimental and adverse effects adult uses and
sexually oriented businesses have on adjacent land uses and to protect and
promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
(Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002)
§ 153.111 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT USES. Adult body painting studios, adult book stores, adult cabaret,
adult car wash, adult hotels or adult motels, adult motion picture theaters,
adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult health, sport
clubs, adult sauna/steam room/bathhouses, adult companionship establishments,
adult rap/conversation parlors, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture
arcade, adult modeling studios and other premises, enterprises or
establishments, businesses, or places open to some or all members of the public
at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation or display, depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
which the public could see. This definition does not apply to the practice of
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry by
state licensed or registered persons. Activities defined as obscene by M.S. §
617.241, as it may be amended from time to time, are not lawful and are not
included in the definitions of ADULT USES.
   ADULT USES (ACCESSORY). The offering of goods and/or services classified as
adult uses on a limited scale that are incidental to the primary activity and
goods and/or services offered by the establishment. Examples of these items
include adult magazines, adult movies, adult novelties, and the like. Accessory
uses that use less than 200 square feet or 10% of the total floor area (square
footage), whichever is less, are exempted from obtaining a license under this
subchapter.
   ADULT USES (PRINCIPAL). The offering of goods and/or services classified as
adult uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment and
include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business that
provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent
or non-transparent to or on the body of a patron when the body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment, building or business engaging
in the barter, rental or sale of items or merchandise consisting of printed
matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tapes, video tapes, computer or video
disks, motion picture film or any other similar materials, if the shop is not
open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public,
excluding any minor because of age, if more than 200 square feet or 10% of the
usable floor area of the establishment, building or business, whichever is
less, has products or materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matters depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. An establishment, building or business that provides
dancing or other live entertainment if the establishment excludes minors by
virtue of age and if the dancing or live entertainment is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the performance or presentation, display,
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (4)   ADULT CAR WASH. A wash facility for any type of motor vehicle that
allows employees, agent, independent contractors or person to appear in a state
of partial or total nudity in terms of specified anatomical areas.
      (5)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENTS. An establishment or business,
if the establishment excludes minors because of age, which provides the service
of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an
employee of the establishment and a customer, if the service is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (6)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. A building or space in which an
admission is charged for the entrance, or food or non-alcoholic beverages are
sold or intended for consumption, and in which may be observed live
presentations of entertainment distinguished by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (7)   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.  
         (a)   An establishment, building or business engaged in any of the
following activities or which uses any of the following procedures or
practices, either:
            1.   Any business conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults
and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage either by law
or by the operators of the business; or
            2.   Any other business that offers its patrons services, products
or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing,
describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
         (b)   Specifically included in the term but without limitation are
adult book stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture
theaters, adult massage parlors, adult health clubs, adult saunas, adult
companionship establishments, adult cabarets, adult car washes, adult novelty
businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels
or motels and adult body painting studios.
      (8)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are
specifically excluded from patronage and in which material is presented that is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (9)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A massage parlor or
health/sport club that restricts minors because of age or law, which provides
the services of massage if the service is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (10)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business, building or
establishment in an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons
used for the presenting of visual media material if the business as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age or law, or if the material
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas by patrons.
      (11)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment or business whose major
business is the provision to customers of figure models who are provided with
the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to customers
and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical
areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted by the customers.
      (12)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any building or place to which the
public is allowed or invited in which coin- or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, computers or other production devices show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at once, and characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (13)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business premises within an
enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting
visual media material if the business as a prevailing practice excludes minors
by virtue of age, or if the material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (14)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business that has as a principal
activity the sale of materials or devices that stimulate human genitals or
devices designed for sexual stimulation or which depict or relate to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (15)   ADULT SAUNA/STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE. A business that excludes minors
because of age, and which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
bathing, pleasure, relaxation or reducing, and which utilizes steam or hot air
as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the
sauna/steam room/bathhouse is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   LICENSED FAMILY DAYCARE, LICENSED GROUP FAMILY DAYCARE, LICENSED CHILD CARE
CENTER. A facility holding a license from this county or this state pursuant to
M.S. Chapter 245A, as it may be amended from time to time, and/or Minn. Rules,
Chapter 9502 or Chapter 9503, as amended.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with
less than fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less
than fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building or space that is principally used as a place
where people of the same faith or religion regularly assemble for worship.
   PUBLIC LIBRARY. Any library that provides free access to all residents of
the city or county without discrimination and is organized under M.S. Chapter
134, as it may be amended from time to time.
   PUBLIC PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach or recreation or
community center in the city owned, leased or used wholly or in part of a city,
county, state, school district or federal government for recreational purposes.
   SCHOOL. A building or space that is principally used as a place where 25 or
more persons receive a full course of educational instruction. Any post-
secondary or post-high school educational building, including any college or
any vocational-technical college, shall not be deemed a SCHOOL for purposes of
this subchapter.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any adult body painting studios, adult book
stores, adult cabaret, adult car wash, adult hotels or adult motels, adult
motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage
parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult sauna/steam room/bathhouses, adult
companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult novelty
businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios and other
premises, enterprises or establishments, businesses or places open to some or
all members of the public at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation or display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas which the public could see. This
definition does not apply to the practice of medicine, surgery, osteopathy,
chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry by state licensed or registered
persons. Activities defined as obscene by M.S. § 617.241, as it may be amended
from time to time, are not lawful and are not included in the definitions of
adult uses.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covering human genitals, pubic
region or pubic hair, buttock, anus or female breast or breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola or any combination of the foregoing;
and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or
fondling of unclothed genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast,
flagellation or torture in a sexual relationship, and any of the following
sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia,
cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism,
sodomy, zooerasty;
      (2)   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence;
      (3)   Use or acts of human or animal ejaculation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation;
      (4)   Fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic regions or pubic
hair, buttocks, female breasts;
      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude,
clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of the person;
      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being;
      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation; or
      (8)   Any combination of the above.
(Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002; Ord. 63, 1st Ser., 9-17-2013)
§ 153.112 APPLICATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   Except as may otherwise be permitted in this subchapter, no structure
shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed nor altered, and no
structure or land shall be used, for any purpose nor in any manner which is not
in conformity with this subchapter.
   (B)   No adult oriented business shall engage in any activity or conduct, or
permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct, in or about an
establishment which is prohibited by an ordinance of the city, the laws of this
state or the United States of America. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed as authorizing or permitting conduct which is prohibited or regulated
by other statutes or ordinances, including but not limited to statutes or
ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material
generally, or the exhibition, sale or distribution of specified material to
minors.
(Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002)
§ 153.113 LICENSING.
   (A)   License required. No person, firm or corporation shall own or operate
an adult oriented business in the city without having first secured a license
as provided herein.
   (B)   Exemption. Access uses that use less than 200 square feet or 10% of
the total floor area (square footage), whichever is less, of the establishment,
space, structure or building in which it is located are exempted from obtaining
a license.
   (C)   Applications. An application for a license shall be made on a form
provided by the city. This application shall include:
      (1)   The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the applicant,
if an individual; and if a corporation, partnership, limited liability
corporation (LLC) or similar entity, the names, residences, phone numbers and
birth dates of those owners holding more than 5% of issued and outstanding
stock of the corporation or ownership interest in a partnership, LLC or similar
entity;
      (2)   The names and addresses of all creditors of the applicant, owner,
lessee or manager insofar as the same have furnished or extended credit for the
purposes of constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, furnishing or
acquiring the premises, personal effects, equipment or anything incident to the
establishment, maintenance and operation of the business;
      (3)   The name, address, phone number and date of birth of all employees,
and of the operator, manager or lessee of the operation, if different from the
owner(s);
      (4)   A statement detailing each misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor or felony
relating to a sex related offense and/or the operation of adult uses and
related activities of which the manager, operator, lessee, employees and/or
applicant and, for a corporation, the owners of more than 5% of the issued and
outstanding stock of the corporation, or ownership interest in a partnership,
LLC or similar entity, have been convicted and whether the applicant has ever
applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of business in other
counties or cities;
      (5)   The activities and type of business to be conducted;
      (6)   The address and legal description of the building, establishment or
premises where the adult oriented business is to be located;
      (7)   A building plan of the premises detailing internal operations and
activities, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business;
      (8)   A description or building plan that details all proposed interior
and exterior changes to an existing building or structure;
      (9)   Intended hours of operations;
      (10)   Provisions made to restrict access by minors;
      (11)   The license fee required by this subchapter must accompany the
application; and
      (12)   Each application shall contain a provision on the application in
bold print stating that any withholding of information or the providing of
false or misleading information will be grounds for the denial or revocation of
a license. Any changes in the information provided on the application or
provided during the investigation shall be reported to the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer by the applicant or licensee. If the changes take place during
the investigation, the data shall be provided to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer in writing, and the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall report
the changes to the City Council. Failure to report the changes by the
applicants or the licensee may result in the denial or revocation of a license.
   (D)   License fees.
      (1)   The annual fee, investigative fee and late fees for an adult
business license shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in
full of the required application and investigation fees for the license. All
fees shall be paid at the time of application.
      (3)   All permits/licenses shall expire on the last day of December in
each year. The city shall issue each license for one year, except if part of
the license year has elapsed when the application is made, the city may issue a
license for the remainder of the year for a prorated fee. In computing the fee,
the city shall count any unexpired fraction of a month as one month. License
fees shall be considered past due as of January 1 if not paid. Late fees will
be assessed on all past due license applications.
      (4)   No part of any annual fee, investigative fee and/or late fee paid
as required by this subchapter shall be refunded.
   (E)   Granting of license. The city shall investigate all facts set out in
the application, including a background check of the applicant or licensee, the
manager, operator and each cabaret dancer. The City Council shall act to
approve or disapprove the license application within 60 days from the date the
application was submitted. If the application is deficient, the Council shall
act on the application within 120 days from the date that the deficiency has
been corrected.
   (F)   Persons ineligible for license. The city shall not grant a license to
nor may one be held by any person who:
      (1)   Is under 21 years of age;
      (2)   Has been convicted of a felony or any obscenity crime as defined by
M.S. §§ 617.23 through 617.299, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to
time, or as defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith;
      (3)   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
issued;
      (4)   Has not paid the license and investigative fees required by this
subchapter;
      (5)   Is not a citizen of the United States; or
      (6)   Has had an adult use or similar permit or license revoked under an
ordinance or statute similar to this subchapter.
   (G)   Place ineligible for license.
      (1)   No license shall be granted for an adult oriented business on any
premises where a licensee has been convicted of a violation of this subchapter,
or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause until one year has
elapsed after the conviction or revocation.
      (2)   Except uses lawfully existing at the time of this subchapter, no
license shall be granted for any adult oriented business that does not meet all
city ordinance requirements, all Building and Fire Code requirements and all
provisions of state and federal law.
   (H)   Nonconforming uses. Any adult oriented business existing on the
effective date of the adoption of this subchapter may be continued subject to
the following provisions:
      (1)   No adult oriented business shall be expanded or enlarged except in
conformity with the provisions of this subchapter; and
      (2)   A nonconforming adult oriented business shall be required to apply
for and receive an adult oriented establishment license from the city. The city
does not require a public hearing before issuing a license for the
nonconforming adult oriented business.
   (I)   Conditions of license generally.
      (1)   The city shall issue the license to the applicant. The license
shall not be transferred to another holder.
      (2)   The license shall be issued only for the premises or location
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another location
or place without the approval of the City Council.
      (3)   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions of the
following subdivisions and all other provisions of this subchapter and of any
applicable city, state and federal law.
      (4)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
licensee, the expiration date and the address of the business. All licensed
premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance of the business so that it may be easily read at any time.
      (5)   No minor shall be allowed in or on the premises of an adult
oriented business.
      (6)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of its place of
business and shall maintain conditions consistent with this subchapter and all
federal, state and local rules and regulation generally.
   (J)   Additional conditions for adult cabarets.
      (1)   Dancer’s license. No person shall dance at an adult cabaret without
a valid dancer’s license issued by the city.
      (2)   Dancer’s license application and issuance.
         (a)   Application for dancers’ licenses shall be made to the city.
         (b)   An application for dancers’ licenses shall be verified and shall
contain or set forth the following information:
            1.   The applicant’s names, home addresses (current and former),
home telephone number, date of birth and aliases (past and present); and
            2.   The business name and address where the applicant intends to
dance.
         (c)   Application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $5.
         (d)   Within five days of receipt of an application for dancer’s
license, the city shall issue the license.
         (e)   A dancer’s license shall entitle a dancer to dance only at the
business indicated on the dancer’s license application.
      (3)   Dancer’s license; renewal, revocation. A dancer’s license may be
renewed by following the application procedure in §
153.113.
      (4)   Additional conditions.
         (a)   No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit
or allow any dancer or other live entertainer to perform nude.
         (b)   No dancer, live entertainer, performer, patron or any other
person shall be nude in an adult cabaret.
         (c)   No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under 18 years
old.
         (d)   All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform
intended for that purpose and which is raised at least two feet from the level
of the floor.
         (e)   No dancer or performer shall perform any dance or live
entertainment closer than ten feet to any patron.
         (f)   No dancer or performer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no
patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or performer.
         (g)   No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or
performer.
         (h)   No dancer or performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from
any patron.
(Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002)
§ 153.114 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Access. An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department and Building
Inspection Division to inspect the premises of an adult oriented business for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or
open for business, in accordance with §
10.20.
   (B)   Refusal to permit inspections. A person who operates an adult oriented
business or his or her agent or employee commits an offense if he or she
refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department and Building
Inspection Division at any time it is occupied or open for business. Refusal to
permit inspections may result in the suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of
the license as provided in §
153.113.
   (C)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation.
(Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002)
§ 153.115 LOCATION; CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The city shall permit adult oriented establishments to be located only in
the I-1 Industrial Park and subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   No adult oriented establishment shall be located closer than 300 feet
from any other adult use principal or sexually oriented business in the city.
Measurements shall be made in a straight horizontal line, without regard to
city or county boundaries, intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
point of the actual business premises of the adult use or sexually oriented
business to the nearest point of the actual business premises of any other
adult use or sexually oriented business.
   (B)   No adult oriented establishment shall be located closer than 500 feet
from any residential lot line, place of worship, school, public park, licensed
family daycare home, public library or licensed child care or daycare center in
the city or county. Measurements shall be made in a straight horizontal line,
without regard to city or county boundaries, intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest point of the actual business premises of the adult use or
sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the premises or
building used as a dwelling or residence, place of worship, school, public
park, licensed family daycare home, licensed group family daycare home, public
library or licensed child care or daycare center.
   (C)   No adult oriented establishments shall be located closer than 500 feet
from any residential lot line, any residential zoning district or any
residential planned unit development (PUD). Measurements shall be a straight
horizontal line, without regard to city or county boundaries, intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest point of the actual business premises
of the adult oriented establishment to the nearest property line of the
premises or building used as a dwelling residence, residential zoning district
or PUD.
   (D)   No adult oriented establishments shall be located closer than 500 feet
from any state or federal trunk highway or any major city thoroughfare.
   (E)   The city prohibits any building owner or operator from having more
than one of the following uses, tenants or activities in the same building
structure:
      (1)   Adult body painting studio;
      (2)   Adult book store;
      (3)   Adult cabaret;
      (4)   Adult car wash;
      (5)   Adult companionship establishment;
      (6)   Adult entertainment facility;
      (7)   Adult hotel or motel;
      (8)   Adult modeling studio;
      (9)   Adult sauna/steam room/bathhouse;
      (10)   Adult motion picture theater;
      (11)   Adult mini-motion picture theater;
      (12)   Adult massage parlor;
      (13)   Adult health, sports club;
      (14)   Adult novelty business; or
      (15)   Any business or establishment in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas that the public can see.
   (F)   An adult oriented establishment shall not sell or dispense non-
intoxicating or intoxicating liquors, nor shall it be located within 500 feet
of a building that contains a business that sells or dispenses 3.2% malt liquor
beverage or intoxicating liquors. An adult use oriented establishment shall not
allow the consumption of non-intoxicating or intoxicating liquors anywhere on a
parcel containing that use or business.
   (G)   No adult use oriented establishment’s entertainment shall engage in
any activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or
conduct in or about the adult use establishment that is prohibited by any
ordinance of the city, the laws of this state or the United States of America.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as authorizing or permitting
conduct that is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinances
prohibiting the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material generally,
or the exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials to minors.
   (H)   No adult use oriented establishment shall be conducted in any manner
that permits the perception or observation from any property not approved as an
adult use of any materials depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by any visual or auditory
media, including display, decoration, sign, show window, sound transmission or
other means.
   (I)   All adult use oriented establishments shall prominently display a sign
at the entrance and located within two feet of the door opening device of the
adult use establishment or section of the establishment devoted to adult books
or materials which states: “This business sells or displays material containing
adult themes. Persons under 18 years of age shall not enter.”
   (J)   No adult oriented establishments (principal) shall be open to the
public between the hours of 10:00 p.m and 10:00 a.m. on the days of Monday
through Saturday. No adult oriented establishments (principal) shall be open to
the public on Sunday.
   (K)   Adult use accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and
external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.
   (L)   An adult oriented establishment shall prevent off-site viewing of its
merchandise, which if viewed by a minor would be in violation of M.S. Chapter
617, as it may be amended from time to time, or other applicable federal or
state statutes or local ordinances.
   (M)   All entrances to the establishment, with the exception of the
emergency fire exits which are not useable by patrons to enter the business,
shall be visible from a public right-of-way.
   (N)   The layout of the display areas shall be designed so that the
management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside the
store can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise offered
for sale or viewing, including but not limited to books, magazines,
photographs, video tapes or any other material.
   (O)   Illumination of the premises’ exterior shall be adequate to observe
the location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.
(Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002)
§ 153.116 EXPIRATION, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Expiration. Each license shall expire at the end of the calendar year
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in §
153.113. Applications for renewal must be made at least 60 days before the
expiration date.
   (B)   Suspension, revocation or non-renewal. The city may revoke, suspend or
not renew a license upon recommendation of the City Police Chief that shows
that the licensee, its owners, managers, operator, employees, agents or any
other interested parties have engaged in any of the following conduct:
      (1)   Licensee or employees has or have knowingly allowed possession, use
or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;
      (2)   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation about securing the license;
      (3)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult oriented
establishment premises;
      (4)   Knowingly operated the adult oriented establishment during a period
of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage an adult oriented
establishment in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action
by law enforcement officers;
      (6)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or on the
licensed premises;
      (7)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult oriented establishment
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
      (8)   Conviction of a felony or any offense involving moral turpitude.
   (C)   Notice. A suspension, revocation or nonrenewal by the city shall be
preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing before the City
Council. The notice shall give at least ten days’ notice of the time and place
of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee.
The notice may be served upon the licensee personally, or by leaving the same
at the licensed business premises with the person in charge thereof.
   (D)   Decision. At the conclusion of the hearing the City Council may order
that:
      (1)   The revocation, suspension or nonrenewal be affirmed; or
      (2)   The revocation, suspension or nonrenewal be lifted, and that the
license be returned to the certificate holder.
   (E)   Appeals. After denial of an application, or denial of renewal of an
application or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of the administrative action in any
court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly
reviewed by the court.
(Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002)
§ 153.117 SIGN RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The following sign regulations shall apply to all adult oriented
establishments in the city. These regulations are to protect children from
exposure to sexually oriented or shocking signs and materials and to preserve
the value of property near adult oriented establishments. These regulations are
aside from any other provisions of the city’s regulations.
   (B)   (1)   All signs shall be flat, wall-mounted signs. No signs shall be
freestanding, located on the roof, or contain any flashing lights, moving
elements or electronically or mechanically changing messages. No signs shall
contain any message or image which identifies specified sexually activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
      (2)   The amount of allowable sign area shall be one square foot of sign
area per foot of lot frontage on a street, not to exceed 50 square feet.
      (3)   No merchandise, photos or pictures of the products or entertainment
on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where they can
be viewed from the sidewalk or public right-of-way adjoining the building or
structure in which the adult use or sexually oriented business is located.
      (4)   No signs shall be placed in any window. A two-foot square sign may
be placed on the door to state hours of operation and admittance to adults
only.
(Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002)
Cross-reference:
   Signs generally, see
Chapter 150
§ 153.118 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect on 6-1-1976 and be enforced from and after
its passage, adoption and publication.
(Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.130 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer who is hereby designated as the Zoning Official.
   (B)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may authorize other employees
or agents of the city to perform the various duties of the Zoning Official,
including the enforcement of this chapter.
(1989 Code, § 11.80)
§ 153.131 VALIDITY.
   Failure to give mailed notice as may be required by this chapter or any
defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
(1989 Code, § 11.81)
§ 153.132 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be
the minimum requirements necessary to promote and preserve the public health,
safety, morals and welfare.
(1989 Code, § 11.82)
§ 153.133 SUPREMACY.
   When any condition imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the use of
land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings is either more restrictive or
less restrictive than similar conditions imposed by the provisions of this
chapter or other city code provisions, the more restrictive condition shall
prevail. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easements, covenants or
any other private agreement, providing that where the provisions of this
chapter are more restrictive than the easements, covenants or other private
agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
(1989 Code, § 11.83) (Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1989 Code, § 11.99)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to conduct a garage or rummage sale in
violation of any of the provisions of §
153.077. A violation of §
153.077 is a misdemeanor, to be punished as provided in division (A) above.
   (C)   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with or assists
or participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of §§
153.110 through
153.117 is guilty of a misdemeanor and for each violation is subject to the
maximum penalty prescribed by state law for a misdemeanor. Each day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 129, eff. 4-24-1976; Ord. 42, 2nd Ser., passed 9-3-2002; Ord. 55, 2nd
Ser., passed 9-1-2009)
CHAPTER 154: LONG TERM RENTALS
Section
   
154.01   Purpose and findings
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Registration requirements
   
154.04   Exemptions
   
154.05   Manner of registration renewal
   
154.06   Transfer of property
   
154.07   Posting of registration
   
154.08   Fees
   
154.09   Maintenance of records
   
154.10   Maintenance of standards
   
154.11   Inspections and investigations
   
154.12   Conduct on registered premises
   
154.13   Failure to grant registration, revocation, suspension or failure to
renew registration
   
154.14   Summary action
   
154.15   Applicable laws
   
154.16   Violations, injunctive relief
   
154.17   Written notices
   
154.18   Effective date
§ 154.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City Council of the City of Aurora finds that there is a need for
periodic municipal inspection of residential rental units in the city to ensure
that such units meet city and state safety, health, fire, and zoning codes and
to promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the community at-large and
the residents of rental units within this city.
   (B)   The City Council of the City of Aurora finds that a municipal
registration program is appropriate to effectively enforce residential rental
unit maintenance standards and correct or prevent law violations, nuisances,
and other disturbances and disorders involving residential rental units within
this city.
   (C)   The City Council of the City of Aurora finds that an effective means
of implementing the foregoing findings is registration of all residential
rental units within the city and inspection of such units from time to time as
determined appropriate in the exercise of discretion by staff and personnel of
the city and in response to complaints involving such units.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ADMINISTRATOR or CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The Aurora City Administrator, or the
Deputy Aurora City Clerk in the absence of the City Administrator, or such
person as the City Administrator designates, in writing, to carry out the
responsibilities of the City Administrator as provided by this chapter.
   DWELLING. Any building or other permanent or temporary structure, including
a manufactured or mobile home which is wholly or partly used, or intended to be
used, for living or sleeping by human occupants.
   LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGER. A natural person who is authorized by the rental
unit owner to make decisions for the owner about rental, occupancy, and
maintenance of the rental unit.
   REGISTRATION HOLDER. A person or entity to whom registration for a rental
unit is issued under this chapter.
   RENT, LEASE, LET, or SUBLET. The leasing of a rental unit to a non-owner for
a fixed or non-fixed period of time of more than 30 days, and shall include
lease to buy, contract for deed, installment sales, purchases, and other
similar arrangements whereby nonpayment of a periodic payment means the
occupants may be evicted without the necessity of either a statutory mortgage
foreclosure procedure, a statutory termination of contract for deed procedure,
or a statutory repossession procedure.
   RENTAL UNIT/RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT. Any house, apartment, condominium,
townhouse, room, or group of rooms, constituting or located within, a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit.
   SHALL AND MUST, as used in this chapter, are each mandatory.
   SHOULD AND MAY, as used in this chapter, are each permissive or directory.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.03 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person or entity may hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied, or
rent, lease, let, or sublet a rental unit, to another person or entity for
occupancy unless that rental unit is registered for occupancy pursuant to a
valid and current rental unit registration issued by the Aurora City
Administrator.
   (B)   Each rental unit must have an owner, or local property manager
designated by the owner.
   (C)   Any person or entity desiring to rent, let, lease, or sublet any
rental unit shall apply for registration by using forms furnished by the city
for that purpose. The forms must provide information required by the City
Administrator, including, but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Name, address, phone number of the property owner.
      (2)   Name, address, phone number of a designated local property manager.
      (3)   The street address of the rental property.
      (4)   The number and types of units within the rental property (dwelling
units or sleeping rooms).
      (5)   The name, phone number, and address of the person authorized to
make, or order, made repairs or services for the property if in violation of
city or state codes, if the person is different than the owner or local
property manager.
      (6)   Home insurance provider (with proof of insurance).
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to campus dormitory and campus residence units
owned, operated, or managed by a governmental entity or agency, hospital units
or rooms, nursing homes, retirement homes or other similar rental space which
is otherwise registered by the State of Minnesota or the City of Aurora.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.05 MANNER OF REGISTRATION RENEWAL.
   Registration shall be required each calendar year and may be issued on a
calendar year basis prior to January 1 of each successive year. The city will
annually mail registration renewal forms to rental unit owners or their
designated local property managers on or about October 1 of each year.
Registration renewal forms must be delivered to the City Administrator no later
than the 15th day of November each year. Failure of the city to mail renewal
forms and failure of an owner or local property manager to receive a renewal
form, does not excuse or waive the registration required by this chapter.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.06 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.
   Every new owner of a rental unit, whether fee owner or contract purchaser,
shall furnish to the City Administrator the new owner's name, address, and
phone number, and the name, address, and phone number of the new owner's
designated local property manager before taking possession of the rental
property upon closing of the transaction. No new registration fee is to be
required of the new owner during the year in which such possession takes place,
provided that the previous owner has paid all registration fees and has
complied with all requirements of this chapter and any violations of health,
zoning, fire, or safety codes of the city and county. If any change in the type
of occupancy as originally registered is contemplated by the new owner, a new
registration application will be required.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.07 POSTING OF REGISTRATION.
   Each rental unit registration holder must post the rental unit registration
in a conspicuous spot near the front entry to the rental unit in a public
corridor, hallway, or lobby. Failure to post the registration and keep the
registration posted is a misdemeanor, but is not grounds for termination of
registration.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.08 FEES.
   The fees for rental unit registration, registration renewal, late fees and
inspection may be set by ordinance or resolution of the City Council adopted
from time to time and shall not be prorated or refunded.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.09 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   All records, files, and documents pertaining to rental unit registration and
rental unit inspections may be maintained by the City Administrator and will be
available to the public as allowed, permitted, or required by state law or city
ordinance.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.10 MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS.
   Every rental unit must be maintained in compliance with the building code,
dwelling maintenance standards, nuisance ordinance, and noise ordinance of the
City of Aurora, St. Louis County, and State of Minnesota respectively as now in
force and hereafter amended, revised, or replaced, and in compliance with all
other standards, ordinances, laws and regulations governing use, occupancy,
construction and maintenance of property and conduct of persons in or on that
property.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.11 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The City of Aurora requires a professional home inspection report from
a home inspector with adherence to the Standards of Practice of the American
Society of Home Inspectors. Inspections will be valid for up to three years
after the date of inspection.
   (B)   The City Administrator and/or respective designees and representatives
are hereby authorized to make compliance checks reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   All persons authorized herein to inspect shall have the authority to
enter, at all reasonable times, any rental unit or structure containing a
rental unit, registered or required to be registered, for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter.
   (D)   Written notice of a violation of this chapter may be given to the
registration holder by certified mail directed to the address of the
registration holder as shown by the Administrator's registration application
file. Said notice may contain a compliance order stating that compliance with
this chapter shall be made immediately and, in that case, the notice shall
advise the registration holder that the property may be re-inspected in not
less than 30 days, unless extended by the Administrator, based on good cause.
   (E)   A registration holder may appeal to the City Administrator the
requirements of any compliance order by filing a written appeal with the office
of the City Administrator no later than ten days after the date of issuance of
the compliance order. The City Administrator should schedule a hearing within
ten days after filing of the notice of appeal. Enforcement of the compliance
order shall be stayed pending the decision of the City Administrator on the
appeal. The City Administrator may reschedule the hearing as the Administrator
determines is necessary.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.12 CONDUCT ON REGISTERED PREMISES.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the registration holder to require and
ensure that occupants of the registered premises conduct themselves in such a
manner as to not cause the premises to be disorderly or to be used, occupied,
or maintained in violation of law or ordinance. For purposes of this section, a
rental unit is disorderly and in violation of law or ordinance when any of the
following activities occur in, on or at the registered premises:
      (1)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of Aurora City Code relating
to nuisances as it now exists or as hereafter amended.
      (2)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of Aurora City Code
Chapter 130, the noise ordinances as it now exists or as hereafter amended.
      (3)   Conduct which constitutes disorderly conduct in violation of M.S. §
609.72 as it now exists or as hereafter amended.
      (4)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of laws relating to
possession of controlled substances pursuant to M.S. Chapter 152 as it now
exists or as hereafter amended.
      (5)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of any city ordinance or
state law relating to minors possessing or consuming alcohol, or relating to
providing, furnishing or serving alcohol to minors, or relating to sale of
alcoholic beverages.
      (6)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of state laws or city
ordinances relating to prostitution, indecent exposure or acts related to
prostitution as defined by state law.
      (7)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of city ordinances and state
laws relating to weapons or fire arms.
      (8)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of city ordinances or state
laws relating to assault, specifically including domestic assaults and criminal
sexual conduct.
      (9)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of ordinances or laws
relating to contributing to the need for protection, services, or delinquency
of a minor as defined in M.S. § 260B.425 as it now exists or as hereafter
amended.
      (10)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of any other federal, state
or local ordinance or regulation and which is reasonably likely to threaten,
annoy or harass tenants or visitors to rental units, or to residents, visitors
or occupants of neighboring properties.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall administer this section of the chapter
and may delegate administration to a designee authorized in writing by the City
Administrator.
   (C)   If the Administrator determines that a violation of this section has
occurred, then the Administrator will give notice of the violation to the
registration holder and the renters of the rental unit, if known, and will
direct that the registration holder take steps to prevent further violations.
   (D)   If another violation of this section occurs within 90 days of the
incident for which notice was given as provided in division (C) of this
section, then the City Administrator will give notice of the violation to the
registration holder and the renters of the rental unit, if known, and will
direct that the registration holder take steps to prevent further violations.
The City Administrator will also, at that time, request that the registration
holder submit to the City Administrator, within ten days of the City
Administrator's mailing of the notice of violation provided in this section, a
report itemizing all actions taken by the registration holder in response to
all notices of violations as to the rental unit within the preceding 90 days.
   (E)   If a third violation of this section occurs within 90 days after the
last of any two or more previous violations for which notices were given
pursuant to this section, and the registration holder has not sufficiently
taken action to prevent further violations, then the rental unit registration
for the premises may be denied, revoked, suspended or not renewed.
      (1)   Action to deny, revoke, suspend or not renew a rental unit
registration may be initiated by the City Administrator who shall give to the
registration holder a written notice of hearing before the City Administrator
to consider such denial, revocation, suspension or non-renewal.
      (2)   A notice of intent to deny, revoke, suspend or not renew
registration shall specify all violations of this section and shall state the
date, time, place and purpose of the hearing provided by this subdivision.
      (3)   The hearing held pursuant to this subdivision shall occur no later
than 30 days after notice.
      (4)   Following the hearing, the City Administrator may deny, revoke,
suspend or not renew registration for all or any part of the registered
premises or may grant conditional registration upon such terms and conditions
as the Administrator finds necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter.
   (F)   No adverse registration action may be imposed where the violation of
this section occurred during the pendency of unlawful detainer eviction
proceedings brought under Minnesota Statutes or within 30 days of notice given
by the registration holder to a tenant to vacate the premises at which the
violation occurred. Unlawful detainer eviction proceedings or a notice to
vacate the premises, will not, however, bar adverse registration action unless
diligently pursued by the registration holder. Action to deny, revoke, suspend
or not renew registration for violation of this section may be postponed or
dismissed by the City Administrator at any time if it appears to the
Administrator that the registration holder has taken appropriate remedial
action.
   (G)   The standard of proof to be used in determinations by the City
Administrator as to conduct constituting violations under this section is a
fair preponderance of evidence in support of such a determination. It is not
necessary that criminal charges be brought to support a determination of
violation of this section or a determination that conduct constituting a
violation of this section has occurred. It is necessary, in determining a
violation of this section, that law enforcement officers be called to the
rental unit in response to a complaint and that a police report and
investigation of the same be prepared.
   (H)   For the purpose of this chapter, a violation under this section
includes violations by the rental unit renters or occupants, or by their
visitors or guests, in or at the rental unit of the renters or tenants, or in,
at or upon its curtilage, including anywhere on the property grounds and
premises of an apartment building, home or mobile home park at which the rental
unit is situated.
   (I)   Failure of a registration holder to respond to notices provided in
this section is not, by itself alone, a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.13 FAILURE TO GRANT REGISTRATION, REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR FAILURE TO
RENEW REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to not register a rental unit unless it
complies with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any registration issued under this chapter is subject to the right,
which is hereby expressly reserved by the city, to deny, suspend, revoke, or
not renew the same should the registration holder or their agents, employees,
representatives, or lessees directly or indirectly operate or maintain the
rental dwellings contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance of the city or any special permit issued by the city, or the laws of
the State of Minnesota. Provided, however, registration shall not be denied,
suspended, revoked or not renewed if the registration holder complies with a
compliance order or orders in a reasonably timely manner as determined by the
City Administrator.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall notify the applicant that registration
has been denied, or the registration holder that registration is being
suspended, revoked or not-renewed. The suspension, revocation or non-renewal
shall occur 35 days after the date of the notification order, or at such later
date as set out in the notification.
   (D)   A determination by the City Administrator to deny, suspend, revoke or
not-renew registration of a rental unit may be appealed to the City Council by
filing with the City Administrator a written notice of appeal within 15 days of
the date on which the City Administrator mails such determination to the
applicant or registration holder. In that event, the appeal will be heard by
the City Council at its next meeting occurring at least 15 days after the
filing of the notice of appeal.
   (E)   At any appeal of a determination by the City Administrator under this
chapter, the registration holder or applicant, local property manager for the
registration holder or applicant, or an attorney representing them, may appear
and make a presentation to the City Council. The City Administrator shall
present to the City Council the basis for the determination being appealed.
After the hearing, the Council may uphold, reverse or modify the decision of
the City Administrator based upon the provisions of this chapter and upon the
protection of the public health, sanitation, safety or general welfare of the
community at-large or the residents of rental units within the city. The City
Council shall issue written findings and determination within 31 days of the
hearing, unless the Council extends that time for good cause.
   (F)   A decision of the City Council made as provided in this section may be
appealed by Writ of Certiorari to the Court of Appeals of the State of
Minnesota pursuant to its Rules of Civil Appellate Procedure.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.14 SUMMARY ACTION.
   (A)   As a condition of receiving rental unit registration, each
registration holder is presumed to agree and consent that when the conduct of
any registration holder or registration holder's agent, representative,
employee or lessee, or the condition of their rental unit, or the property in
or on which it is located, is detrimental to the public health, sanitation,
safety and general welfare of the community at-large, or residents of the
rental units so as to constitute a nuisance, fire hazard, or other unsafe or
dangerous condition and thus give rise to an emergency, the City Administrator
shall have the authority to summarily condemn or close individual rental units
or such areas of the rental dwelling as the Administrator deems necessary.
Notice of summary condemnation shall be posted at the units or areas affected
and shall describe the units or areas affected. No person shall remove the
posted notice, other than the Fire Chief, East Range Police Chief, City
Administrator, or their designated representative. Any person aggrieved by the
decision or the action of the City Administrator or Fire Marshall set out in
this division, may appeal the decision following the procedures set out in this
chapter. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as provided in this
chapter, however, the date of the hearing may be expedited with the consent of
the registration holder.
   (B)   The decision of the City Administrator set forth in this division is
not voided by the filing of such appeal. Only after the hearing by the City
Council has been held will the decision or action of the City Administrator be
affected.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.15 APPLICABLE LAWS.
   Registration holders are subject to all of the ordinances of the city and
State of Minnesota relating to rental dwellings, and this chapter shall not be
construed or interpreted to supersede or limit any other applicable ordinance
or law.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.16 VIOLATIONS, INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter prevents the city from taking enforcement
action under any of its fire, housing, zoning, health safety, or other codes,
ordinances and state laws for violations thereof, or to seek injunctive relief
and criminal prosecution for violations of any ordinance, code, or law. Nothing
contained in this chapter prevents the city from seeking injunctive relief
against a property owner or designated property manager who fails to comply
with the terms and conditions of this chapter or to obtain an order closing
such rental units until violations of this particular chapter have been
remedied by the property owner or designated property manager.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Each separate day on which
a continuing violation occurs is a separate violation.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.17 WRITTEN NOTICES.
   Notices from the city required by this chapter shall be effective if
personally delivered or if mailed to the addressee by first class mail to the
address shown in the city file pertaining to the rental unit involved in the
notice.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 154.18 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The initial registration provisions of this chapter do not become effective
until August 1, 2023, to allow rental unit owners to complete the process of
registration. The initial registration covers a period of time from the date of
issue through December 31, 2023.
(Ord. 97, passed 5-2-2023)
CHAPTER 155: SHORT TERM RENTALS
Section
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Registration required
   
155.04   Application
   
155.05   Application fee
   
155.06   Lodging tax
   
155.07   Expiration of license
   
155.08   Renewal of license
   
155.09   No vested right
   
155.10   Criteria for issuance
   
155.11   Licensed premises
   
155.12   Recreational vehicles
   
155.13   License not transferable
   
155.14   Registered agent required
   
155.15   Responsibility of owners
   
155.16   Disorderly conduct prohibited
   
155.17   License revocation
   
155.18   Violation
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the short-term rental of
dwelling units within the city is conducted, operated, and maintained in R-1,
R-2, R-2A, and R-3 Districts in a manner so as to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Aurora, and so as to not
become a nuisance to the surrounding properties.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings
stated:
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for
residential purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit equipped and intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages pertinent to the use of
the property on which it is displayed.
   OPERATE. To charge a rental charge for the use of a unit in a dwelling.
   OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this section, to the same extent as if such person were
the owner.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Means any of the following:
      (1)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary building to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of the self-propelled
vehicle.
      (2)   PICK-UP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
      (3)   TRAVEL TRAILER. Vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses, permanently identified "Travel Trailer" by the manufacturer of
the trailer.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The rental or lease of a dwelling unit, in whole or in
part, for 30 days or less.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE. The license issued by the city for the rental or
lease of a dwelling unit, in whole or in part, for 30 days or less.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse or any other discarded solid organic or
inorganic materials.
   TENANT. Any person who is occupying a dwelling unit in whole or in part
under any agreement (written or oral), lease, or contract.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.03 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No owner shall undertake the short-term rental of any dwelling unit to a
tenant or tenants unless properly permitted by state, county, and any other
governmental regulations, and as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.04 APPLICATION.
   An owner desiring to undertake or allow the short-term rental of a dwelling
unit in the city shall apply for a short-term rental license. The application
shall be submitted by the owner. The registration application shall be on a
form prescribed by the city and shall include all required information.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.05 APPLICATION FEE.
   Short-term rentals registration fee shall be set forth in the city's fee
schedule and may be adjusted from time-to-time by the City Council by formal
resolution.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.06 LODGING TAX.
   Short-term rentals are subject to lodging tax as provided for in the City of
Aurora Code of Ordinances
Chapter 35. A short-term rental license holder is required to file monthly
lodging tax reports to the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.07 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Short term rental licenses shall expire annually on December 31st of each
year unless suspended or revoked as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.08 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Applications for renewal of an existing short-term rental license must be
made at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the current short-term rental
license. All such applications shall be made to the city on forms provided by
the city. If the license holder does not offer the property for short-term
rentals at least twice in a calendar year, then they are not eligible for
renewal.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.09 NO VESTED RIGHT.
   Licenses granted hereunder constitute a revocable, limited right. Nothing
herein shall be construed as granting a vested property right. No party shall
have any expectancy of reissuance of any license after its annual expiration.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.10 CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE.
   Prior to issuance of a short-term rental license, the applicant shall ensure
that the following criteria are met:
   (A)   The proposed short-term rental is located in a Residential Zoning
District.
   (B)   The proposed short-term rental complies with all of the performance
standards and all applicable state and county regulations. Applicant must
provide proof of registration with the Minnesota Department of Health.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.11 LICENSED PREMISES.
   Short-term rentals shall only be licensed for dwelling units located on
conforming lots as defined in the City of Aurora Zoning Ordinance. All licensed
premises must be hooked up and paid to current for city water and sewer
services.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.12 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   The short-term rental of recreational vehicles parked or otherwise located
on property outside of designated campsites within the city is prohibited.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.13 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No short-term rental license shall be transferable to another person or
another dwelling unit. Every person holding a short-term rental license shall
give notice in writing to the city within five business days after having
legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any dwelling
unit for which a short-term rental license has been issued. Such notice shall
include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or
control of such dwelling unit.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.14 REGISTERED AGENT REQUIRED.
   No short-term rental license shall be issued without the designation of a
local agent. The agent may, but is not required to be, the owner. One person
may be the agent for multiple dwelling units. At all times, the agent shall
have on file with the city a primary phone number as well as current address.
The agent or a representative of the agent shall be available during all times
that the dwelling unit is being rented as the primary number to respond
immediately to complaints and contacts relating to the dwelling unit. The city
shall be notified in writing within ten business days of any change of agent.
The agent shall be responsible for the activities of tenants and the
maintenance and upkeep of the dwelling unit and shall be authorized and
empowered to receive notice of a violation of the provisions of city ordinances
and state law, to receive orders, and to institute remedial action to affect
such orders, and to accept service of process pursuant to law.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.15 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.
   No owner shall undertake or allow the short-term rental of a dwelling unit
that does not comply with all applicable city ordinances, the laws of the State
of Minnesota, and this section. It shall be the owner's responsibility to
ensure compliance with the following:
   (A)   Maintenance standards. Every dwelling unit used for short-term rental
shall conform to all building and zoning requirements of the City of Aurora and
laws of the State of Minnesota.
   (B)   Parking. All short-term rental units shall comply with
Chapter 71: Parking Regulations of the City of Aurora Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   Signs prohibited. On-premises signs are prohibited unless a sign
permit has been applied for and approved.
   (D)   Tenants. Owner or registered agents shall maintain a list of all
current and prior tenants of each dwelling unit, including dates stayed at the
dwelling units. The owner or registered agent shall make the list available to
city staff and/or law enforcement upon request.
   (E)   Emergency contact. The owner shall post within the dwelling unit the
name, address, email and primary and secondary telephone number of the owner or
any registered agent that can be utilized by tenants or their guests.
   (F)   Noise standards. Quiet hours shall be between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Any outdoor amplified sound during this time that can be heard by neighboring
property owners is prohibited.
   (G)   Solid waste. Owner shall ensure that appropriate solid waste and/or
recycling bins are available for use by tenants and guests and shall not be
stored in public view.
   (H)   Posted notice. Owner shall post within the dwelling unit, notice of
all use restrictions as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.16 DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
   Disorderly conduct is prohibited on all licensed premises. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to ensure that all tenants occupying the licensed
premises and their guests conduct themselves in such a manner as not to cause
the licensed premises to be disorderly. For purposes of this section,
disorderly conduct refers to any disorderly conduct violation under Minnesota
Statutes or City of Aurora ordinances.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.17 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Every short-term rental license is subject to revocation for violations of
this section or any other provision of Minnesota or City of Aurora ordinances.
   (A)   Violations. Violations of this section shall be reported to the City
Clerk's Office. The City Administrator shall review the violation and provide
written notice to the license holder of the violation and any necessary
remedial actions.
   (B)   Revocation. If a license holder fails to correct a violation or
receives three violations within any 12 month period, the City Administrator
shall recommend revocation of the short-term rental license to the City
Council. The City Council and City Administrator shall provide written notice
to the owner and any registered agent of the revocation. The notice shall
inform the owner and agent of the right to appeal the decision to the Aurora
City Council.
   (C)   Appeal. A license holder aggrieved by the revocation of a short-term
rental license may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing with the City Clerk's office within ten days after date of issuance of
the written revocation notice, a written statement requesting a hearing before
the City Council and setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. A hearing
shall be held within 30 days of receipt of the request. Notice of the hearing
shall be given by the City Clerk's Office in writing, setting forth the time
and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
license holder at his/her last known address at least five days prior to the
date set for hearing.
   (D)   Effect of revocation. If a short-term rental license is revoked, it
shall be unlawful for anyone to thereafter allow any new short-term rental
occupancies of the dwelling unit until such time as a valid short-term rental
license is issued by the city. No person who has had a license revoked under
this section shall be issued a short-term rental license for one year from the
date of revocation.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 155.18 VIOLATION.
   Any person who undertakes or allows any violation of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-2-2023)
CHAPTER 156: ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
   
156.01   Purpose and findings
   
156.02   Definitions
   
156.03   Retail registration
   
156.04   Sign restrictions
   
156.05   Location of cannabis businesses
 
   
156.99   Penalty
§ 156.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate time, place,
and manner of the operation of a cannabis business to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to:
      (1)   Prevent unwanted criminal activity within the city;
      (2)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent adverse
effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood; and
      (3)   To locate cannabis businesses away from residential areas, schools,
residential treatment facilities, day care facilities, parks and playgrounds.
   (B)   Findings. The City Council makes the following findings about the
effect cannabis businesses have on the character of the city's neighborhoods.
      (1)   Cannabis businesses can have a detrimental influence on young
people and students attending schools and day cares and can diminish the
enjoyment and family atmosphere of persons using parks, playgrounds and other
public recreational areas.
      (2)   Cannabis businesses can have a detrimental influence on people in
residential treatment facilities.
      (3)   M.S. Chapter 342, as it may be amended from time to time, allows
local government units to regulate cannabis businesses within city limits.
      (4)   Minnesota Statutes defines CANNABIS BUSINESSES as:
         (a)   CANNABIS MICROBUSINESS. Can grow, make, sell, and buy cannabis
(including plants and seedlings) and lower-potency hemp products. They can also
have on-site lounges where customers can use cannabis. These businesses can
grow up to 5,000 square feet of cannabis plants indoors and up to one-half acre
outdoors. This license may hold a cannabis event organizer license.
         (b)   CANNABIS MEZZOBUSINESS. Can grow, make, sell, and buy cannabis
(including plants and seedlings) and lower-potency hemp products.
Mezzobusinesses can grow up to 15,000 square feet of cannabis plants indoors
and up to one acre outdoors. This license type is available in limited
quantities, and licensees will be selected through a vetted lottery run by the
Office of Cannabis Management.
         (c)   CANNABIS CULTIVATOR. Can grow cannabis plants from seed to
maturity. They can grow up to 30,000 square feet of cannabis plants indoors and
two acres outdoors. Cultivators are allowed to harvest, package, label, and
transport fully grown cannabis plants to manufacturers. They can also package,
label, and transport seedlings. This license type is available in limited
quantities, and licensees will be selected through a vetted lottery run by the
Office of Cannabis Management.
         (d)   CANNABIS MANUFACTURER. Process raw cannabis plants into various
products, such as edibles, concentrates, wax, oils, and tinctures.
Manufacturers can buy cannabis flowers, cannabis products, and lower-potency
hemp products from other cannabis businesses. They turn these materials into
cannabis products, then package and sell them to other cannabis businesses.
This license type is available in limited quantities, and licensees will be
selected through a vetted lottery run by the Office of Cannabis Management.
         (e)   CANNABIS RETAILER. Sell packaged cannabis products to the
general public and medical patients. They can buy cannabis (including plants
and seedlings) and lower-potency hemp products from other cannabis businesses
and sell them to customers. This license type is available in limited
quantities, and licensees will be selected through a vetted lottery run by the
Office of Cannabis Management. A cannabis retailer may operate up to five
retail locations; however, no person, cooperative, or business may hold a
license to own or operate more than one cannabis retail business in one city
and three retail businesses in one county.
         (f)   CANNABIS WHOLESALER. Buy cannabis, cannabis products, and lower-
potency hemp products from cannabis businesses and then sell them to other
cannabis businesses.
         (g)   CANNABIS TRANSPORTER. Businesses that move cannabis, cannabis
products, and lower-potency hemp products between businesses.
         (h)   CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY. Receive cannabis, cannabis products,
and lower-potency hemp products from manufacturers and cultivators to test.
They ensure these products meet safety standards.
         (i)   CANNABIS EVENT ORGANIZER. Plan and host events featuring
cannabis, and may allow for the sale of cannabis, cannabis products, and lower-
potency hemp products to consumers at events like festivals (an event cannot
last more than four days). They can also provide spaces for consumers to use
cannabis. An event organizer must receive local approval, including obtaining
any necessary permits or licenses issued by a local unit of government.
         (j)   CANNABIS DELIVERY SERVICE. May purchase cannabis and lower-
potency hemp products from specific cannabis businesses and sell and deliver
those products directly to consumers.
         (k)   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE MANUFACTURER. Produce edibles from
hemp. These manufacturers can create, package, and label lower-potency hemp
products, and sell them to cannabis businesses. This license type cannot hold
any cannabis business licenses.
         (l)   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE RETAILER. Sell packaged lower-potency
hemp edibles to consumers. This license type cannot hold any cannabis business
licenses.
         (m)   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATOR. 
         (n)   MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSOR.
         (o)   MEDICAL CANNABIS RETAILER.
         (p)   MEDICAL CANNABIS COMBINATION BUSINESS. Can grow, manufacture,
package, label, and sell cannabis products (including cannabis plants and
seedlings) to both medical patients and adult consumers. These businesses can
package and sell medical cannabis products to other eligible cannabis
businesses. They are allowed to cultivate up to 60,000 square feet of medical
cannabis plant canopy for distribution into the medical market, and depending
upon the total amount of medical sales the year prior, up to an additional
30,000 square feet of cannabis plant canopy for distribution into the adult-use
market.
      (5)   Businesses such as the types described in division (B)(4), and all
other similar businesses, require close inspection, permitting, and
regulations.
      (6)   Control and regulation of businesses of these types, in view of the
abuses that may be perpetrated, require intensive efforts by the Police
Department and other departments of the city. It is necessary for the city to
provide services to all of the city without concentrating the public services
in one area. The concentrated use of city services detracts from and reduces
the level of services available to the rest of the city. Thus, if not properly
overseen, these types of establishments can diminish the ability of the city to
protect and promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the city.
      (7)   The limitation on the hours of operation and the regulation of
exterior appearance, including signage, of cannabis business activities is
necessary to protect and secure neighboring uses, to control adverse noise and
traffic impacts associated with those activities, and otherwise address,
mitigate and, if possible, eliminate the adverse impacts and secondary effects
of cannabis business activities on the areas in which the activities are
located or taking place.
      (8)   The City Council adopts the following land use and permitting
regulations, recognizing that it has an interest in the present and future
character of the city's residential and commercial neighborhoods. These
regulations are to lessen the potential detrimental and adverse effects
cannabis businesses may have on adjacent land uses and to protect and promote
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city.
(Ord. 105, passed 8-6-2024)
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. An establishment, building or business as defined by M.S.
§ 342.01, as it may be amended from time to time.
   DAY CARE. Licensed family daycare, licensed group family daycare, licensed
child care center or a licensed in-home daycare.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 21 years.
   PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, PUBLIC RECREATION AREAS. A park, athletic field,
reservation, playground, or beach that is regularly used by minors.
   SCHOOL. A building or space that is principally used as a place where 25 or
more persons receive a full course of educational instruction. Any post-
secondary or post high school educational building, including any college or
any vocational-technical college, shall not be deemed a SCHOOL for purposes of
this chapter.
(Ord. 105, passed 8-6-2024)
§ 156.03 RETAIL REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Retail registration required. Before making retail sales to customers
or patients, an applicable cannabis business must register with the city, town,
or county in which the cannabis business is located.
   (B)   Applications.
      (1)   An application for a license shall be made on a form provided by
the city.
      (2)   This application shall include:
         (a)   The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the
applicant, if an individual; and if a corporation, partnership, limited
liability corporation (LLC) or similar entity, the names, residences, phone
numbers and birth dates of those owners holding more than 10% of issued and
outstanding stock of the corporation or ownership interest in a partnership,
LLC, or similar entity;
         (b)   The names and addresses of all creditors of the applicant,
owner, licensee or manager insofar as the same have furnished or extended
credit for the purposes of constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating,
furnishing or acquiring the premises, personal effects, equipment, or anything
incident to the establishment, maintenance and operation of the business;
         (c)   A statement detailing each felony of which the manager,
operator, lessee, and, for a corporation, the owners of more than 10% of the
issued and outstanding stock of the corporation or ownership interest in a
partnership, LLC, or similar entity, have been convicted, and whether the
applicant has ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of
business in other counties or
cities;
         (d)   The activities and type of cannabis business to be conducted;
         (e)   The address and legal description of the building,
establishment, or premises where the cannabis business is to be located;
         (f)   A building plan of the premises detailing internal operations,
outdoor operations if allowed, and activities, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business;
         (g)   A description or building plan that details all proposed
interior and exterior changes to an existing building or structure;
         (h)   Intended hours of operations;
         (i)   Provisions made to restrict access by minors;
         (j)   Security means set forth on the premises;
         (k)   The license fee as set forth by the City Council must accompany
the application; and
         (l)   Each application shall contain a provision on the application in
bold print stating that any withholding of information or the providing of
false or misleading information will be grounds for
the denial or revocation of a retail registration. Any changes in the
information provided on the application shall be reported to the City Clerk-
Treasurer by the applicant or licensee. Failure to report
the changes by the applicant(s) or the licensee may result in the denial or
revocation of the retail registration.
      (3)   Retail registration fees.
         (a)   The registration fee and renewal fee for a cannabis business
retail registration shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
         (b)   Each application for registration shall be accompanied by
payment in full of the required registration fee and/or renewal fee. All fees
shall be paid at the time of application.
         (c)   All retail registration shall expire on the last day of December
in each year. The initial registration fee includes the first year renewal fee.
The renewal fee shall be charged beginning the second year renewal.
         (d)   No part of any fee paid as required by this section shall be
refunded.
         (e)   No fee shall be prorated based on the length of registration.
      (4)   Granting of license. The city shall investigate all facts set out
in the application. The City Clerk's Office shall approve or deny the retail
registration within 30 days from the date the application was submitted. If the
application is deficient, the City Clerk's Office shall act on the application
within 60 days from the date that the deficiency has been corrected.
      (5)   Persons ineligible for retail registration. The city shall not
grant a retail registration to, nor may one be held by, any person who:
         (a)   Is under 21 years of age;
         (b)   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the retail
registration is issued;
         (c)   Has not paid the license and retail registration fees required
by this section; or
         (d)   Has had cannabis business or similar permit or license revoked
under an ordinance or statute similar to this section.
      (6)   Place ineligible for retail registration.
         (a)   No retail registration shall be granted for a cannabis business
on any premises where a licensee has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause until one
year has elapsed after the conviction or revocation.
         (b)   Except uses lawfully existing at the time of this section, no
retail registration shall be granted for any cannabis business that does not
meet all city ordinance requirements, all building and fire codes requirements
and all provisions of state and federal law.
      (7)   Conditions of retail registration generally.
         (a)   The city shall issue the license to the applicant. The license
shall not be transferred to another holder.
         (b)   The license shall be issued only for the premises or location
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another location
or place without the approval of the City Council.
         (c)   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions of this
chapter and all other provisions or any applicable city, state and federal law.
         (d)   The retail registration, if granted, shall state on its face the
name of the licensee, the expiration date and the address of the business. All
licensed premises shall have the retail registration posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance of the business so that it may be easily read at
any
time.
         (e)   No minor shall be allowed in or on the premises of cannabis
business.
         (f)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of its place
of business and shall maintain conditions consistent with this section and all
federal, state and local rules and regulations generally.
         (g)   The layout of the display areas shall be designed so that the
management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside the
retail store can observe all patrons while they have access to any cannabis
merchandise offered for sale or viewing including, but not limited to, books,
magazines, photographs, video tapes or any other material.
         (h)   Illumination of the premises exterior shall be adequate to
observe the location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.
      (8)   Inspection.
         (a)   Access. An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, and other pertinent
city officials to inspect the premises of any cannabis business for the purpose
of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
         (b)   Refusal to permit inspections. A person who operates a cannabis
business or his or her agent or employee commits an offense if he or she
refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, and other pertinent
city officials at any time it is occupied or open for business. Refusal to
permit inspections may result in the suspension, revocation or non-renewal of
the license as provided in division (B)(9) below.
      (9)   Expiration, suspension, revocation or non-renewal of retail
registration.
         (a)   Expiration. Each retail registration shall expire at the end of
the calendar year and may be renewed only by making an application to the City
Clerk's Office. Applications for renewal must be made at least 30 days before
the expiration date.
         (b)   Suspension, revocation, or non-renewal. The city may revoke,
suspend, or not renew a retail registration upon recommendation of the Police
Chief and complaint to the Office of Cannabis Management that shows that the
licensee, its owners, managers, operator, employees, agents or any other
interested parties have engaged in any part of the following conduct:
            1.   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation about securing the
license;
            2.   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the cannabis
business premises. Knowingly operated the cannabis business during a period of
time when the licensee's retail registration was suspended;
            3.   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage cannabis business
in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers;
            4.   Refused to allow an inspection of the cannabis business
premises as authorized by this section; and
            5.   Conviction of a felony.
         (c)   Notice. A suspension, revocation, or non-renewal by the city
shall be preceded by written complaint to the Office of Cannabis Management.
The city shall also send a copy of the complaint to the licensee as notice. The
notice may be served upon the licensee personally, or be sent
by United States Postal Service first-class mail.
(Ord. 105, passed 8-6-2024)
§ 156.04 SIGN RESTRICTIONS.
   The following sign regulations shall apply to all cannabis businesses in the
city. These regulations are aside from any other provisions of the city's
regulations.
   (A)   All signs shall be flat-wall-mounted signs. No signs shall be
freestanding, located on the roof, or contain any flashing lights, moving
elements or electronically or mechanical changing messages. Signs are permitted
to be back-lighted in white light only.
   (B)   The amount of allowable sign area shall be one square foot of sign
area per foot of lot frontage on a street, not to exceed 50 square feet.
   (C)   No merchandise, photos, or pictures of the products on the premises
shall be displayed in window areas or any area where they can be viewed from
the sidewalk or public right-of-way adjoining the building or structure in
which the cannabis business is located.
   (D)   No signs shall be placed in any window. A two-foot square sign may be
placed on the door to state the hours of operation and admittance to persons
over 21 years of age only.
(Ord. 105, passed 8-6-2024)
§ 156.05 LOCATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   The city shall permit cannabis businesses to be located only as specified in
divisions (A) and (B), with a registration from the city, and subject to the
following conditions.
   (A)   Cannabis businesses that are primarily used for manufacturing and
cultivation must be within the Industrial Commercial Districts (I-1) zoned
area.
   (B)   Cannabis businesses that are primarily used for retail operations must
be within the Business Commercial Districts (C-1).
   (C)   No cannabis business shall be located closer than 1,000 feet from any
school or 500 feet from any public park, day care, or residential treatment
facility. Measurements shall be made in a straight horizontal line, without
regard to city or county boundaries, intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest point of the cannabis business property line to the nearest
property line of the school, public park, day care, or residential treatment
facility.
   (D)   No cannabis business shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit
any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the cannabis
business that is prohibited by any ordinance of city, the laws of the state or
the United States of America.
   (E)   All cannabis businesses shall prominently display a sign at the
entrance and located within two feet of the door opening device of the cannabis
business or section of the establishment devoted to cannabis sales which
states, in letters no smaller than one inch in height: "No persons under 21
allowed."
   (F)   No cannabis business with on-site consumption shall be open to the
public:
      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through
Saturday; and
      (2)   After 1:00 a.m. on Sunday except as provided below.
   (G)   No cannabis business with retail sales shall be made:
      (1)   Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through
Saturday, nor after 2:00 a.m. on Sunday;
      (2)   On Thanksgiving Day;
      (3)   On Christmas Day, December 25; or
      (4)   After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
   (H)   Nonconforming uses. No cannabis business shall be expanded or enlarged
except in conformity with the provisions of this section and all zoning
regulations.
(Ord. 105, passed 8-6-2024)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   All persons violating any provision regarding retail registration
shall be punished by a civil penalty of not more than $2,000 for each violation
of this chapter.
(Ord. 105, passed 8-6-2024)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS
      
II.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
      
III.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed 1989 Code Section Description
                                       Joint sanitary disposal authority in
119      5-7-1973    Ch. 20            conjunction with the City of Biwabik and
                                       others; sanitary disposal system
–      2-21-1979   Ch. 20            Amends Ord. 119
 
TABLE II: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed 1989 Code Section Description
                                       Establishment of sanitary landfill in
118      4-2-1973    Ch. 20            the SW quarter of the NW quarter, 4-58-
                                       15, designated as M-2 Industrial
                                       District
                                       Rezoning property to I-1 Industrial
                                       Commercial, PUB Public or Quasi-Public
82       4-16-2018   —               Open Space, and C-1 Business Commercial
                                       District as more particularly described
                                       in the ordinance.
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed 1989 Code Section Description
Ord. No.     Date Passed 1989 Code Section Description
                                           Grants cable television franchise to
127          - -1976     Ch. 20            Cable Communications System of
                                           Hector, MN, for 15 years
148          11-1-1983   Ch. 20            Amends Ord. 127, renewal of
                                           franchise
                                           Grants electric franchise to
154          9-6-1988    Ch. 20            Minnesota Power and Light Company,
                                           for ten years
156          10-11-1989  Ch. 20            Grants gas franchise to Inter-City
                                           Gas Limited, Inc. for 22 years
4, 2nd Ser.  9-6-1994    Ch. 20            Amends Ord. 148
16, 2nd Ser. 11-9-1994   Ch. 20            Amends Ord. 148
19, 2nd Ser. 2-7-1995    Ch. 20            Grants gas franchise to Northern
                                           Minnesota Utilities for 15 years
                                           Grants electric franchise to
23, 2nd Ser. 6-2-1998    Ch. 20            Minnesota Power and Light Company,
                                           for ten years
                                           Grants cable TV franchise to Triax
24, 2nd Ser. 8-4-1998    Ch. 20            Midwest Associates, L.P., for 15
                                           years
                                           Grants electric distribution/
                                           transmission franchise to Minnesota
44, 2nd Ser. 1-11-2005   –               Power, for 20 years, and
                                           automatically renewing one- year
                                           periods
45, 2nd Ser. 1-11-2005   –               Authorizing electric franchise fee
                                           as authorized by Ord. 44, 2nd Ser.
                                           Grants gas franchise to Minnesota
56, 2nd Ser. 2-2-2010    –               Energy Resources, for 15 years and
                                           additional ten- year extension
                                           thereafter
                                           Grants cable television franchise to
72           12-2-2014   -                 Lake County D/B/A/Lake Connections,
                                           for five years.
                                           Grants renewed cable franchise to
73           12-2-2014   -                 Mediacom Minnesota LLC, for ten
                                           years.
109          1-7-2025    -                 Authorizing electric franchise fee
                                           as authorized by Ord. 44, 2nd Ser.
                                           Amending Ord. 56, 2nd Series, to
110          1-7-2025    -                 implement a gas service franchise
                                           fee on WEC Energy Group Corp.
                                           Granting a renewed cable franchise
112          4-8-2025    -                 to Mediacom Minnesota LLC, for ten
                                           years.
                                           Granting a cable franchise to
113          4-8-2025    -                 Pinpoint Minnesota LLC, for ten
                                           years.
                                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to 1989 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Section Code Section
M.S. Section                        Code Section
12.25                               34.01,
                                    34.04
12.37                               34.06
14.001 to 14.69                     112.002
15.73, Subdivision 3                91.067
65B.48, Subdivision 5               70.22
65A.50                              36.04
84.86                               72.04
                                    72.01,
84.92, Subdivision 8                72.20,
                                    92.08
89.001 et seq.                      90.01
Chapter 103F                        151.01
103G.245                            151.06
115.01                              151.04
Chapter 134                         153.111
144.391                             113.01
144.411 to 144.417                  112.061
Chapter 152                         154.12
157.15, Subdivision 9               114.02
Chapter 168                         36.20
168B.011, Subdivision 3             90.20
                                    36.20,
                                    70.01,
Chapter 169                         70.02,
                                    72.20,
                                    91.001
169.999                             10.98
205.07                              30.02
216B.02, Subdivisions 4 and 6       91.067
Chapter 216D                        91.070,
                                    91.080
216D.01 through 216D.09             91.080,
                                    91.089
216D.04, Subdivision 3              91.067
237.16                              91.065
                                    91.065,
237.162                             91.067,
                                    91.082
237.162, Subdivision 4              91.067
                                    91.065,
237.163                             91.067,
                                    91.082
237.163, Subdivision 2(b)           91.066
237.163, Subdivision 6              91.094
237.79                              91.065
237.81                              91.065
Chapter 238                         91.067
238.086                             91.065
Chapter 245A                        153.111
260B.425                            154.12
272.115, Subdivision 1              53.07
Chapter 278                         113.03,
                                    114.03
300.06                              91.071
306.15                              94.11
Chapter 308A                        91.067
340A.802                            112.002
Chapter 342                         156.01
342.01                              156.02
344.02, Subdivision (a) through (d) 151.02
347.50 to 347.565                   92.50
347.51                              92.50
347.515                             92.50
347.52                              92.50
347.52(a) and (c)                   92.50
Chapter 349                         110.26
349.11 through 349.21               110.99
349.11 through 349.23               110.26
349.12                              110.26
349.12, Subdivision 7a              110.26
349.16                              110.26
349.213                             110.26
363A.01 et seq.                     33.04
412.591                             31.15
412.925                             90.02
Chapter 429                         91.030,
                                    91.087
429.061                             90.24
429.101                             90.24
Chapter 453                         91.067
Chapter 453A                        91.067
Chapter 462                         91.087,
                                    151.01
462.351 et seq.                     152.03
462.357, Subdivision 6(2)           151.02,
                                    151.06
462.3593                            153.078
462.3593, Subdivision 9             153.078
462.367, Subdivision 6(1)           153.008
469.190                             35.14
469.190(7)                          35.16
609.72                              154.12
609.75 through 609.763              110.26,
                                    110.99
609.205(4)                          92.50
609.226, Subdivision 1              92.50
Chapter 617                         153.115
617.23 through 617.299              153.113
617.241                             153.111
626.862                             10.20
631.48                              10.99
                                    
 
REFERENCES TO 1989 CODE
1989 Code Section 2013 Code Section
1989 Code Section 2013 Code Section
1.02              10.05
1.04              10.22
1.06              10.21
2.01              30.01
2.02              30.15
2.03              30.16
2.05              11.01
2.05              30.17
2.06              31.01
2.07              30.18
2.08              31.15
2.09              31.16
2.11              31.17
2.12              36.01
2.20              32.01
2.21              32.02
2.22              32.03
2.23              32.04
2.24              32.05
2.30              33.01
2.31              33.02
2.32              33.03
2.34              33.04
2.35              33.05
2.36              33.06
2.50, Subd. 1     36.20
2.50, Subd. 2     36.21
2.50, Subd. 3     36.22
2.50, Subd. 4     36.23
2.51              36.02
2.52              36.03
2.53              36.04
2.60              30.02
2.99              30.99,
                  36.99
3.01              50.01
3.02              50.02
3.03              50.03
3.04, Subd. 1     50.15
3.04, Subd. 2     50.16
3.04, Subd. 3     50.17
3.04, Subd. 4     50.18
3.04, Subd. 5     50.19
3.04, Subd. 6     50.20
3.04, Subd. 7     50.21
3.04, Subd. 8     50.22
3.05              50.04
3.20, Subd. 1     51.01
3.20, Subd. 2     51.02
3.20, Subd. 3     51.03
3.20, Subd. 4     51.04
3.20, Subd. 5     51.05
3.20, Subd. 6     51.06
3.30, Subd. 1     52.01
3.30, Subd. 2     52.02
3.30, Subd. 3     52.03
3.30, Subd. 4     52.04
3.30, Subd. 5     52.05
3.30, Subd. 6     52.06
3.30, Subd. 7     52.07
3.30, Subd. 8     52.08
3.30, Subd. 9     52.09
3.30, Subd. 10    52.10
3.40, Subd. 1     53.01
3.40, Subd. 2     53.02
3.40, Subd. 3     53.03
3.40, Subd. 4     53.04
3.40, Subd. 5     53.05
3.40, Subd. 6     53.06
3.40, Subd. 7A    53.20
3.40, Subd. 7B    53.21
3.40, Subd. 7C    53.22
3.40, Subd. 7D    53.23
3.40, Subd. 7E    53.24
3.40, Subd. 7F    53.24
3.40, Subd. 7G    53.25
3.40, Subd. 8A    53.40
3.40, Subd. 8B    53.41
3.40, Subd. 8C    53.42
3.40, Subd. 8D    53.43
3.40, Subd. 9     53.99
3.99              50.99
4.10              150.01
4.21, Subd. 1     150.15
4.21, Subd. 2     150.16
4.21, Subd. 3     150.17
4.21, Subd. 4     150.18
4.21, Subd. 5     150.19
4.21, Subd. 6     150.20
4.99              150.99
5.01              112.001
5.02              112.002
5.03              112.003
5.04              112.004
5.05              112.005
5.06              112.006
5.07              112.007
5.08              112.008
5.09              112.009
5.10              112.010
5.11              112.011
5.12              112.012
5.13              112.013
5.14              112.025
5.15              112.026
5.16              112.027
5.17              112.028
5.18              112.029
5.30              112.045
5.31              112.046
5.32              112.047
5.40              112.060
5.41              112.061
5.42              112.062
5.50              112.075
5.51              112.076
5.60, Subd. 1     112.090
5.60, Subd. 2     112.091
5.60, Subd. 3     112.092
5.60, Subd. 4     112.093
5.60, Subd. 5     112.094
5.60, Subd. 6     112.095
5.61              112.110
5.70              112.125
5.71              112.126
5.80              112.030
5.99              112.999
6.01              110.01
6.02              110.02
6.03              110.03
6.04              110.04
6.06              110.05
6.07              110.06
6.08              110.07
6.09              110.08
6.10              110.09
6.11              110.10
6.12              110.11
6.32, Subd. 1     35.01
6.32, Subd. 2     35.02
6.32, Subd. 3     35.03
6.32, Subd. 4     35.04
6.32, Subd. 5     35.05
6.32, Subd. 6     35.06
6.32, Subd. 7     35.07
6.32, Subd. 8     35.08
6.32, Subd. 9     35.09
6.32, Subd. 10    35.10
6.32, Subd. 11    35.16
6.32, Subd. 12    35.11
6.32, Subd. 13    35.12
6.32, Subd. 14    35.13
6.32, Subd. 15    35.14
6.32, Subd. 16    35.15
6.99              35.99,
                  110.99
7.01              70.02,
                  91.001
7.02              70.02,
                  91.002
7.03              70.02,
                  91.003
7.04              70.03
7.05              91.015
7.06              91.030
7.07              91.031
7.08              91.045
7.08, Subd. 1     91.046
7.08, Subd. 2     91.047
7.08, Subd. 3     91.048
7.08, Subd. 4     91.049
7.08, Subd. 5     91.050
7.08, Subd. 6     91.051
7.08, Subd. 7     91.052
7.09              91.032
7.10              91.053
7.11              70.09
7.99              91.999
8.01              70.01
8.02              70.04
8.03              70.05
8.04              70.06
8.05              70.07
8.06              70.08
8.07, Subd. 1     72.01
8.07, Subd. 2     72.02
8.07, Subd. 3     72.03
8.07, Subd. 4     72.04
8.07, Subd. 5     72.05
8.08              72.20
8.09, Subd. 1     70.20
8.09, Subd. 2     70.21
8.09, Subd. 3     70.22
8.99              70.99,
                  72.99
9.01              71.01
9.02              71.02
9.03              71.03
9.04              71.04
9.05              71.05
9.06              71.06
9.07              71.07
9.08              71.08
9.09              71.09
9.10              71.10
9.11              71.11
9.12              71.12
9.13              71.13
9.14              71.14
9.15              71.15
9.16              71.16
9.17              71.17
9.99              71.99
10.02             90.04
10.03, Subd. 1    130.50
10.03, Subd. 2    130.50
10.03, Subd. 3    130.51
10.03, Subd. 4    130.51
10.03, Subd. 5    130.52
10.03, Subd. 6    130.53
10.03, Subd. 7    130.54
10.06             90.01
10.07             90.02
10.08             93.01
10.09             93.02
10.20             130.01
10.21             130.02
10.22             130.03
10.23             130.04
10.30             130.15
10.31             130.16
10.32, Subd. 1    130.30
10.32, Subd. 2    130.31
10.32, Subd. 3    130.32
10.32, Subd. 4    130.33
10.32, Subd. 5    130.34
10.32, Subd. 6    130.35
10.32, Subd. 7    130.36
10.32, Subd. 8    130.37
10.32, Subd. 9    130.38
10.33, Subd. 1    90.40
10.33, Subd. 2    90.41
10.33, Subd. 3    90.42
10.33, Subd. 4    90.43
10.33, Subd. 5    90.44
10.34             90.03
                  90.99,
10.99             92.99,
                  93.99,
                  130.99
11.01             153.001
11.02             153.002
11.03             153.003
11.04             153.004
11.05             153.020
11.10             153.021
11.11             153.022
11.12             153.005
11.13             153.006
11.14             153.007
11.15             153.008
11.20             153.035
11.21             153.036
11.22             153.037
11.23             153.038
11.24             153.039
11.25             153.040
11.30             153.041
11.40             153.044
11.50             153.046
11.55, Subd. 1    153.095
11.55, Subd. 2    153.096
11.55, Subd. 3    153.097
11.60             153.060
11.61             153.061
11.62             153.062
11.63             153.063
11.64             153.064
11.65             153.065
11.66             153.066
11.67             153.067
11.68             153.068
11.69             153.069
11.70             153.070
11.71             153.071
11.72             153.072
11.73             153.073
11.74             153.074
11.75             153.075
11.76             153.076
11.80             153.130
11.81             153.131
11.82             153.132
11.83             153.133
11.99             153.999
12.01             152.01
12.02             152.02
12.03             152.03
12.04             152.04
12.05             152.05
12.06, Subd. 1    152.20
12.06, Subd. 2    152.21
12.06, Subd. 3    152.22
12.06, Subd. 4    152.23
12.06, Subd. 5    152.24
12.06, Subd. 6    152.25
12.06, Subd. 7    152.26
12.06, Subd. 8    152.27
12.07, Subd. 1    152.40
12.07, Subd. 2    152.41
12.07, Subd. 3    152.42
12.08             152.06
12.20             152.07
12.21             152.08
12.99             152.99
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.      Date Passed Description
118           4-2-1973    T.S.O. II
119           5-7-1973    T.S.O. I
127           - -1976     T.S.O. III
                          152.06,
                          152.08,
                          152.99,
                          153.002,
                          153.008,
                          153.020,
                          153.037,
129           4-24-1976   153.039,
                          153.040,
                          153.046,
                          153.074,
                          153.095 -
                          153.097,
                          153.133,
                          153.999
–           2-21-1979   T.S.O. I
148           11-1-1983   T.S.O. III
154           9-6-1988    T.S.O. III
156           10-11-1989  T.S.O. III
155           10-10-1990  31.17
2, 2nd Ser.   11-28-1991  35.15
3, 2nd Ser.   3-26-1993   52.10
4, 2nd Ser.   9-6-1994    T.S.O. III
16, 2nd Ser.  11-9-1994   T.S.O. III
5, 2nd Ser.   12-2-1994   30.16,
                          32.04
6, 2nd Ser.   12-2-1994   30.02
                          50.15,
8, 2nd Ser.   12-2-1994   50.17,
                          51.01 -
                          51.06
9, 2nd Ser.   12-2-1994   150.20
10, 2nd Ser.  12-9-1994   112.011
12, 2nd Ser.  12-9-1994   71.10
13, 2nd Ser.  12-9-1994   130.04
14, 2nd Ser.  12-9-1994   153.002,
                          153.075
15, 2nd Ser.  12-9-1994   153.076
17, 2nd Ser.  1-13-1995   153.037,
                          153.039
19, 2nd Ser.  2-7-1995    T.S.O. III
20, 2nd Ser.  1-19-1996   112.061
23, 2nd Ser.  6-2-1998    T.S.O. III
24, 2nd Ser.  8-4-1998    T.S.O. III
25, 2nd Ser.  9-18-1998   70.04
26, 2nd Ser.  5-7-1999    36.04
26, 2nd. Ser. 5-7-1999    36.21
27, 2nd Ser.  5-7-1999    50.21
28, 2nd Ser.  5-14-1999   150.01
                          112.001,
                          112.002,
29, 2nd Ser.  5-14-1999   112.006,
                          112.012,
                          112.025,
                          112.046
31, 2nd Ser.  5-21-1999   70.01
32, 2nd Ser.  5-21-1999   93.01
                          53.01 -
                          53.06,
                          53.20 -
33, 2nd Ser.  5-21-1999   53.25,
                          53.40 -
                          53.43,
                          53.99
34, 2nd Ser.  2-17-2000   153.037
38, 2nd Ser.  10-2-2001   31.17
39, 2nd Ser.  11-7-2001   53.23
41, 2nd Ser.  5-7-2002    153.044
                          153.044,
42, 2nd Ser.  9-3-2002    153.110 -
                          153.118,
                          153.999
44, 2nd Ser.  1-11-2005   T.S.O. III
45, 2nd Ser.  1-11-2005   T.S.O. III
46, 2nd Ser.  8-2-2005    112.062
47, 2nd Ser.  8-2-2005    112.076
48, 2nd Ser.  12-6-2005   72.35 -
                          72.39
49, 2nd Ser.  7-5-2006    93.03
53, 2nd Ser.  11-18-2008  112.062
54, 2nd Ser.  12-16-2008  112.061
55, 2nd Ser.  9-1-2009    153.077,
                          153.999
56, 2nd Ser.  2-2-2010    T.S.O. III
57, 2nd Ser.  8-3-2010    153.076
58, 2nd Ser.  2-1-2011    53.23
59, 2nd Ser.  5-3-2011    112.012
60, 2nd. Ser. 5-3-2011    33.02
61, 2nd Ser.  6-7-2011    112.061
62, 2nd Ser.  7-5-2011    93.03
63, 1st Ser.  9-17-2013   153.111
64, 1st Ser.  9-20-2013   90.05
65, 1st Ser.  10-18-2013  150.35 -
                          150.37
66            11-6-2013   50.15
67            11-6-2013   153.007
                          94.01 -
68            6-3-2014    94.21,
                          94.99
69            6-3-2014    110.26,
                          110.99
                          130.60,
70            9-2-2014    130.61,
                          130.99
72            12-2-2014   T.S.O. III
73            12-2-2014   T.S.O. III
74            1-13-2015   153.037 -
                          153.039
75            2-3-2015    90.06
71            11-5-2015   50.23
77            12-1-2015   153.009
78            7-12-2016   153.078
79            8-2-2016    94.07
                          112.047,
80            6-26-2017   112.061,
                          112.062,
                          112.076
                          152.02,
81            7-11-2017   152.03,
                          152.06
                          153.035,
                          153.041,
82            4-16-2018   153.044,
                          153.060,
                          153.063,
                          T.S.O. II
83            8-7-2018    90.02
84            9-4-2018    30.17
                          92.01 -
                          92.21,
85            7-2-2019    92.30 -
                          92.37,
                          92.50,
                          92.99
86            3-10-2020   94.14
                          90.02,
87            5-19-2020   90.20,
                          90.23
90            5-3-2022    92.99
91            9-20-2022   90.19
92            10-18-2022  153.079
93            12-6-2022   90.99
94            12-6-2022   112.061
                          113.01 -
95            12-20-2022  113.08,
                          113.99
97            5-2-2023    154.01 -
                          154.18
98            5-2-2023    155.01 -
                          155.18
101           10-3-2023   53.07
102           4-2-024     92.05
103           - -         153.009
104           6-4-2024    112.126
                          153.041,
                          153.044,
105           8-6-2024    156.01 -
                          156.05,
                          156.99
106           10-3-2024   30.01
108           12-3-2024   92.50
109           1-7-2025    T.S.O. III
110           1-7-2025    T.S.O. III
                          151.01 -
111           3-4-2025    151.07,
                          151.99
112           4-8-2025    T.S.O. III
113           4-8-2025    T.S.O. III
115           - -         90.02
                          111.01 -
                          111.04,
116           7-15-2025   111.99,
                          114.01 -
                          114.06,
                          114.99
                         
 
