BATTLE LAKE, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through an ordinance passed 10-28-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
Administrative Offenses
   
10.35   Purpose
   
10.36   Administrative offense defined
   
10.37   Notice
   
10.38   Payment
   
10.39   Hearing
   
10.40   Hearing Board
   
10.41   Failure to pay
   
10.42   Disposition of penalties
   
10.43   Offenses and penalties
   
10.44   Subsequent offenses
   
10.45   Supplemental administrative penalties
 
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
   
Appendix A:   Notice of code violation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“City of Battle Lake Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,”
“codified ordinances,” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and
section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the
code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions, or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Battle
Lake, Minnesota, as presently established or as amended by ordinance,
annexation, or other legal actions at a future time. The term CITY when used in
this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
      COUNTY. The County of Otter Tail, Minnesota.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      RESERVED. When in reference to a code section, chapter, or title, such
part of the code is intentionally being held available for future use.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      UNPERMITTED. Not permitted, disallowed, banned.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk/Treasurer for public inspection. The Clerk/Treasurer shall provide a copy
for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this
Minnesota Livable City Code of Ordinances, all future amendments to any state
or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced
in this code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been
in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting the
Minnesota Livable City Code of Ordinances, all future supplements are hereby
adopted as if they had been in existence at the time this code was enacted,
unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall have the authority to administer and
enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk/Treasurer or City
Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions
specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk/Treasurer and any city official or employee designated
by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may,
with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or
resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or
otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk/Treasurer, peace officer, or any employee or official charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting
the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only
to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Clerk/Treasurer or any other authorized
city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code
enacted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being
complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit
the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination
of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice
shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
the property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner,
resident, or other person in control of the property shall be given an
opportunity to appear before the City Clerk/Treasurer to object to the
termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the Clerk/Treasurer’s
decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES
§ 10.35 PURPOSE.
   Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this subchapter
are intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost-
effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for
violations of certain ordinance provisions. The procedures are intended to be
voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with administrative
offenses. At any time prior to the payment of the administrative penalty as is
provided for hereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in the
procedures, in which event the city may bring criminal charges in accordance
with law. Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may choose not to initiate an
administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first instance. In
the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedure but does
not pay the monetary penalty which may be imposed, the city will ask to collect
the costs of the administrative offense procedures as part of a subsequent
criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is adjudicated guilty
of the criminal violations.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.36 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSE DEFINED.
   An ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSE is a violation of a provision of the code and is
subject to the administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses
and penalties referred to in §
10.43.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.37 NOTICE.
   Any officer of the City Police Department or any other person employed by
the city, authorized in writing by the city and having authority to enforce
this code, shall, upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the
violator, or in the case of a vehicular violation, attach to the vehicle a
notice of the violation. Said notice shall set forth the nature, date, and time
of violations, the name of the official issuing the notice, and the amount of
the scheduled penalty.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.38 PAYMENT.
   Once such notice is given, the alleged violator may, within seven days of
the time of the issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the
schedule of penalties for the violations, or may request a hearing in writing,
as is provided for hereafter. The penalty may be paid in person or by mail, and
payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.39 HEARING.
   Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this subchapter
may, within seven days of the time of issuance of the notice, request a hearing
by a Hearing Board who shall forthwith conduct an informal hearing to determine
if a violation has occurred. The Hearing Board shall have authority to dismiss
the violation or reduce or waive the penalty. If the violation is sustained by
the Hearing Board, the violator shall pay the penalty imposed.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.40 HEARING BOARD.
   Two City Council members designated in writing by the city and one member of
the city staff, appointed at the time the hearing is requested, by the
appointed City Council members shall be the Hearing Board. The Hearing Board is
authorized to hear and determine any controversy relating to administrative
offenses provided for in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.41 FAILURE TO PAY.
   In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the
penalty, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may be brought against the
alleged violator in accordance with applicable statutes. If the penalty is paid
or if an individual is found not to have committed this administrative offense
by the Hearing Board, no such charge may be brought by the city for the same
violation.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.42 DISPOSITION OF PENALTIES.
   All penalties collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be paid to the
Clerk/Treasurer and may be deposited in the city’s General Fund.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.43 OFFENSES AND PENALTIES.
   Offenses which may be charged as administrative offenses and the penalties
for such offenses may be established by resolution of the City Council from
time to time. Copies of such resolutions shall be maintained in the office of
the Clerk/Treasurer.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.44 SUBSEQUENT OFFENSES.
   In the event a party is charged with a subsequent administrative offense
within a 12-month period of paying an administrative penalty for the same or
substantially similar offense, the subsequent administrative penalty shall be
increased by 25% above the previous administrative penalty.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 10.45 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code
and the enforcement powers granted in §
10.20, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a
majority of the members of the City Council, supplemental administrative
penalties. The resolution may be in the form established in Appendix VI of the
User’s Guide to the MBC. Such resolution may not proscribe administrative
penalties for traffic offenses designated by M.S. § 169.999.
   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended
to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective, and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on
the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.
   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the
code, other than those penalties established in the code or in statutes that
are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time by resolution of
a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before
the violation occurred.
   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk, or other person
giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this code, a written
notice must be provided of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to
the person who is alleged to have violated the code. The person giving notice
may request the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation
directly to the City Treasurer within 14 days of the notice of the violation. A
sample notice is contained in the appendix to this chapter. In the sole
discretion of the person giving the notice of the alleged violation, the time
for payment may be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not requested by
the person to whom the notice has been given. In addition to the administrative
penalty, the person giving notice may request in the notice to the alleged
violator to adopt a compliance plan to correct the situation resulting in the
alleged violation and may provide that if the alleged violator corrects the
situation resulting in the alleged violation within the time specified in the
notice, the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due,
the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may request to
appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the
penalty. After a hearing before the City Council, the City Council may
determine to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for
payment. Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there
shall be no appeal from the decision of the City Council.
   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating
the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its attorney, may
bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance,
rather than requesting the payment of an administrative penalty, even if a
penalty for the particular violation has been established by City Council
resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested
correction of the situation resulting in the violation is completed, no
criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any violation which is a petty misdemeanor under this code, including
Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including state statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §§
10.35 through
10.44, if any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any provision
of this code, the City Council or any city official designated by it, may
institute appropriate proceedings with a hearing before City Council, at law or
at equity to restrain, correct, or abate the violation.
   (F)   Issuance of citation for violation is as follows.
      (1)   Upon probable cause to believe that a violation has been committed
and that the violator has committed the violation or is legally responsible for
the commission of the violation or for allowing the condition constituting the
violation to exist, an issuer is authorized to issue a citation, complying with
the standards set forth below, to the violator.
      (2)   In the case of a violation which constitutes a property violation,
the citation may, in addition, include a directive to eliminate the condition
giving rise to the property violation.
      (3)   If reasonably practical, the issuer shall deliver the citation to
the violator in person. If the violator is not present at the time that the
citation is issued, cannot be reasonably contacted for the purpose of delivery
of the citation or refused to accept delivery of the citation, the issuer may
deliver the citation to the violator by depositing it in the U.S. mail
addressed to the violator at an address of public record for the violator,
which may include but need not be limited to an address taken from area
telephone directories, from records of the city assessor, from records of city-
owned utilities or from other public sources. Delivery by such alternative
means shall be deemed to be valid delivery and shall be deemed to be effective
three days after the deposit of the citation in the U.S. mail.
APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
To: (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
From: (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
Re: Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title of
section)
Date: (Date of notice)
   I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §                 
of the City Code relating to
                                                                                                                                                      
.
   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in
the amount of $         for this violation.
   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay
it the city may initiate proceedings for this alleged violation.
   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due
date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay the
administrative penalty.
   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by
                        (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.
   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to
institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to
contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the City
Council, the City Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or
to renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the City
Council.
   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate
proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the City Council, or any city
official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings, as referenced
in ____________, or seek appropriate remedies at law or at equity to restrain,
correct, or abate the violation.
   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash, or money
order to the City Clerk/Treasurer.
Signed:                                                             
      (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
      
31.   CITY COUNCIL AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
34.   FEES AND CHARGES
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
30.01   Plan of government
   
30.02   Elections
   
30.03   Absentee Ballot Counting Board
   
30.04   Hearings
   
30.05   Bonds
§ 30.01 PLAN OF GOVERNMENT.
   In accordance with M.S. Chapter 412, as it may be amended from time to time,
the city shall be governed under the plan of government known as Optional Plan
A. As provided by statute, the city shall be governed by a City Council
composed of a Mayor and four City Council members.
(Prior Code, § 30.01)
§ 30.02 ELECTIONS.
   A regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November in every even-numbered year. Two City Council members shall
be elected for four-year terms at each election. The Mayor shall be elected for
a two-year term at each election.
(Prior Code, § 30.02)
§ 30.03 ABSENTEE BALLOT COUNTING BOARD.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the counting of
all absentee ballots cast in the city by the county-wide Absentee Ballot
Counting Board established by the county.
   (B)   Legal authority. This section is enacted pursuant to M.S. § 203B.121,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Authorization of County Auditor. The County Auditor is authorized to
direct that all absentee ballots obtained by residents of the city be returned
to the County Auditor for safe and secure storage until election day. The
County Auditor shall deliver the absentee ballots directly to the Absentee
Ballot Counting Board on election day.
   (D)   Designation. The City Council hereby appoints the County Absentee
Ballot Counting Board as the city election judges for the sole purpose of
tallying absentee ballots in the city.
(Prior Code, § 30.03) (Ord. 72, passed 3-13-1990)
§ 30.04 HEARINGS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in this code or by law, every public hearing
required to be held on any legislative or administrative matter shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   At least ten days’ mailed notice of the time, place, and purpose of
any hearing shall be given to all persons entitled to notice.
   (C)   At the hearing, each party in interest shall have an opportunity to be
heard and to present evidence relevant to the hearing.
   (D)   The City Council or other body charged with conduct of any hearing may
adopt rules governing the conduct of hearings, the record to be made, and such
other matters as it deems advisable for the proper conduct of hearings held by
it.
   (E)   Upon the disposition of any matter after hearing, the body conducting
the hearing shall cause to be prepared a written summary of its findings and
decision and shall enter the summary in the official minutes of its meetings.
(Prior Code, § 30.04)
§ 30.05 BONDS.
   (A)   The City Council may require that any officer or employee be bonded.
Unless fixed by law, the bond shall be in such form and amount as the City
Council determines. All bonds shall be approved by the City Council and filed
with the Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   The premium on the bond of any officer or employee shall be paid by
the city, unless the City Council requires that it be paid by the officer or
employee.
(Prior Code, § 30.05)
CHAPTER 31: CITY COUNCIL AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Clerk/Treasurer
   
31.02   Compensation of Mayor and Council
   
31.03   Additional offices and employees
   
31.04   Background checks
Council Meetings
   
31.15   Regular meetings
   
31.16   Special and emergency meetings
   
31.17   Recessed or continued meetings
   
31.18   Place of meetings
   
31.19   Conduct of meetings
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 CLERK/TREASURER.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 412.591, subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time, the offices of Clerk and Treasurer are combined into
the office of Clerk/Treasurer. The Clerk/Treasurer shall be appointed by the
City Council, receive such compensation as the City Council may fix, and serve
at the pleasure of the City Council. The Clerk/Treasurer shall have such powers
and duties as are prescribed by law and as the City Council may determine.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall fix the salaries of the Mayor and City Council
members in such amount as the City Council deems reasonable. Salaries may be on
an annual, monthly, or per diem basis. Pursuant to the authority granted by
M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended from time to time, salaries shall be set by
ordinance. No change in salary shall take effect until after the next
succeeding municipal election.
(Prior Code, § 31.02) (Ord. 87, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 31.03 ADDITIONAL OFFICES AND EMPLOYEES.
   In addition to the departments, boards, commissions, agencies, and other
offices created in this chapter or in other provisions of this code, the City
Council may create any additional offices and may designate any other employees
and agents as may be necessary or helpful to the efficient government of the
city and operation and maintenance of the public facilities.
(Prior Code, § 31.03)
§ 31.04 BACKGROUND CHECKS.
   (A)   (1)   The City Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive
entity within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on
the applicants for the following positions within the city, unless the city’s
hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed:
         (a)   All regular part-time or full-time employees of the city; and
         (b)   Other positions that work with children or vulnerable adults.
      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the State Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority,
including the City Council, the City Clerk/Treasurer, or other city staff
involved in the hiring process.
      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the
collection, maintenance, and use of the information. Except for the positions
set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city
will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s
prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of
employment sought and conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant’s request
on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
         (d)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
   (B)   (1)   The City Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive
entity within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on
the applicants for the following licenses within the city:
         (a)   Liquor;
         (b)   Tobacco;
         (c)   Gambling; and
         (d)   Peddler license.
      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the State Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Police Department to the licensing
authority, including the City Council, the City Clerk/Treasurer, or other city
staff involved in the license approval process.
      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the
collection, maintenance, and use of the information. Except for the positions
set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city
will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s
prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and
the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail
sentence. If the city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city
shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for denial;
         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license; and
         (d)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2006; Ord. passed 5-11-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Business licenses, see Title XI
COUNCIL MEETINGS
§ 31.15 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish dates for regular meetings
of the City Council and establish when a regular meeting shall be held if the
date established falls upon a holiday. The Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a
schedule of the regular meetings of the City Council on file at the city
offices. If a regular meeting will be held at a date, time, or place different
from the date, time, and place stated in the schedule, the Clerk/Treasurer
shall give notice of the meeting the same as that required for a special
meeting, except that notice shall not be required for City Council members in
attendance at the meeting at which the change was determined.
(Prior Code, § 31.15)
§ 31.16 SPECIAL AND EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   (A)   (1)   A special meeting may be called by the Mayor or by any other two
members of the City Council, upon request to the Clerk/Treasurer. The Clerk/
Treasurer shall mail or deliver or otherwise give notice to each City Council
member of the date, time, place, and purpose of the special meeting at least
three days before the date of the meeting.
      (2)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall post written notice of the date, time,
place, and purpose of the special meeting on the principal bulletin board of
the City Council. If there is no principal bulletin board of the City Council,
the Clerk/Treasurer shall post the notice on the door of the Council Chamber.
The notice shall also be mailed or otherwise delivered to each person who has
filed a written request for notice of special meetings with the Clerk/
Treasurer. The notice shall be posted and mailed or delivered at least three
days before the date of the meeting. As an alternative to mailing or otherwise
delivering notice to persons who have filed a request for notice, the Clerk/
Treasurer may publish the notice once, at least three days before the meeting,
in the official newspaper of the city. If a person filing a request for notice
has limited the request for notice to particular subjects, the Clerk/Treasurer
may send notice to that person only of those special meetings involving those
subjects.
      (3)   Any request for notice of special meetings shall expire on December
31 of the year in which the request was filed, unless the person refiles a
request for notice. The Clerk/Treasurer shall send notice of the refiling
requirement to each person not more than 60 days and not less than ten days
before the expiration date of the request for notice.
      (4)   If the Clerk/Treasurer fails to give notice of the refiling
requirement or determines not to do so, the request for notice shall remain in
effect the following calendar year.
   (B)   An emergency meeting may be called by the Mayor or by any other two
members of the City Council upon request to the Clerk/Treasurer, whenever, in
their judgment, circumstances require immediate consideration of any matter by
the City Council. Notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the meeting
shall be given by the Clerk/Treasurer to each City Council member, by telephone
or by any other method. The Clerk/Treasurer shall make a good faith effort to
give notice of the meeting by telephone or by any other method best calculated
to give actual notice to each news medium that has filed a written request for
notice if the request includes the news medium’s telephone number. Even if not
required by law, the Clerk/Treasurer shall give similar notice to any person
who has filed a written request for notice if the request includes the person’s
telephone number, shall post the notice the same as for special meetings as
soon as may be done and shall cause the notice to be published if such may be
done.
   (C)   If matters not directly related to the purpose or purposes for which
an emergency or a special meeting was called are discussed or acted upon at the
meeting, the Clerk/Treasurer shall include in the minutes a specific
description of each other matter discussed or acted upon. If a person receives
actual notice of a meeting at least 24 hours before the meeting, all notice
requirements for the meeting shall be considered satisfied with respect to that
person, regardless of the method of receipt of notice. Any further requirements
of law shall also be complied with in calling and holding any meeting.
(Prior Code, § 31.16)
§ 31.17 RECESSED OR CONTINUED MEETINGS.
   At any meeting, the City Council may recess or continue the meeting to
another date, time, and place. The Clerk/Treasurer shall record in the minutes
the date, time, and place to which the meeting is recessed or continued. No
further published, mailed, or other notice of the recessed or continued meeting
need be given.
(Prior Code, § 31.17)
§ 31.18 PLACE OF MEETINGS.
   Meetings of the City Council shall be held at the Council Chamber in the
City Hall, except that the City Council may recess or continue any meeting to
some other place, or hold a special or emergency meeting at some other place,
for the convenience of the public or where the nature of the business under
consideration makes it reasonably necessary to hold the meeting at the other
place.
(Prior Code, § 31.18)
§ 31.19 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   Presiding officer. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City
Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the acting Mayor shall preside. In the
absence of both, any other City Council member may call the meeting to order
and shall preside until the City Council members present at the meeting choose
another member to act temporarily as presiding officer.
   (B)   Procedure. The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the
rules of procedure of the City Council, and determine without debate, subject
to the final decision of the City Council on appeal, all questions of procedure
and order. Except as otherwise provided by law or by rule of the City Council,
the proceedings of the City Council shall be conducted in accordance with the
latest revision of Robert’s Rules of Order.
   (C)   Rights of presiding officer. The presiding officer may make motions,
second motions, and speak on any question, except that, when speaking on any
question on demand of any City Council member, the presiding officer shall
vacate the chair and designate a City Council member to preside temporarily.
   (D)   Minutes. Minutes of each City Council meeting shall be kept by the
Clerk/Treasurer. In the absence of the Clerk/Treasurer, the presiding officer
shall appoint an acting secretary. Ordinances, resolutions, claims, and other
matters need not be recorded in full in the minutes if they appear in other
permanent records of the Clerk/Treasurer and can be accurately identified from
the description given in the minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be
reduced to typewritten or other printed form and signed by the Clerk/Treasurer.
At the next regular City Council meeting, approval of the minutes shall be
considered by the City Council.
   (E)   Order of business. City Council business shall be conducted in such
order as the City Council may establish or as the presiding officer may deem
most expedient in the absence of direction from the City Council. The presiding
officer may vary the order of business at any meeting, except that all public
hearings shall be held at the time specified in the notice of hearing.
   (F)   Quorum. A majority of all members of City Council shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of any business, although a smaller number may
adjourn the meeting from time to time.
   (G)   Voting. The votes of the City Council members on any question may be
taken in any manner which signifies the intention of the individual members,
and the votes of the members on any business shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (H)   Vote required. Every ordinance shall be enacted by a majority vote of
all the members of the City Council, except where a larger number is required
by law. Except as otherwise provided by law, majority vote of a quorum shall
prevail in all other cases.
(Prior Code, § 31.19)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Planning Commission
   
32.001   Policy; establishment of Planning Commission
   
32.002   Members
   
32.003   Disqualification; removal from office; vacancies
   
32.004   Officers
   
32.005   Voting and other rights
   
32.006   Rules; records
   
32.007   Employment of staff, technicians, and experts; other expenditures
   
32.008   Powers and duties
   
32.009   Studies authorized
   
32.010   Approval of plats
Police Department
   
32.025   Establishment; duties
   
32.026   Chief of Police
   
32.027   Members; badge and uniform
Public Works Department
   
32.040   Establishment; duties
   
32.041   Public Works Coordinator
Water and Sewer Department
   
32.055   Establishment; duties
Fire and Rescue Department
   
32.070   Fire and Rescue Department ordinance
   
32.071   Fire Chief and Rescue Captain
   
32.072   Fire and Rescue Department regulations
   
32.073   Authority at emergency incidents
   
32.074   Investigation of emergency incidents
   
32.075   Mutual aid
   
32.076   Fire Department Relief Association
   
32.077   Fire and rescue service definitions
   
32.078   Service fees
   
32.079   Billing and collection
   
32.080   Hardship and waiver of fees
   
32.081   Service charge on entities owing tax exempt real property
 
   
32.999   Penalty
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 32.001 POLICY; ESTABLISHMENT OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The City Council desires to encourage sound and harmonious growth in the
city and its environment, encourage efficiency and economy in the provision of
facilities and services, ensure maximum return for expenditures of public
funds, and avoid error and waste resulting from unplanned and uncoordinated
development. To these ends and for these purposes, the City Council finds it
desirable that municipal planning activities be undertaken for guiding the
future development and improvement of the city. Therefore, a Planning
Commission is hereby established.
(Prior Code, § 32.045)
§ 32.002 MEMBERS.
   (A)   Appointment. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members.
Two members shall be appointed by the City Council from its own membership.
Five members shall be appointed from among persons in a position to represent
the general public interest. No person shall be appointed with private or
personal interests likely to conflict with the general public interest.
   (B)   Membership. Members appointed by the City Council from the City
Council shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, and their membership
shall terminate upon termination of their membership upon the City Council.
Terms of office for the other members shall be for three years, or until the
member’s successor is appointed and qualified.
   (C)   Terms of office. Of the members who are first appointed and are not
from the City Council, one shall be appointed for a term expiring at the end of
the next succeeding January, two for a term expiring one year after the end of
the next succeeding January, and two for a term expiring two years after the
end of the next succeeding January. Thereafter, at its first regular meeting of
each calendar year, the City Council shall appoint any public members for any
term which will then expire.
   (D)   Compensation. Members of the Planning Commission may receive
compensation in an amount set by City Council ordinance for service upon the
Planning Commission. They shall be allowed necessary travel and other expenses
while on official business of the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 32.046)
§ 32.003 DISQUALIFICATION; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   (A)   Disqualification. If the private or personal interest of a member is
involved in any business before the Planning Commission, the member shall not
take part in action on the business. If the member attempts to take part, the
member may be disqualified from doing so by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Removal from office. Any member, for just cause and upon written
charges, may be removed from office by a two-thirds vote of the entire City
Council. The member shall be entitled to a public hearing before a decision is
made by the City Council. Any member may be removed without action of the City
Council for nonattendance at Commission meetings, according to rules adopted by
the Commission.
   (C)   Vacancies. The Chairperson of the Planning Commission shall notify the
City Council promptly of any vacancy occurring or about to occur upon the
Planning Commission. The City Council shall fill any vacancy for the unexpired
portion of the original term of the appointment.
(Prior Code, § 32.047)
§ 32.004 OFFICERS.
   The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson
from among those of its members who are not appointed from the City Council and
may create and fill such other offices upon the Planning Commission as it
determines. It shall provide itself with a secretary, either by election from
among its members or by the appointment of any officer or employee of the city
who is not a member of the Planning Commission. Terms of all elected officers
shall be for one year, or until their successors are elected and qualified. Any
officer shall be eligible for reelection.
(Prior Code, § 32.048)
§ 32.005 VOTING AND OTHER RIGHTS.
   All members, including the Chairperson, shall be entitled to vote and shall
otherwise have the full rights and privileges of a member of the Planning
Commission, except as is provided in §
32.004 regarding eligibility for service as an officer. A secretary who is not
a member of the Planning Commission shall not be entitled to vote or to
exercise any of the rights and privileges of its members.
(Prior Code, § 32.049)
§ 32.006 RULES; RECORDS.
   (A)   Rules. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for its governance
and for the transaction of its business.
   (B)   Records. 
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall keep a record of attendance at its
meetings and of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations,
showing the vote of each member on each question requiring a vote, including
whether the member was absent or abstained.
      (2)   The records of the Planning Commission shall be a public record.
(Prior Code, § 32.050)
§ 32.007 EMPLOYMENT OF STAFF, TECHNICIANS, AND EXPERTS; OTHER EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The City Zoning Official shall serve as staff for the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council the
expenditure of such funds as it deems necessary and proper for the conduct of
its business.
(Prior Code, § 32.051)
§ 32.008 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall be, in general:
      (1)   To acquire and maintain in current form such basic information and
background data as is necessary to an understanding of past trends, present
conditions, and forces at work, to cause changes in these conditions;
      (2)   To prepare and keep current a comprehensive general plan for
meeting present requirements and such future needs as may be foreseen;
      (3)   To establish principles and policies for guiding action affecting
development in the city and its environs;
      (4)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council ordinances,
regulations, and other proposals promoting orderly development along lines
indicated as desirable by the comprehensive plan;
      (5)   To determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the
principles and requirements for the comprehensive plan and the ordinances of
the city;
      (6)   To keep the City Council and the general public informed and
advised as to all planning and development matters;
      (7)   To conduct such public hearings as may be required to gather
information necessary for the drafting, establishment, and maintenance of the
comprehensive plan and ordinances and regulations related to it, and to
establish public committees for the purpose of collecting and compiling
information necessary for the plan, or for the purpose of promoting the
accomplishment of the plan in whole or in part; and
      (8)   To perform other duties which may be lawfully assigned to it, or
which may have a bearing on the preparation or accomplishment of the
comprehensive plan.
   (B)   The Planning Commission, or its employees or agents, may in the
performance of official duties, enter upon lands and make examinations or
surveys in the same manner as authorized city agents or employees, in
accordance with §
10.20, and shall have such other powers as are required for the performance of
official functions in carrying out the purposes of the provisions of this code
relating to the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 32.052)
§ 32.009 STUDIES AUTHORIZED.
   In connection with its duties, the Planning Commission may request the city
to provide maps, aerial photographs, surveys, special studies, and other data
reasonably necessary to the Planning Commission in carrying on its
comprehensive municipal planning activities. Its activities may include,
without limitation, study of the location, condition, and adequacy of housing,
commercial, and industrial facilities, economic development, parks,
playgrounds, and other recreational facilities, schools, public and private
utilities, traffic transportation, parking, and other matters in furtherance of
its planning activities.
(Prior Code, § 32.053)
§ 32.010 APPROVAL OF PLATS.
   (A)   Any subdivision plat submitted to the City Council for approval shall,
prior to final consideration, be referred to the Planning Commission for review
and recommendation.
   (B)   Any plat so referred shall be returned to the City Council by the
Commission with its recommendation within 30 days.
   (C)   If the Planning Commission fails to act within that time, the City
Council may then proceed with its consideration of the plat.
(Prior Code, § 32.054)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.025 ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be a Police Department of the city.
   (B)   Members of the Police Department shall enforce the ordinances and laws
applicable in the city, prevent crime, protect lives and property, maintain the
peace, serve process on behalf of the city, and have such additional powers and
duties as are prescribed by law and by this code and as the City Council may
determine.
(Prior Code, § 32.070)
§ 32.026 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The head of the Police Department shall be known as the Chief of Police. The
Chief shall be appointed by the City Council, receive such compensation as the
City Council may fix, and serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The Chief
shall supervise the operation of the Police Department and shall have such
other powers and duties and keep such records as may be prescribed by law and
by this code and as the City Council may determine.
(Prior Code, § 32.071)
§ 32.027 MEMBERS; BADGE AND UNIFORM.
   (A)   The number of additional members of the Police Department, together
with their rank and title, shall be determined by the City Council. Members
shall be appointed by the City Council, receive such compensation as the City
Council may fix, and serve at the pleasure of the City Council.
   (B)   Each member of the Police Department shall, while on duty, wear a
suitable badge and uniform, except that the Chief may authorize the performance
of specific duties while not in uniform.
(Prior Code, § 32.072)
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
§ 32.040 ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be a Public Works Department of the city. The Department
shall consist of such employees of the city as the City Council may determine.
   (B)   Subject to direction by the City Council, the Public Works Department
shall have control and supervision over the drainage within the city, city
streets, alleys, parks, and public accesses, the city airport grounds and its
lighting system, city buildings, and all other property owned, leased, or
maintained by the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.085)
§ 32.041 PUBLIC WORKS COORDINATOR.
   The City Council shall appoint a Public Works Coordinator, who shall receive
such compensation as the City Council may fix and serve at the pleasure of the
City Council. The Coordinator, subject to direction of the City Council, shall
have control and supervision of all affairs of the Public Works Department, the
Water and Sewer Department, and shall have such other duties as the City
Council may provide.
(Prior Code, § 32.086)
WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT
§ 32.055 ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be a Water and Sewer Department of the city. The
Department shall consist of such employees of the city as the City Council may
determine.
   (B)   Subject to direction by the City Council, the Water and Sewer
Department shall have control and supervision over the water and sanitary sewer
systems of the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.100)
FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.070 FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The city shall continue to provide a Fire and Rescue Department for
the benefit of its citizens, whose mission is to respond to fire, rescue, and
other emergencies, to investigate the cause of fires and to prevent fires and
promote safety in the community. The city may enter into joint powers
agreements to provide the necessary services contemplated by this section.
   (B)   The Fire and Rescue Department shall be administered by a Fire Chief
and Rescue Captain.
   (C)   The Fire Chief and Rescue Captain shall have subordinate officers to
assist in management of Fire and Rescue Department duties and functions. The
Fire and Rescue Department chain of command shall be defined in the Fire and
Rescue Department Regulations.
   (D)   The Fire and Rescue Department shall have sufficient staff to respond
to fires and other emergencies that may occur within the city or the area
served by the joint powers agreement.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.071 FIRE CHIEF AND RESCUE CAPTAIN.
   The Fire Chief and Rescue Captain shall be appointed by the City Council or
Joint Powers Board taking into consideration recommendation of the members of
the Department. The Chief and Captain shall be responsible to the City Council
or Joint Powers Board for general policymaking and administrative control,
budgeting, staffing, directing, evaluating, reporting, planning, and
coordinating all activities of the Fire and Rescue Department including, but
not limited to, fire protection, emergency rescue, fire prevention, and safety
educational services, training, and safety personnel and fire and rescue
station facilities, vehicles, and equipment assigned to the Fire and Rescue
Department. Specific duties of the Fire Chief and Rescue Captain shall be
prescribed in a job description prepared and adopted by the City Council or
Joint Powers Board.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.072 FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS.
   The Fire Chief and Rescue Captain shall recommend to the City Council or
Joint Powers Board a set of Department regulations for operation and
administration of the Fire and Rescue Department for consideration and approval
by the City Council or Joint Powers Board. The Department regulations detail
the organization and administration of the Fire and Rescue Department and
establish procedures for efficiently and effectively handling operations while
maintaining sufficient flexibility to allow for deviation from the procedures
when necessary. Notwithstanding the requirements set forth previously and
hereinafter in this subchapter, the Fire Department regulations shall include,
but not be limited to, rules of conduct, health and fitness requirements, fire
and rescue call and training participation requirements, discipline, job
descriptions, and position appointments.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.073 AUTHORITY AT EMERGENCY SCENES.
   (A)   An emergency scene is under the authority of the first arriving
emergency personnel, which includes emergency medical services personnel/first
responders, until the arrival of the fire or law enforcement officials having
jurisdiction.
   (B)   The Fire Chief and Rescue Captain, or any Fire and Rescue officer or
personnel in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the
protection of life or property, shall have the authority to direct such
operation as may be necessary to limit or mitigate the threat of injury to
persons or damage to property or the environment, extinguish or control any
fire, perform any rescue operation, investigate the existence of suspected or
reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations or of
taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of duty. In
exercise of such power, the Fire Chief and Rescue Captain or any other Fire and
Rescue officer or personnel is authorized to prohibit any person, vehicle,
vessel, aircraft, or thing from approaching the scene and is authorized to
remove or cause to be removed, towed, or kept away from the scene any person,
vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or thing which may impede or interfere with the
operations of the Fire and Rescue Department.
   (C)   The Fire Chief and Rescue Captain, or any fire and rescue officer or
personnel in charge at the scene of an emergency, is authorized to place ropes,
guards, barricades, or other obstructions across any street, highway, alley,
place, or private property in the vicinity of such operation so as to prevent
accidents or interference with the lawful efforts of the Fire and Rescue
Department to manage and/or control the situation.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.074 INVESTIGATION OF EMERGENCY INCIDENTS.
   Unless otherwise directed, the Fire Chief and Rescue Captain shall
investigate or cause to be investigated the cause, origin, and circumstances of
fires occurring within the city or area served by the joint powers agreement
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 299F, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.075 MUTUAL AID.
   The Fire Chief and Rescue Captain, or his or her designee, is authorized to
respond to requests for mutual aid assistance in the form of Fire and Rescue
Department resources from any political subdivision, agencies of the state and
federal agencies pursuant to M.S. Chapter 12, as it may be amended from time to
time, provided the emergency response needs of the city or the area covered by
any existing joint powers agreement are not compromised and the City Council or
Joint Powers Board or its designee is notified when Fire and Rescue Department
personnel and/or resources shall be committed to the mutual aid response in
excess of 12 hours.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.076 FIRE DEPARTMENT RELIEF ASSOCIATION.
   (A)   There is a City Firefighters’ Relief Association, whose function is to
manage service pension benefits for Fire personnel, authorized under Minnesota
Statutes and to provide other services to Fire personnel of the Department as
deemed appropriate by members of the Association.
   (B)   The affairs of the Relief Association are governed by its bylaws. The
bylaws provide rules for matters such as membership, meetings, elections, and
duties of officers and trustees, investments, eligibility for benefits, and
benefit amounts.
   (C)   Any proposed change to the Association’s bylaws or Articles of
Incorporation which will affect the benefits paid from the Association’s funds
shall not be effective until ratified by the City Council or Joint Powers
Board.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.077 FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICE DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed and manufactured to
operate primarily upon public roads and highways, including semi-trailers.
   SERVICE. Any deployment of fire and rescue personnel and/or equipment to
extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to protect
equipment, life, or property in an area of/or threatened by fire. It also
includes the deployment of fire and rescue personnel and/or equipment to
provide fire suppression, rescue, extrication, and any other SERVICES related
to fire and rescue as may occur.
   SERVICE FEE. The charge imposed by the city for receiving fire and rescue
service.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.078 SERVICE FEES.
   (A)   As allowed by applicable law, the City Council and/or any effective
Joint Powers Board may by resolution establish fees for fire protection service
and/or emergency response which are not otherwise specified by contract. Said
fees may be established at a fixed rate for certain specific types of incidents
or for actual costs incurred by the Fire and Rescue Department in responding to
a call for service.
   (B)   The Fire Chief and Rescue Captain shall make a recommendation annually
to the City Council for approval, the fee to be charged for each service fee
noted in this section, and such fees shall be specified in the city’s fee
schedule.
      (1)   Chemical/hazardous materials spills. Fees incurred by the city for
response to chemical spills on roadways and at fixed private facilities within
the city or in other cities that personnel and equipment from the city may be
requested to respond, will be charged to the owner of the chemical, the owner
of the vehicle in which the chemical is being shipped, and/or to the owner of
the facility where the spill occurred.
         (a)   Fees shall include, but shall not be limited to, actual costs
for all personnel who respond to the incident for a minimum of one hour and the
cost on a per hour basis for each piece of city or joint powers agreement
member apparatus and equipment that responds to the incident for a minimum of
one hour. Vehicle and equipment costs shall conform to the most recent cost
schedules published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for disaster
recovery or in the event a piece of equipment is not listed on the schedule, it
shall be billed at a reasonable rate to be determined by the city or Joint
Powers Board using industry standards. Fees may also include actual costs for
personnel and equipment necessary to respond to fire alarms and false fire and
emergency service calls.
         (b)   In addition, the bill for service shall include any cost of
clean-up of any contaminated equipment and/or repair of any equipment damaged
during the incident or its replacement along with replacement of any disposable
equipment, supplies, and/or communication equipment and administrative costs to
be established at 10% of the total bill.
         (c)   Each owner of the premises receiving Fire and Rescue Department
service for a hazardous materials spill shall be deemed to have agreed to pay
for said services and any delinquencies in the payment for the Fire and Rescue
Department service to said premises shall be a lien and charged against the
premises so served, regardless of whether the same be a homestead or not.
      (2)   Wildland fires. At the discretion of the Fire Chief and Rescue
Captain, fees may be charged to the State Department of Natural Resources for
services provided for incidents under the jurisdiction of the State Department
of Natural Resources.
      (3)   Arson accidents due to gross negligence. Fees for services provided
for incidents caused by arson or by gross negligence will be charged to the
perpetrator(s) of the incident.
      (4)   Motor vehicle accidents. Any party who receives fire service
involving a motor vehicle accident or motor vehicle fire will pay for such fire
service according to the schedule referenced in division (B) above. Fire and
rescue calls resulting from vehicular accidents on state and county highways to
the extent services are provided to non-resident individuals or businesses of
the City Fire and Rescue Department’s area of service will be charged to the
non-resident individual or business.
      (5)   Impounding vehicles/property. The Fire Chief and Rescue Captain, or
their designate, is authorized to impound vehicles or property related to a
fire and/or hazardous materials release and to be held in a secure location
until such time as payment is received for Fire and Rescue Department response
to the incident and/or the vehicle or property may be transported without
further risk of injury to the public or damage to the environment.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.079 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   A party receiving fire service will be billed directly by the city or
Joint Powers Board.
   (B)   Additionally, if the city or Joint Powers Board is aware of the
insurance company covering any involved vehicle, the city or Joint Powers Board
will send a copy of such billing directly to the insurance company.
   (C)   A party billed for fire or rescue service will have 30 days from the
time of notice to pay and, if not paid by that time, it will be considered
delinquent and an additional charge of 10% will be added to the amount due.
Additionally, such party shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by
the city or Joint Powers Board including reasonable attorney fees and cost.
   (D)   If the fire or rescue service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after
the notice of delinquency is sent, the City Council may also on or before
October 15 of each year, certify the unpaid fire service charge to the County
Auditor in which the recipient of the services owns real property for
collection with property taxes. The County Auditor is responsible for remitting
to the city all charges collected on behalf of the city. The city must give the
property owner notice of its intent to proceed in this manner by September 15
of the year in which it certifies the unpaid charge to the appropriate County
Auditor.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.080 HARDSHIP AND WAIVER OF FEES.
   (A)   When the city or Joint Powers Board determines that imposition of a
fee would impose an extreme economic hardship as determined by the city or
Joint Powers Board, the city or Joint Powers Board may reduce or waive the fee
as deemed appropriate by the City Council or Joint Powers Board.
   (B)   Economic hardship may be established where a party is totally disabled
and receiving social security benefits or similar fixed income, retirement or
disability benefits and whose total household income is less than the annual
low income level established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development low income level.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.081 SERVICE CHARGE ON ENTITIES OWING TAX EXEMPT REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   All real property within the city owned by an entity which is exempt
from property taxation shall pay a fee for service(s) for emergency services
rendered by the city for fire, rescue, and other emergency services.
   (B)   The amount of such charges shall be established in accordance with the
fees allowed in §
32.078(B)(1)(a).
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §
32.073 shall be guilty of an offense punishable as a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2011; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
33.01   Policy and purpose
   
33.02   Definitions
   
33.03   Establishment of emergency management organization
   
33.04   Local emergencies
   
33.05   Emergency regulations
   
33.06   Emergency management a government function
   
33.07   Participation in labor disputes or politics
 
   
33.99   Penalty
§ 33.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Due to the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size
and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive
winds, or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from
hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order to ensure that
preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with those disasters, and
generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace,
health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of
this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for
city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters;
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters;
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other
political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the
carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and
   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended
from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of the state
shall establish a local organization for emergency management.
§ 33.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is
likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which traditional
sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair
or prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services,
police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as “civil defense”
functions.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-
level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city
departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization
provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state, and local
jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures
implementation of federal and state program requirements.
§ 33.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management
organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the City
Emergency Management Director, called the Director. The Director shall be
appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be removed by the
City Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary as established
by the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The
Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration,
and operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the
direction and control of the City Council. The Director shall coordinate the
emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be
consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal
government and the state, and correlated with emergency plans of the county and
other political subdivisions within the state. The emergency management
organization shall conform to and be consistent with, where applicable, all
state and federal requirements, including the National Incident Management
System framework found at 44 C.F.R. part 201, as it may be amended from time to
time.
§ 33.04 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her
legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days
except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation
declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk/
Treasurer.
   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of
the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional
disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance thereunder.
   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency
unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions.
However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services
in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.05 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor
or the City Council, the City Council may by resolution promulgate regulations,
consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting: the
conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair,
maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire, and safety regulations, drills or practice periods required for
preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect
public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies.
   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall
be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so
limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer. A copy
shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours.
Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for
inspection at the City Clerk/Treasurer’s office shall be conspicuously posted
at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of the city or at other
places in the affected area as the City Council shall designate in the
resolution. By resolution, the City Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
   (C)   The City Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time.
If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days
after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates,
whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the City Council shall be suspended during
the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.
   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S.
§ 12.37, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding any
statutory provision to the contrary, empowered through its City Council, acting
within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into contracts and
incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the health and
safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the
victims of a disaster. The city may exercise these powers in the light of the
exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming
procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and
materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure
of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions,
publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules,
provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.06 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby
declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not
affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or she would
otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker’s compensation
law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
§ 33.07 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than official
acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 34: FEES AND CHARGES
Section
   
34.01   Compensation and fee schedule
§ 34.01 COMPENSATION AND FEE SCHEDULE.
   The City Council hereby establishes the following rates, fees, and
administrative fines:
   (A)   Water/sewer and natural gas utilities.
      (1)   Water service.
         (a)   Base rate: $19 per month per ERU; plus
         (b)   Volume rate: $5.95 per 1,000 gallons used.
      (2)   Sewer service.
         (a)   Base rate: $20 per month per ERU; plus
         (b)   Volume rate: $6.30 per 1,000 gallons use; and
         (c)   Camper dump fee: $10 each time.
      (3)   Bulk water.
         (a)   Per tank: $25;
         (b)   Late payment fee: 10% of the amount overdue;
         (c)   Curb stop repair and digging: at the expense and responsibility
of the property owner; and
         (d)   Water connect/disconnect:
 
After business hours              $50
During business hours             $25
If shut-off is due to delinquency $50
 
      (4)   Natural gas service.
         (a)   Base rate: $30 per meter (exceptions will be considered by the
City Council on a case by case basis);
         (b)    Volume rate: Rate will be based on a margin of $7.50 per mcf
over paid rate to Perham, then divided by ten to create the CCF rate;
         (c)   Late payment fee: 10% of the amount overdue;
         (d)   Utility pre-payment: $200 for renters without owner service
contracts;
         (e)   Connect/disconnect: $25 for seasonal or property ownership
change;
         (f)   Gas installation/hookups:
            1.   $300 for 100 feet;
            2.   $3.75 per foot over 100 feet; and
            3.   Gas installations between October 1 and April 30 will be 40%
more.
         (g)   Winter construction charges: time and materials;
         (h)   Main extensions (outside service area):
            1.   Over 360 feet: at cost of developer/property owner; and
            2.   Up to 360 feet with at least two meters: at the cost of the
utility.
         (i)   Renter deposit for natural gas: $200.
   (B)   Public works.
      (1)   Generally.
Reason for Fee Fee
Reason for Fee                          Fee
Delay penalty                           $10 per day
Excavation permit                       $20
Machine and worker                      $175 per hour (for hauling, snow
                                        removal, mowing, and the like)
Repair or replacement of street surface At property owner’s expense
Right-of-way permit                     $20
ROW or EXC permit extension             $20
Small cell tower ROW permit             $150
Worker without machine                  $65 per man hour
 
      (2)   Small cell tower rent.
         (a)   Up to $150 per year for rent to occupy space on a wireless
support structure;
         (b)   Up to $25 per year for maintenance associated with the space
occupied on a wireless support structure; and
         (c)   A monthly fee for electricity used to operate a small wireless
facility, if not purchased directly from a utility, at the rate of:
            1.   $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 max watts;
            2.   $182 per radio node over 100 max watts; or
            3.   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual costs exceed
the amounts in divisions (B)(2)(c)1. and 2. above.
   (C)   Land use management.
      (1)   Zoning permits.
 
Permit Fee            Construction Project Costs
$25                   Up to $10,000
$75                   $10,000 to $75,000
$150                  $75,000 to $200,000
$275                  $200,000 to $300,000
$1 per $1,000 or 0.1% Over $300,000
 
      (2)   Grade and fill permits.
         (a)   Up to 100 cubic yards: $25; and
         (b)   Over 100 cubic yards: $50.
      (2)   Application fees.
After-the-fact permit                            $400
Conditional use permit                           $325
Final review of plat plan                        $100
Initial review of plat plan                      $300
Requests to vacate streets, alleys, or easements $250
Short-term vacation rentals                      $150
Sign application fee                             $10
Variance                                         $325
Zoning change                                    $325
 
      (3)   Inspection fee. $75 per inspection, dependent on the project (up to
three).
   (D)   Alcoholic beverage licenses and permits.
License/Permit Type Fee Restrictions
License/Permit Type         Fee               Restrictions
Brew pub off-sale           $300 annual fee
Brewery taproom             $300 annual fee
                                              Only to chartered veterans
Club on-sale liquor         $300 each event   organizations in existence for
                                              ten years or more or other club
                                              in existence for 15 years or more
Off sale 3.2% malt liquor   $30 annual fee
On-sale liquor              $1,500 annual fee Only to hotel, restaurant, or
                                              club
On-sale 3.2% malt liquor    $135 annual fee   Only to drugstores, restaurants,
                                              hotels, and clubs
On-sale wine                $150 annual fee   Only to restaurant
Outdoor liquor permit       $100 each event   No fee for nonprofits or city-
                                              sponsored events
Sunday on-sale liquor       $200 annual fee   Only to hotel, restaurant, club,
                                              or bowling center
                                              Only to club, charitable,
Temporary on-sale liquor    $50 each event    religious, or nonprofit
                                              organization in existence for at
                                              least three years
Temporary on-sale 3.2% malt                   Only to club, charitable,
liquor                      $30 each event    religious, or nonprofit
                                              organizations
Notes to table:
1)   Annual license fees may be pro-rated as indicated in
Chapter 110 of this code.
2)   License fees may be refunded only for reasons listed in
Chapter 110 of this code.
 
   (E)   Other licenses and permits.
 
                                     $15 yearly;
                                     Lifetime license holders will not be
Cat and dog licenses                 charged for a yearly license- all new
                                     licences will be yearly.
                                     $100 per potentially dangerous or
                                     dangerous dog
Gambling permit                      $20 (not to be pro-rated)
                                     $10 yearly.
Golf cart/ATV permit                 Current licenses will not pay fee until
                                     their permit expires; must provide proof
                                     of insurance and get a yearly tag.
Peddler/solicitor/transient merchant $600 for 30-day permit
permit
Public vehicle plug-in               $10 each time (maximum of two hours in a
                                     24-hour period)
Refuse collectors                    $40 annual fee
 
   (F)   Fees and charges applicable to all licenses and permits.
      (1)   Issuance of duplicate license where original is lost, stolen, or
destroyed: $20;
      (2)   Transfer fee (when transfer of license is permissible): $20;
      (3)   Late fee for applications submitted after applicant was required to
have a current license or permit in effect, or for renewal of any license or
permit which expires prior to next regular meeting of the City Council, after
filing of the application: $100 or 10% of permit or license fee, whichever is
greater; and
      (4)   Late fee for lease payments (airports and the like): 10% of amount
due.
   (G)   Administration fees and miscellaneous charges.
      (1)   Copies: $0.25 per page;
       (2)   Color copies: $.50 per page;
      (3)   Faxes: $1.50 each;
      (4)   Research for open records/public information requests: $25 per hour
(over half-hour);
      (5)   Transportation (mileage) for city business: at current IRS approved
rate;
      (6)   Administrative fee for NSF check charge: $30;
      (7)   Request to call a special meeting for the benefit of the
individual: $300 per meeting; and
      (8)   Police Department fingerprinting services: $10 per card.
   (H)   Compensation schedule.
      (1)   Mayor.
 
Type of Meeting/Session                                  Compensation Rate
Full day meetings/training/workshops (over four hours)   $100 each
outside of City Council meetings
Half-day meetings/training/workshops (two to four hours) $50 each
outside of City Council meetings
Regular and Special City Council meetings                $150 each
All committee meetings, including Planning Commission    $40 each
 
      (2)   City Council members.
 
Type of Meeting/Session                                  Compensation Rate
Full day meetings/training/workshops (over four hours)   $100 each
outside of City Council meetings
Half-day meetings/training/workshops (two to four hours) $50 each
outside of City Council meetings
Regular and Special City Council meetings                $100 each
All committee meetings, including Planning Commission    $40 each
 
      (3)   Other compensation.
         (a)   Planning Commission members: $40 per meeting;
         (b)   Economic Development Commissioners: $40 per meeting;
         (c)   Election judges: $20 per hour; and
         (d)   Head election judge: $22 per hour.
   (I)   Schedule of administrative fines.
Code Section Offense Fine
Code Section Offense                                Fine
Traffic Rules
71.02        Exhibition driving                     $50
Parking Regulations
72.02        Unauthorized parking                   $25
72.03        Disabled vehicles                      $25
72.04        Abandoned vehicles                     $25
72.05        Repair and display                     $25
72.07        Special parking during snow removal    $25
Non-motorized Scooters, Skateboards and Roller Blades
73.02        Prohibited uses                        $25
Golf carts and ATV Operation
73.35        Requirements for permit                $25
             Other requirements                     $25
Animals
90.02        Licensing of dogs and cats:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
90.03        Tag/collar on dog or cat:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
90.04        Dog or cat at large:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
90.05        Animals - nuisance barking:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
90.07        Rabies shot required:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
90.10        Dog/cat nuisance other than barking:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
90.11        Other animals regulations:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
90.13        Farm animals:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
90.16        Dogs in parks:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
Noise
93.01        General prohibition:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
93.03        Exhaust:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
93.06        Sound systems:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
93.07        Noisy parties and gatherings:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
93.08        Loud speakers/amplifiers:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
93.09        Noisy animals:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
93.11        Yelling, shouting and whistling:
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
93.12        Noise time limits
                First violation                  $25
                Second violation                 $50
Nuisances
92.03        Public nuisance, including snow:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
92.06        Junk:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
92.04        Refuse storage:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
92.05        Dumping prohibited - garbage/junk:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
92.06        Junk storage:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
92.08        Unlawful acts:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
92.10        Weeds prohibited:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
92.11        Dark house/fish house prohibitions:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
Trail Uses
73.16        Trail uses                             $50
73.17        Bicycles on trails                     $25
73.19        Rest areas                             $50
73.20        Trail protection                       $50
Street and Sidewalk
94.01        Prohibited camping:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
Park Regulation
94.16        Park rules and regulations:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
94.17        Other prohibited park activities:
                First violation                  $50
                Second violation                 $100
Alcoholic Beverages
110.04       Public alcohol consumption             $50
110.06       Underage alcohol possession/purchase   $50
110.08       Nudity                                 $150
110.33       Hours of alcohol sale                  $150
110.34       Consumption after hours                $150
110.35       Open when prohibited                   $150
Peddlers and Solicitors
111.03       Prohibited activities for peddlers and $50 per occurrence
             solicitors
Tobacco Regulations
112.06       Prohibited tobacco sales               $50
112.11       Other illegal tobacco acts             $50
Offenses Against Peace and Safety
131.01       Injury to public property              $50
133.01       Curfew for minors (12A-5A)             $35
133.02       Open burning                           $25
131.01       Vandalism                              $50
150.35-
150.45;
Ch. 151;
Ch. 152;     Land use and zoning code violations    $200
Ch. 153;
Ch. 155;
Ch. 156
50.095-      Municipal utility violations           $300
50.098
150.01-      Uniform addressing violations          $25
150.08
License/permit violations not specified elsewhere   $50
 
   (J)   Impounded vehicles.
      (1)   Towing: $50 minimum, up to amount of costs incurred;
      (2)   Impound fee: $20;
      (3)   Storage fee: $5 per day (not counting day of impoundment or day
retrieved; and
      (4)   Administrative fee: $10.
(Ord. 2023, passed 12-19-2022; Ord. 2024, passed 12-12-2023; Ord. 2025, passed
11-12-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Administrative penalties, see §§
10.35 through
10.44
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   GARBAGE
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   WATER
      
54.   NATURAL GAS
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Definitions
   
50.002   Requirements part of service terms
   
50.003   Applications for service; information required
   
50.004   Access to premises
   
50.005   Additional requirements
   
50.006   Enforcement
Rates and Charges
   
50.020   Establishment
   
50.021   Establishment of water and sewer service charge system
   
50.022   Water and Sewer Service Funds
   
50.023   Administration
   
50.024   Metered charge when part of water does not enter sewer
   
50.025   Unusual uses
Billing and Collection
   
50.040   Statements and payment
   
50.041   Discontinuance of service
   
50.042   Delinquent charges; lien, suit, interest
Requirements for Connection to Public Water and Sewer Service
   
50.055   Connection required; exception
   
50.056   When connection to be made; notice
   
50.057   Water and sewer service line construction
   
50.058   Construction or maintenance of privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
unlawful
   
50.059   New connections
   
50.060   Connection costs
   
50.061   Installation prior to street surfacing
   
50.062   Responsibility for service lines
   
50.063   Private sewage disposal
Water and Sewer Construction Permits
   
50.075   Permit required
   
50.076   Permit required for person doing work; fee; insurance
   
50.077   Permit requirement; permit applications
   
50.078   Bond; insurance
   
50.079   Excavations
   
50.080   Excavations to be barricaded; restoration of property
   
50.081   Supervision and approval
Damages and Violations
   
50.095   Prohibited acts
   
50.096   Liability for damages
   
50.097   Corrections for violations
   
50.098   Correction by city
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATION. Those fixed costs attributable to administration of the
water and wastewater systems (such as billing and associated bookkeeping and
accounting costs).
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C expressed in milligrams per liter. Laboratory procedures
shall be in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lower horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning
five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called HOUSE CONNECTION.
   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Battle Lake,
as presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a
future time. The term CITY when used herein may also be used to refer to the
City Council and its authorized representatives.
   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, as
determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedures as set out in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer originally designated to receive both surface water
runoff and sewage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any place of business which discharges sanitary waste as
distinct from industrial wastewater.
   COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER. Domestic wastewater emanating from a place of
business as distinct from industrial wastewater.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge levied on users of water and wastewater
facilities for the cost of repaying money bonded to construct said facilities.
   EXTRA STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater having a BOD and/or TSS greater than
domestic waste as defined in NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER, and not
otherwise classified as an incompatible waste.
   GARBAGE. Solid waste resulting from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, or sale of
meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetable, or condemned food.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Users of water and sewer facilities which are units,
agencies, or instrumentalities of federal, state, or local government
discharging normal domestic strength wastewater.
   INCOMPATIBLE WASTE. Waste that either singly or by interaction with other
wastes interferes with any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to
humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The solid, liquid, or gaseous wastes resulting from an
industrial or manufacturing processes, trade, or business, or from the
development, recovery, or processing of natural resources.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. The liquid processing wastes from an industrial
manufacturing process, trade, or business including but not limited to all
Standard Industrial Classification Manual Division A, B, D, E, and I
manufacturers and distinct from domestic wastewater.
   INDUSTRIES or INDUSTRIAL USERS.
      (1)   Entities that discharge into a publicly owned wastewater treatment
works, liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial
manufacturing processes, or from the development of any natural resources.
These are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the
following divisions: Division A. Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; Division B.
Mining; Division D. Manufacturing; Division E. Transportation, Communications,
Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Sewers; and Division I. Services.
      (2)   For the purpose of this definition, DOMESTIC WASTE shall be
considered to have the following characteristics:
         (a)   BOD less than 350 mg/l; and
         (b)   Suspended solids less than 383 mg/l.
      (3)   Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal
systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment proves, or
which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or
creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
   INFLOW/INFILTRATION (I/I). The total quantity of water entering a sanitary
sewer system from roof drains, basement sumps, manhole covers, and the like
(INFLOW) and through joints and cracks in the sewer after having traveled
through soil (INFILTRATION).
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Users other than commercial, industrial, or residential
users, discharging primarily normal domestic strength wastewater (such as
nonprofit organizations).
   MAY. Is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface groundwater.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTES. Wastes which are characterized by 350 mg/
l BOD and 383 mg/l suspended solids.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER. Wastewater that is primarily produced
by residential users, with BOD concentrations not greater than 350 mg/l and
suspended solids concentrations not greater than 383 mg/l.
   NPDES PERMIT (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM). The system
for issuing, conditioning, and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants
from point sources into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone and the
oceans by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act of 1972, §§ 402 and 405, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1342 et seq.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Expenditures for operation and maintenance,
including replacement.
   OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE. Activities required to provide for the
dependable and economical functioning of water and sewer facilities throughout
the design or useful life, whichever is longer, of such water and sewer
facilities, and at the level of performance for which the facilities were
constructed.
   OTHER WASTES. Garbage, municipal refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings,
bark, lime, sand, ashes, oil, tar, chemicals, offal, and other substances
except sewage and other wastes.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
municipal corporation, governmental unit, or group.
   pH. Logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
   PROCESS WATER. Any water used in the manufacturing, preparation, or
production of goods, material, or foods. PROCESS WATER is an industrial waste.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer owned or operated by a unit or agency of government.
   REPLACEMENT. Obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances of the water and sewer facilities to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the water and sewer service facilities whose
premises or building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons,
including dwelling units such as detached and semi-detached housing,
apartments, and mobile homes; and which discharges primarily normal domestic
strength sanitary wastes.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage, and to which storm, surface,
and ground water is not intentionally admitted.
   SANITARY WASTE. The liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from sanitary
plumbing facilities.
   SEWAGE or WASTEWATER. The water-carried waste products from residences,
public buildings, institutions, industrial establishments, or other buildings
including the excrementitious or other discharge from the bodies of human
beings or animals, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may
be present.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, industrial wastes, or other
waste liquids.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The aggregate of all charges, including charges for
operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service, and other sewer related
charges that are billed periodically to users of the city’s wastewater
collection and treatment facilities.
   SEWER SERVICE FUND. A fund into which income from sewer service charges is
deposited along with other income, including taxes intended to retire debt
incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater collection and treatment.
Expenditure of the SEWER SERVICE FUND will be for operation, maintenance, and
replacement costs; and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for
wastewater collection and treatment.
   SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all
other devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for collecting or
conducting sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes to a point of ultimate
disposal.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration of flows during the normal operation.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION MANUAL. Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. Sewer which carries storm or surface water and
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial waste, other than unpolluted
cooling or process water.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface or is in suspension in water,
wastewater, or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants as defined in standard issued pursuant to § 307(a) of the Clean
Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317a, which upon exposure to or assimilation into
any organism will cause adverse effects.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Clean water uncontaminated by industrial wastes, other
wastes, or any substance which renders such water unclean or noxious or impure
so as to be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or injurious to
public health, safety, or welfare to domestic, commercial, industrial, or
recreational uses; or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish, or other aquatic
life.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of water and sewer facilities for the
user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including
replacement.
   USERS. Those residential, commercial, governmental, institutional, and
industrial establishments which are connected to the public water and sewer
systems.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community, also referred to as SEWAGE. From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions together with any ground water, surface water, and storm water
that may be present.
   WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM. A system of sanitary sewers owned, maintained,
operated, and controlled by the city.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, or processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and
structures for treatment of wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge. Sometimes
used as a synonym for WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT, WASTE TREATMENT PLANT, WATER
POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT, or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.
   WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. A system of pipelines or conduits, wells, and
pumps, and all other devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, operated and
controlled by the city and used for distributing or conducting water to users.
   WATER SERVICE CHARGE. The aggregate of all charges, including charges for
operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service, and other sewer related
charges that are billed periodically to users of the city’s water distribution
and storage facilities.
   WATER SERVICE FUND. A fund into which income from water service charges is
deposited along with other income, including taxes intended to retire debt
incurred through capital expenditure for water distribution and storage.
Expenditure of the WATER SERVICE FUND will be for operation, maintenance, and
replacement costs; and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for
water distribution and storage.
   WATER STORAGE FACILITIES. An elevated tank structure or water tower, used
for water storage.
(Prior Code, § 50.00)
§ 50.002 REQUIREMENTS PART OF SERVICE TERMS.
   All provisions of this code respecting municipal utility service, including
amendments which may from time to time be enacted, and also including any
regulations which may be adopted, shall be a part of the terms of service for
every service customer and for every owner, lessee, occupant, and person in
charge of the premises serviced. Every customer served and every owner, lessee,
occupant, and person in charge of the premises served shall be considered to
express consent to and be bound by all such requirements.
(Prior Code, § 50.60)
§ 50.003 APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Applications for water, sewer, and other municipal utility services
shall be made to the Clerk/Treasurer. When a water service connection is to be
made, the application may be made by the owner or the agent of the owner, or by
the lessee, the occupant, or the person in charge of the premises.
   (B)   The owner, lessee, occupant, or other person in charge of any
premises, and the applicant for any municipal utility service, shall provide
the city with such information as may reasonably be required relating to the
provision of or the use of municipal utility services upon the premises. No
person shall willfully fail to provide such information or willfully falsify
such information.
(Prior Code, § 50.61) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.004 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The customer and any other person in control of any premises connected to
the city water supply system or served by the city sewer system shall permit
authorized meter readers to read meters at reasonable hours of any day, shall
permit authorized employees or agents of the city to have access to all parts
of any building or premises connected with the city water supply system or the
city storm or sanitary sewer systems at such times as may be reasonably
necessary for repairs and at reasonable hours of any day for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measuring, sampling, and testing, in accordance with §
10.20. If access cannot be obtained to read a meter, the customer’s bill may be
estimated. Refusal to permit access or continued inability to obtain access to
the premises shall be grounds for discontinuance of service. In such case,
service shall be discontinued in the same manner as service is discontinued for
failure to pay amounts owed.
(Prior Code, § 50.62)
§ 50.005 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The City Council may establish by ordinance and enforce any additional
regulations necessary or convenient for the adequate, safe, efficient, and
healthful installation and provision of municipal utility services and of
private sewage disposal and for the protection of the municipal utility service
facilities. No person shall violate any such requirements of law or of any
other agency, respecting municipal utility service or private sewage disposal
systems.
(Prior Code, § 50.63)
§ 50.006 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Public Works Coordinator shall, subject to the direction of the City
Council, enforce all provisions of this chapter relating to the city water and
sewer systems and private sewage disposal systems.
(Prior Code, § 50.64)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.020 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The City Council shall establish by ordinance rates and charges for city
water, sewer, and other municipal utility services, permits and other related
matters. Without limitation upon the City Council’s authority, this shall
include the authority to establish rates and charges for:
   (A)   City water, sewer, and other municipal utility services, and the
availability of them;
   (B)   Deposits upon meters and as security for payment of amounts owed;
   (C)   Connection and reconnection charges;
   (D)   Late payment charges;
   (E)   Meter testing;
   (F)   Water and sewer construction permits;
   (G)   If provided by the city, thawing and other city services provided; and
   (H)   Use of the city dewatering apparatus and of any other equipment.
(Prior Code, § 50.01)
§ 50.021 ESTABLISHMENT OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a water and sewer service charge system
whereby all revenue collected from users of the water and wastewater facilities
will be used to effect all expenditures incurred for annual operation,
maintenance, and replacement and for debt service on capital expenditure
incurred in constructing water and wastewater facilities.
   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation, maintenance,
and replacement costs of the water distribution, water storage, wastewater
collection, and wastewater treatment facilities, based on the total annual
costs of constructing, operating, and maintaining said facilities.
   (C)   Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local capital costs
as determined by the City Council.
   (D)   Service rates and charges to users of the water and wastewater
facilities shall be determined utilizing the budget-based formula found in the
appendices to the ordinance establishing water and sewer service rates.
Subsequent changes in water and sewer service rates shall be adopted in Chapter
34 of this code and published in the local newspaper.
   (E)   Revenues collected for water and sewer services shall be deposited in
separate funds known as the Water Service Fund and the Sewer Service Fund,
respectively. Income from revenues collected will be expended to offset the
cost of operation, maintenance, and equipment replacement for the facilities
and to retire the debt of capital expenditure.
   (F)   Water and sewer service charges and the Water and Sewer Service Funds
will be administered in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.02)
§ 50.022 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE FUNDS.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a Water Service Fund and a Sewer Service
Fund as an income fund to receive all revenues generated by the water and sewer
service charge systems and all other income dedicated to the operation,
maintenance, replacement, and construction of the water and wastewater
facilities, including taxes, special charges, fees, and assessments intended to
retire construction debt.
   (B)   The city also establishes the following accounts as income and
expenditure accounts within the Water and Sewer Service Funds:
      (1)   Operation and Maintenance Account;
      (2)   Equipment Replacement Account; and
      (3)   Debt Retirement Account.
   (C)   All revenues generated by the water and sewer service charge systems,
and all other income pertinent to the systems, including taxes and special
assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be held by the Clerk/
Treasurer separate and apart from all other funds of the city.
   (D)   Revenues generated by the water and sewer service charge systems
sufficient to ensure adequate replacement of the facilities, shall be held
separate and apart in the Equipment Replacement Account and dedicated to
effecting replacement costs.
   (E)   Revenue generated by the water and sewer service charge systems
sufficient for operation and maintenance shall be held separate and apart in
the Operation and Maintenance Account.
(Prior Code, § 50.03)
§ 50.023 ADMINISTRATION.
   The water and sewer service charge systems and Water and Sewer Service Funds
shall be administered according to the following provisions.
   (A)   (1)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall maintain a proper system of accounts
suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment replacement,
and debt retirement costs of the water and sewer facilities and shall furnish
the City Council with a report of such costs annually in the city’s financial
report.
      (2)   The City Council shall annually determine whether or not sufficient
revenue is generated for the effective operation, maintenance, replacement, and
management of the water and sewer facilities and whether sufficient revenue is
being generated for debt retirement.
      (3)   The city shall reassess and, as necessary, revise the water and
sewer service charge system to ensure the proportionality of the user charge
and to ensure the sufficiency of the funds to maintain the capacity and
performance to which the facilities were constructed, and to retire the
construction debt.
   (B)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall be responsible for maintaining all records
necessary to document compliance with the water and sewer service charge
systems adopted.
   (C)   Bills for water and sewer service charges shall be rendered on a
monthly basis succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and
shall be due 15 days from the date of rendering. Any bill not paid in full ten
days after the due date will be considered delinquent. At that time, the city
shall notify the delinquent owner/occupant in writing regarding the delinquent
bill and subsequent penalty. The penalty shall be computed as 10% of the
original bill and shall be increased the same 10% for every month the bill is
outstanding.
   (D)   The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service to
such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable therefor to the
city.
(Prior Code, § 50.04)
§ 50.024 METERED CHARGE WHEN PART OF WATER DOES NOT ENTER SEWER.
   In the event that sewer charges are based upon the amount of water used, and
if a portion of the water received at the premises of any customer does not and
cannot enter the sanitary sewer system, the customer may install and maintain
at the customer’s expense a meter approved by the Public Works Coordinator
which accurately measures the amount of water which does not and cannot enter
the sanitary sewer system or which enters the sanitary sewer system. In that
case, the charges for sanitary sewer service shall be based on the amount of
water which enters the sanitary sewer system, subject to such additional
charges as the City Council may by ordinance establish for reading the
additional meter and for special computation of the customer’s bill.
(Prior Code, § 50.05)
§ 50.025 UNUSUAL USES.
   Any additional costs caused by discharges to the treatment works of toxic or
other incompatible wastes, including the costs of restoring wastewater
treatment services, clean-up and restoration of the receiving waters and
environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the discharger of the wastes,
at no expense to the city.
(Prior Code, § 50.06)
BILLING AND COLLECTION
§ 50.040 STATEMENTS AND PAYMENT.
   (A)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall compute the amount due to the city from each
customer for city water and sewer service and for any other municipal utility
charges. The Clerk/Treasurer shall mail to the customer a statement of the
charges as soon as practicable after the end of each period of service. The
Clerk/Treasurer shall establish such monthly or other service periods for a
customer, as the Clerk/Treasurer deems best. The Clerk/Treasurer shall
establish and shall specify in the statement a due date, to be uniform as to
time allowed for payments for all customers and to be not less than 15 days
after mailing of the statement, upon which all charges then due for municipal
utility services are to be paid.
   (B)   Amounts owed for municipal utility services shall be due and payable
to the Clerk/Treasurer on the due date specified in the statement and shall be
paid on or before that date.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.041 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   In any case where charges for municipal utility services have not been
paid within 30 days after the date due, and where satisfactory payment
arrangements have not been made, water and other municipal utility services to
the premises may be discontinued in accordance with the provisions of divisions
(B) and (C) below. Discontinuance of service for any other reason shall be made
in accordance with requirements set forth in other parts of this code
pertaining to discontinuance of service for those reasons. When service has
been discontinued, service shall not be restored until all delinquent charges,
including reconnection charges are paid, or arrangements satisfactory to the
Clerk/Treasurer, are made for their payment.
   (B)   The procedure set forth in this section shall apply to discontinuance
of service for nonpayment of amounts owed. This shall also be subject to such
additional requirements, if any, as are provided by law or by regulation.
   (C)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall cause written notice of intention to
discontinue service for non-payments of amounts owed to be served upon the
customer. Mailed notice shall also be given to the owner, if the owner is not
the customer served. The notice shall state that if payment is not received on
or before a date stated in the notice, services specified in the notice will be
discontinued. The date shall be not less than three days after the date upon
which the notice is given. The notice shall also state that the person may,
before that date, file with the Clerk/Treasurer a demand for hearing on the
matter, in which case service shall not be discontinued, pending decision on
the issue at the hearing. If a timely demand is made for a hearing, a hearing,
at which the applicant for hearing shall be heard, shall be held by the City
Council not sooner than three days after the date upon which the request is
received by the Clerk/Treasurer. If, as a result of the hearing, the City
Council finds that there is an unpaid charge and that there is no legal reason
why service should not be discontinued, the City Council may order that service
be immediately discontinued.
   (D)   Pursuant to M.S. § 216B.097, as it may be amended from time to time,
no service of a residential customer shall be disconnected if the disconnection
affects the primary heat source for the residential unit when the disconnection
would occur during the period between October 15 and April 15, the customer has
declared inability to pay on forms provided by the city, the household income
of the customer is less than 185% of the federal poverty level as documented by
the customer to the city, and the customer’s account is current for the billing
period immediately prior to October 15 or the customer has entered into a
payment schedule and is reasonably current with payments under the schedule.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall, between August 15 and October 15 of each year,
notify all residential customers of these provisions.
(Prior Code, § 50.16)
§ 50.042 DELINQUENT CHARGES; LIEN, SUIT, INTEREST.
   (A)   Each and every water and sewer service charge levied by and pursuant
to this subchapter is hereby made a lien upon the land or premises served, and
all such charges which are, on December 31 of each year, past due and
delinquent, shall be certified to the County Auditor as taxes or assessments on
the real estate. Nothing in this subchapter shall be held or construed as in
any way stopping or interfering with the right of the city to levy as taxes or
assessments against any premises affected by any delinquent or past due water
or sewer service charges.
   (B)   As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at its discretion,
file suit in a civil action to collect such amounts as are delinquent and due
against the occupant, owner, or user of the real estate, and shall collect as
well all attorney’s fees incurred by the city in filing the civil action. Such
attorney’s fees shall be fixed by order of the court.
   (C)   In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and chargeable to
recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the owner or user of
the real estate being serviced by the treatment works shall be liable for
interest upon all unpaid balances at the rate of 18% per annum.
(Prior Code, § 50.17)
REQUIREMENTS FOR CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
§ 50.055 CONNECTION REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   When property abuts upon any public street, alley, or other place along
which water and sewer mains have been constructed, the owner of any dwelling or
commercial or industrial establishment on the property shall install suitable
toilet facilities therein and connect them with the city water line and with
the sanitary sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this code. This
shall not, however, prevent the use on the premises of distilled or specially
bottled water meeting all requirements of law and of all applicable health
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 50.25) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.056 WHEN CONNECTION TO BE MADE; NOTICE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise allowed in this chapter, the owner of any property
required to be connected with the city water line or with the city sewer system
shall connect the property within 90 days after the service first becomes
available to the property, within 90 days of the enactment of this code if the
requirement did not previously apply but service is presently available, and
immediately if the requirement previously applied and service is available. The
owner shall discontinue at that time the use of any other water supply or means
of sewage disposal.
   (B)   Whenever service for which a connection required under this chapter
becomes available or is about to become available to a property, the Clerk/
Treasurer may notify the owner of the connection requirement. If that notice
has not been given and the owner failed to make the required connection within
the time allowed for making connection, the Clerk/Treasurer shall give notice
that connection must be made within a specified time of the mailing or delivery
of the notice, and that if not done, connection will be made by the city at the
expense of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 50.26) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.057 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE LINE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No person, unless authorized, shall uncover, make any connection with
or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any water or sewer main or service line
within the city or any part of the city water or wastewater facilities.
   (B)   No water or sewer main or service line shall be constructed in the
city (except house or building service lines) except by the city or by others
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by a professional
engineer. No such mains shall be constructed or considered to be part of the
public water or wastewater system unless accepted by the city.
   (C)   The size, slope, alignment, material of construction, methods to be
used in excavation, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling, and other
work connected with the construction of water and sewer mains shall conform to
the requirements of the city.
(Prior Code, § 50.27) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.058 CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE OF PRIVY VAULT, SEPTIC TANK, CESSPOOL
UNLAWFUL.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage if adequate and feasible city
facilities are available.
(Prior Code, § 50.28) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.059 NEW CONNECTIONS.
   New connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless
sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities, including, but
not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD, and suspended solids.
(Prior Code, § 50.29) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.060 CONNECTION COSTS.
   The cost of connections to the city water and sanitary sewer systems or
repairs to an existing connection, including the cost of any necessary
excavations, connections, taps, installation of pipe, appurtenances, and street
repairs, shall be borne by the owner or other applicant for service. The owner
shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any loss or damage to the
public water and sewer systems that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building water and sewer systems.
(Prior Code, § 50.30)
§ 50.061 INSTALLATION PRIOR TO STREET SURFACING.
   The City Council may, by resolution, require that water and sewer lines be
installed from the main to the property line of any property to be served
before any permanent street surfacing is completed. The Clerk/Treasurer shall
give each owner notice to do so within a specified time of the mailing or
delivery of the notice. If the owner fails to install the line, the City
Council may cause the line to be installed. If not paid or payment arrangements
made within 30 days after billing for payment, any costs may be collected as
provided in §
50.042.
(Prior Code, § 50.31) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.062 RESPONSIBILITY FOR SERVICE LINES.
   The water and sewer service lines connecting the property service with the
city water and sewer mains, including the portion of the line in the public
right-of-way between the main and the stopbox, shall be owned by the owner of
the property served. The owner shall be responsible for all expenses of their
maintenance, repair, and replacement.
(Prior Code, § 50.32)
§ 50.063 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with Minn.
Rules Chapter 7080, as it may be amended from time to time, entitled Individual
Sewage Treatment System Standards or the requirements of the city or other
regulatory agencies, whichever is more restrictive.
   (B)   No new private sewer systems or sewer system extensions shall be
constructed within the city without first obtaining written approval of the
system plan and the materials to be used in the construction of the system.
   (C)   No person shall construct any private sewage disposal facility without
first having obtained a private sewage disposal facility construction permit to
do so. Private facility permits are issued by the county.
(Prior Code, § 50.33) Penalty, see §
50.999
WATER AND SEWER CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
§ 50.075 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person other than an authorized city employee or person hired to do
so by the city shall do any of the following without first having obtained an
excavation permit to do so:
      (1)   Connect any water service line with the city water main;
      (2)   Construct or repair any building sewer between the building drain
and the sewer main stub;
      (3)   Connect any building sewer with the sewer main stub; or
      (4)   Otherwise make any connection with or opening into, alter, or
disturb any part of the city water system, or the city sanitary sewer system,
or of the city storm sewer system.
   (B)   No city excavation permit is required for on-site sewage disposal
systems.
(Prior Code, § 50.45) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.076 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PERSON DOING WORK; FEE; INSURANCE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the work or business of
installing private water or sewer service lines and appurtenances for others
without a permit from the city.
   (B)   Any person desiring to engage in such work shall make application to
the city on forms to be supplied by the city together with a fee to be
established by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 50.46) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.077 PERMIT REQUIREMENT; PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may
obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate permit from the city.
         (a)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to excavate
that part of the right-of-way described in the permit and to hinder free and
open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
         (b)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
      (2)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-
way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
      (3)   Delay penalty. The city shall establish and impose a delay penalty
for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by
resolution of City Council.
      (4)   Permit display. Permits issued under this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the Director.
   (B)   Permit applications. Application for a permit shall contain, and will
be considered complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the
following provisions:
      (1)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:
         (a)   Each permittee’s name, Gopher-One Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
         (b)   The name, address, and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information
regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be
provided at the time of registration;
         (c)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
            1.   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the Director;
            2.   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities, and collapse of property;
            3.   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all coverages;
            4.   Requiring that the Director be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
            5.   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, Workers’ Compensation, and umbrella coverage established by
the Director in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to
carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
         (d)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies;
         (e)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate
required to be filed under M.S. § 326B.801, as it may be amended from time to
time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and
         (f)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the State Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal
agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the certificate from the
Commission or other state or federal agency.
      (2)   Payment of money due to the city for:
         (a)   Permit fees as established by ordinance of the City Council,
estimated restoration costs, and other management costs;
         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of the applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-
way or any emergency actions taken by the city; or
         (d)   Franchise fees or other charges as established by ordinance of
the City Council, if applicable.
(Prior Code, § 50.47) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.078 BOND; INSURANCE.
   (A)   Before the Clerk/Treasurer may issue a water and sewer construction
permit for a commercial or industrial project, the applicant shall file with
the Clerk/Treasurer a corporate surety bond in the amount of at least $2,000,
or deposit with the Clerk/Treasurer cash or other securities in that amount. It
shall be conditioned upon faithful performance of all work undertaken to be
done with due care and skill, and in compliance with the requirements of this
code and in compliance with all other applicable requirements. The bond shall
state that the person will defend, indemnify, and save harmless the city and
the person for whom the work is undertaken against all damages, costs,
expenses, outlays, and claims of every nature and kind arising out of un-
skillfulness or negligence on the applicant’s part in connection with the
excavating, plumbing, and other work undertaken. The bond shall remain in force
and must be executed for a period of at least one year, and upon expiration it
shall remain in force as to all penalties, claims, and demands that may have
accrued under it prior to its expiration.
   (B)   In the case of a residential water and sewer construction permit
application, the applicant, before a permit may be issued, shall secure from a
reputable, established insurance company licensed to do business in the state
and maintain in effect a policy of insurance against damage to property and
injury or death to person. The property damage coverage shall be in the amount
of at least $300,000 and the public liability coverage for injury or death
shall be in the amount of at least $300,000 per person and $1,000,000 per
occurrence. The policy shall provide that the Clerk/Treasurer shall be notified
prior to any termination or modification of the insurance. Proof of insurance
shall be filed with the Clerk/Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 50.48) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.079 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or boulevard, or on any
other public property, for water and sewer construction shall meet all
requirements for excavations contained in Chapter 154, except that no separate
excavation permit shall be required if a water and sewer construction permit
has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 50.49) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.080 EXCAVATIONS TO BE BARRICADED; RESTORATION OF PROPERTY.
   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed during the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Prior Code, § 50.50) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.081 SUPERVISION AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   All construction shall be subject to the supervision of the Public
Works Coordinator. No part of the work done shall be covered by backfill until
it has been inspected and approved by the Coordinator. The person doing the
work shall notify the Coordinator when the work is ready for inspection. If the
Coordinator determines that any part of the work is not done in accordance with
applicable requirements, the person doing the work shall correct the defects
and have the work reinspected. Upon request, the Coordinator shall give written
notice describing the defects. No system shall be placed or replaced in service
until all defects have been corrected.
   (B)   All connection with any water main, all tapping of mains, and the
installation, opening, and closing of stopcocks shall be made by authorized
city employees or done under the supervision of the Coordinator.
   (C)   All connections with the sanitary sewer system shall be made by
authorized city employees or done under the supervision of the Coordinator.
   (D)   All pipes laid in the streets, in the alleys, or on public property
shall be laid by authorized city employees or under the supervision of the
Coordinator.
(Prior Code, § 50.51) Penalty, see §
50.999
DAMAGES AND VIOLATIONS
§ 50.095 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall make any municipal utility service connection, fail to
make any required connection, or use, damage, or interfere with any municipal
utility installation contrary to the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   No person other than an authorized city employee or a fire fighter in
the performance of fire fighting and prevention duties shall take water from a
fire hydrant, city well, city water tank filling station, or any other city
facility without first obtaining authority to do so from the Public Works
Coordinator. Nor shall any person install or use any private sewage disposal
facilities contrary to the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.70) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.096 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   Any person violating any provisions of this code relating to the water
system, the sewer system, or any other municipal utility, and any person who
negligently or intentionally causes damage to any municipal utility, shall be
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned thereby. In
addition, the customer, owner, lessee, occupant, or person in charge of the
premises may each also be held liable if the expense, loss, or damage could
have been avoided by due care on their part.
(Prior Code, § 50.71)
§ 50.097 CORRECTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upon finding any violation of any provision of this code relating to
municipal utility services or private sewage disposal facilities, or upon
finding that the water service at the premises served needs repair or that the
sewer system at the premises served needs repair or cleaning, the Public Works
Coordinator shall notify the Clerk/Treasurer. The Clerk/Treasurer shall serve
notice upon the occupant, lessee, or other person in charge of the premises,
and upon the owner if the owner does not occupy the premises, specifying the
nature of each violation and the work which is required to be done. The notice
shall also specify the reasonable time, considering the nature and amount of
work to be done and the nature of the violations or problems, within which each
violation or problem of all of them must be remedied.
   (B)   The provision of this section shall not limit the power of any other
officer or agency, to act pursuant to authority given in this code or by law.
(Prior Code, § 50.72) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.098 CORRECTION BY CITY.
   If each violation or problem is not corrected within the time specified, the
official reporting it may cause it to be corrected at the expense of the owner,
of the occupant, and of the lessee or of any or all of them. The cost of doing
so shall also be a lien against the property and may be collected as a special
assessment if not promptly paid.
(Prior Code, § 50.73)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except when another penalty is expressly provided in the provision,
any person violating any requirement or any prohibition of any provision of
this title shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
sentenced as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 50.99)
   (B)   Any person who fails to correct any violation or to remedy any problem
when required to do so shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 50.72)
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Improper deposit of refuse
   
51.03   Accumulations prohibited
   
51.04   Scattering of, removal of refuse
   
51.05   Composting
   
51.06   Recyclables
   
51.07   Use of municipal or licensed collection required
Refuse Collectors
   
51.20   License required
   
51.21   Application and fee
   
51.22   Bond and insurance
   
51.23   Approval and issuance
   
51.24   Duration of license
   
51.25   Conditions
   
51.26   Collection of charges for service
   
51.27   Suspension and revocation
   
51.28   Additional rules
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. The refuse animal, fruit, and vegetable matter from the kitchens,
pantries, and dining rooms of hotels, restaurants, boarding houses, and
dwellings, the animal refuse from slaughter houses, butcher shops, and stores,
and the refuse fruit and vegetable matter from stores and fruit houses.
   RECYCLABLES. Paper, plastic, metal, aluminum, motor oil, glass, and other
materials which are actually being kept for delivery to a recycling center.
   REFUSE. Garbage and rubbish, plus all other wastes which are not legally
dischargeable into the city sanitary sewer. It does not include recyclables
kept for recycling.
   RUBBISH. Paper, boxes, cartons, house sweepings, tin cans, bottles, junk,
machinery, metals, tires, inner tubes, and other articles of debris that create
an unsightly appearance.
(Prior Code, § 51.01)
§ 51.02 IMPROPER DEPOSIT OF REFUSE.
   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse:
   (A)   In any stream or body of water;
   (B)   Upon any street, alley, or other public property, except that refuse
from picnics in a park, from pedestrians using a sidewalk, and from similar
uses may be deposited in proper containers provided for that purpose;
   (C)   Upon the property of another, except with permission, and then only
when in compliance with all requirements of law, of regulation, and of this
code; and
   (D)   Upon property owned by, occupied by, or otherwise in control of the
person doing so, except when properly stored until the refuse is collected or
otherwise disposed of properly.
(Prior Code, § 51.02) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 51.03 ACCUMULATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall keep any lumber or other building supplies upon any
property owned by, occupied by, or in the control of that person unless the
lumber or other building supplies are stored inside a building suitable for
storage of the lumber and other building supplies, or unless they are otherwise
suitably screened from public view.
   (B)   This prohibition shall not apply to any person temporarily storing
lumber and other building supplies outside upon any property during the time
reasonably and actually incident to any construction project upon the property,
nor shall it apply to any retail or wholesale dealer in lumber or other
building supplies duly storing in a neat and orderly fashion the lumber and
other building supplies at the dealer’s place of business, when established and
operated in compliance with the zoning and other land use regulations of the
city.
   (C)   In any event, no person shall cause or allow any unsanitary or
unsightly accumulation of lumber or other building supplies, of any unused
appliances, of any junk, or of any other refuse upon any property owned by,
occupied by, or in the control of that person.
(Prior Code, § 51.03) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 51.04 SCATTERING OF, REMOVAL OF REFUSE.
   (A)   No person shall keep or haul, or knowingly allow to be kept upon or
hauled from premises owned by, occupied by, or in control of that person, any
refuse in the city in such a manner that the wind, water, or other cause will
or is likely to scatter the refuse from the place of storage or transport.
   (B)   Refuse which accumulates between collections shall be set out for
removal with each collection from premises regularly served by a refuse
collection service. Refuse from other premises shall be removed and disposed of
properly at such intervals as will prevent it from becoming rotten or offensive
to smell, and shall in any event be removed as often as the containers for the
refuse become full.
(Prior Code, § 51.04) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 51.05 COMPOSTING.
   No person shall bury any refuse in the city except in an approved sanitary
landfill, except that leaves, grass clippings, and easily biodegradable,
nonpoisonous garbage may be composted on the premises where they have
accumulated. Garbage may be composted only in a rodent-proof structure and in
an otherwise sanitary manner.
(Prior Code, § 51.05) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 51.06 RECYCLABLES.
   Recyclables shall be kept in suitable containers or bundled neatly. The
containers or bundles shall be kept in an enclosed building or otherwise
screened from public view. Recyclables shall be disposed of at a recycling
center or otherwise disposed of whenever the containers are full or when space
for the bundles is lacking.
(Prior Code, § 51.06) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 51.07 USE OF MUNICIPAL OR LICENSED COLLECTION REQUIRED.
   Except when removing one’s own refuse, no owner or occupant of property
within the city shall cause or allow any refuse to be collected, removed, or
hauled from the property unless it is done by a licensed refuse collector or by
a municipal refuse collection service if there is a municipal refuse collection
service.
(Prior Code, § 51.07) Penalty, see §
50.999
REFUSE COLLECTORS
§ 51.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall, for hire, collect or remove any refuse from any place
within the city, or transport any refuse over any street, alley, or other
public way within the city, other than upon a main thoroughfare through the
city, without first having obtained a license to do so.
(Prior Code, § 51.20) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 51.21 APPLICATION AND FEE.
   (A)   Any person desiring a license shall file an application with the
Clerk/Treasurer in the form prescribed by the Clerk/Treasurer. The application
shall state the name and address of the applicant, the type of equipment to be
used, a schedule of rates to be charged for the services to be provided, the
place to which the refuse is to be hauled, and such other information as the
City Council may require. No person shall make a false statement in or
concerning any application.
   (B)   The City Council shall, by ordinance, establish the license fees to be
charged. It may provide for the proration of fees for licenses issued for a
portion of a license year. Payment of the required fee shall accompany the
application.
(Prior Code, § 51.21)
§ 51.22 BOND AND INSURANCE.
   When the City Council deems it reasonably necessary in view of the
applicant’s proposed services, equipment, experience, and training, the City
Council may require, as a condition of the issuance of a license, that the
applicant furnish bond in an amount determined by the City Council for the
performance of the licensed activity in accordance with all requirements of
law, administrative regulation, and this code. The City Council may, in
addition to or in lieu of bond, require that any licensee file with the Clerk/
Treasurer a policy of insurance in such kind and amount as the City Council
determines.
(Prior Code, § 51.22)
§ 51.23 APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE.
   The City Council may make such investigation of the fitness of any applicant
as it deems appropriate. The City Council may deny a license to any applicant
when it finds that the applicant lacks sufficient training, experience,
equipment, or employees to provide the services proposed in a safe, sanitary,
and efficient manner, or if it finds that no need exists for the service
proposed. If the City Council approves issuance of a license, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall issue the license upon the applicant filing any required bond
or policy of insurance and upon the applicant meeting any other conditions of
the license.
(Prior Code, § 51.23)
§ 51.24 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   Every license shall become effective on January 1 of the year for which it
is issued, or upon such later date as it is actually issued or as is requested
in the application. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which
they are issued.
(Prior Code, § 51.24)
§ 51.25 CONDITIONS.
   No licensee shall increase any rate charged or decrease the frequency of
collections from that stated in the licensee’s application during the period
for which the license is in effect without approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.25) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 51.26 COLLECTION OF CHARGES FOR SERVICE.
   The licensee shall collect the licensee’s fees for the services provided
from the person to whom the services are provided. The city shall have no
obligation for the payment or collection of the charges.
(Prior Code, § 51.26)
§ 51.27 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Upon due notice and hearing, the City Council may suspend or revoke any
license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any law,
regulation, or provision of this code relating to the licensed activity, or for
any other sufficient cause.
(Prior Code, § 51.27)
§ 51.28 ADDITIONAL RULES.
   The City Council may, by resolution, provide any additional rules which it
deems advisable to carry out and enforce the provisions of this part of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.28)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
Use of Public Sewers
   
52.01   Unlawful discharges to natural outlets; storm water and other drainage
   
52.02   Prohibited discharges
   
52.03   Substances regulated as to discharge
   
52.04   Actions by city
   
52.05   Grease, oil, and mud interceptors
   
52.06   Preliminary treatment equipment maintenance
   
52.07   Control structure
   
52.08   Measurements, tests, and analyses
   
52.09   Special agreements
Building Sewers and Connections
   
52.20   Unused devices and structures to be made safe
   
52.21   Specifications for connections
Administration and Enforcement
   
52.35   Authority of inspectors
   
52.36   Violations
 
   
52.99   Penalty
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 52.01 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES TO NATURAL OUTLETS; STORM WATER AND OTHER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city or any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or
indirectly any storm water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
waste from on-site disposal systems, unpolluted cooling or processing water to
any sanitary sewer except as permitted by the city or other local unit of
government. No person may discharge sump-pump or footing drain water into the
public sanitary sewer.
   (C)   Storm water and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged to a
storm sewer, except that unpolluted cooling or processing water shall only be
so discharged upon approval by the city or other unit of local government.
(Prior Code, § 52.10) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.02 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly
any of the following described substances to any public sewer:
   (A)   Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid, or gas;
   (B)   Water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the wastewater treatment works. A toxic pollutant shall include,
but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317a;
   (C)   Any water or waste having a pH lower than five and one-half or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the wastewater treatment works;
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances, either whole or ground, in quantities or
of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the sewers, or other
interference with the proper continuation of the wastewater facilities, but not
limited to ashes, cinders, disposable diapers, glass grindings or polishing
wastes, stone cuttings or polishing wastes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, sanitary napkins, paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, and other paper products; or
   (E)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or substances which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance or repairs.
(Prior Code, § 52.11) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 SUBSTANCES REGULATED AS TO DISCHARGE.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or
indirectly the following described substances to any pubic sewer unless, in the
opinion of the city, such discharge will not harm the wastewater facilities,
nor cause obstruction to the flow in sewers, nor otherwise endanger life, limb,
or public property, nor constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the
acceptability of the wastes, the city may give consideration to such factors as
the quantities of the subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials, or construction of the sewers, nature of the wastewater
treatment proves, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, the city’s NPDES
permit, and other pertinent factors. The city may make such determinations
either on a general basis or as to discharges from individual users or specific
discharges, and may prohibit certain discharges from individual users because
of unusual concentrations or combinations which may occur.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature in excess of 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and
150°F (0° and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such degree
that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flows normally
prevailing in the public sewers, with no particles greater than one half-inch
in any dimension;
      (4)   Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances which constitute a nuisance or hazard to the structures,
equipment, or personnel of the wastewater works, or which interfere with the
treatment required to meet the requirements of the state or federal government,
or any other public agency with proper authority to regulate the discharge from
the wastewater treatment plant;
      (6)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration that they are not in compliance with regulations issued by the
appropriate authority having control over their use or may cause damage or
hazards to the treatment works or personnel operating it;
      (7)   Any water or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and one-half; and
      (8)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of suspended solids, (such as, but not
limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids, (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewaster
treatment works;
         (d)   Unusual volume of low or concentrations of wastes constituting a
slug; and
         (e)   Water or water-containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of NPDES permit, or requirements of other
governmental agencies having jurisdiction over discharge from the wastewater
treatment plant.
(Prior Code, § 52.12) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 ACTIONS BY CITY.
   (A)   If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which water or wastes
do not meet the standards set out in or promulgated under this subchapter, or
which in the jurisdiction of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the
treatment works, processes equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life, or constitute a public nuisance, the city may take all
or any of the following steps:
      (1)   Refuse to accept the discharges;
      (2)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharges;
      (3)   Require pretreatments to an acceptable condition for the discharge
to the public sewers; and
      (4)   Require payments to cover the added cost of handling or treating
the wastes.
   (B)   The design and installation of the plant and equipment for
pretreatment or equalization of flows shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city and subject to the requirements of 40 C.F.R. part 403,
entitled “Pretreatment Standards,” and the State Pollution Control Agency.
(Prior Code, § 52.13)
§ 52.05 GREASE, OIL, AND MUD INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil, and mud interceptors shall be approved when they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease
in excessive amounts, as specified in §
52.03, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be a type and capacity approved by the city and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
(Prior Code, § 52.14) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE.
   Where preliminary treatment flow equalization or interceptors are required
for any water or waste, they shall be effectively operated and maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective condition by the owner at his or her
expense and shall be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable
times.
(Prior Code, § 52.15) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 CONTROL STRUCTURE.
   When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such
structure and equipment, when required, shall be constructed at the owner’s
expense in accordance with plans approved by the city and shall be maintained
by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Prior Code, § 52.16) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS, AND ANALYSES.
   (A)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water
and waste to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 136, as it may be amended from time to time,
“Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants,” the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
and shall be determined at the control structure provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control structure. In the event that no special structure
has been required, the control structure shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the building
sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effluent constituents and their effect upon the
treatment works and to determine the existence of hazards of life, health, and
property. Sampling methods, location, times, duration, and frequencies are to
be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the city.
   (B)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate
compliance with this chapter and any special condition for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge. The number, type, and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses
to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry
must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge
to assure compliance with federal, state, and local standards. The owner shall
report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such
times and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the
expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the city. At
such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take
measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory.
(Prior Code, § 52.17)
§ 52.09 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be constructed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangements between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern, in accordance with applicable ordinance and any
supplemental agreements with the city.
(Prior Code, § 52.18)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 52.20 UNUSED DEVICES AND STRUCTURES TO BE MADE SAFE.
   Unused septic tanks, cesspools, leaching pits, and similar devices and
structures shall be backfilled or made safe and unusable in a manner acceptable
to the city.
(Prior Code, § 52.30) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.21 SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a
building sewer and the method used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building Code and Plumbing Code, being located in M.S.
Chapter 346B, or other applicable rules and regulations. In the absence of code
provisions, or in amplifications thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the Water Pollution Control Federation
(W.P.C.F.) Manual of Practice No. 9 and the American Society for Testing
Materials (A.S.T.M.) standards shall apply.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, such
building drain shall be provided with a lifting device by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (C)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, roof drains,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (D)   The construction of the building sewer and its connection into the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code,
being M.S. §§ 326B.41 et seq., the sewer specifications included herein, and
other applicable rules and regulations and procedures adopted by the city. All
such construction shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior to
installation.
(Prior Code, § 52.31) Penalty, see §
52.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.35 AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   Duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and §
10.20.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private property as referred to
in division (A) above, the authorized employees of the city shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises.
   (C)   Duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds easements for that purpose of,
but not limited to, inspection, observation, maintenance, and construction of
public water and sewer facilities.
(Prior Code, § 52.40)
§ 52.36 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the time period stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violation.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the
city by reason of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 52.41) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in the written notice stipulated in §
52.36 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be
fined in the amount not exceeding $1,000 for each violation. Each day in which
any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 52.99)
CHAPTER 53: WATER
Section
   
53.01   Separate service connection
   
53.02   Repair of leaks
   
53.03   Cost of installation or repair by the city
   
53.04   Connections with private water supply
   
53.05   Restricted use
   
53.06   Interruption of service
   
53.07   Water meters
   
53.08   Service requirements
§ 53.01 SEPARATE SERVICE CONNECTION.
   No more than one house or other building shall be supplied from one service
connection. The City Council, or the Public Works Coordinator when authorized
to do so by the City Council, may waive this requirement upon finding that a
separate service connection is impractical. Whenever two or more houses or
other buildings are supplied from one pipe connecting with a service main, each
house, other building, or part thereof separately supplied shall have a
separate stopbox and a separate meter.
(Prior Code, § 53.01)
§ 53.02 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
   The owner, and also the customer, the occupant, and the lessee, shall be
responsible for repair of any leaks in the water service line serving the
property. If any leak is not repaired within the time allowed in the notice
after notice to any of them to repair the leak, including notice left at the
premises, the Public Works Coordinator may turn off the water. When the waste
of water is great or damage is likely to occur from the leak, the Coordinator
may turn off the water and thereafter give notice to repair. The Coordinator
may cause any necessary repairs to be made.
(Prior Code, § 53.02)
§ 53.03 COST OF INSTALLATION OR REPAIR BY THE CITY.
   Whenever the city installs any water service lines for the benefit of any
property, or makes any necessary repairs to any water service line, and the
cost of doing so is not paid by the owner, by the customer, by the occupant, or
by the lessee within 30 days after billing for payment, any costs may be
collected as provided in §
50.042.
(Prior Code, § 53.03)
§ 53.04 CONNECTIONS WITH PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.
   No person shall connect any water pipe of the city water supply system with
any pump, well, or tank that is connected to any other source of water supply.
Nor shall any person allow any such connection to continue on property which
the person owns, leases, or occupies. If any such connection exists, it shall
be severed forthwith. When any such connection is found, the Public Works
Coordinator may notify the customer, the owner, the lessee, or the occupant to
sever the connection. If this is not done immediately, the Coordinator may turn
off the water supply. All cross-connections shall be eliminated before water
service is restored to the premises.
(Prior Code, § 53.04) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 53.05 RESTRICTED USE.
   Whenever the City Council determines that a shortage of water threatens the
city water supply, it may, by resolution, limit the times and hours during
which city water may be used for sprinkling, air conditioning, irrigation, car
washing, and other specified uses. After the first day of publication of the
resolution, or after delivery of the resolution to the affected premises, or
three days after mailing the resolution to each affected customer, no person
shall use or permit water to be used in violation of the restrictions imposed
in the resolution. Any person who does so may be charged an excess use charge,
as the City Council may specify in the resolution. Violation of the
restrictions imposed in the resolution shall also be cause for discontinuance
of water service in accordance with the procedures for discontinuance of
service for a leak.
(Prior Code, § 53.05) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 53.06 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   The city may interrupt water service to any customer without notice, or with
such notice as the Public Works Coordinator determines to be appropriate, for
necessary repairs or when any fire or other emergency reasonably requires that
service to any customer be interrupted.
(Prior Code, § 53.06)
§ 53.07 WATER METERS.
   (A)   Meter required. Except for the extinguishment of fires and for such
other uses as may be provided in this code or authorized by the City Council,
no person other than an authorized city employee shall use water from the city
water supply system or permit water to be drawn from it unless the water passes
through a meter supplied or approved by the city.
   (B)   Ownership and installation. Water meters for normal use shall be
furnished by and shall remain property of the city. If a customer requires a
meter of unusual design or capacity, the customer shall purchase and maintain
the meter at the customer’s own expense. Meters shall be installed,
disconnected, taken apart, or in any other manner changed only by authorized
city employees, or by a plumber if expressly so authorized by the Public Works
Coordinator or by regulations established by the City Council.
   (C)   Maintenance. The city shall maintain and repair at its expense any
meter furnished by it that has become unserviceable or inaccurate through
ordinary use and shall replace the meter if necessary. Water meters may be
removed or replaced by the city at any time. If city repair or replacement of a
meter, whether owned by the city or by the customer, is made necessary by any
act or neglect of the owner, of the lessee, or of the occupant of the premises
served, or of any other person, the city may add any expense occasioned thereby
to the customer’s water bill. The Public Works Coordinator may also discontinue
water service until the cause is corrected.
   (D)   Re-reading of meter. When a customer complains that any bill is
excessive and requests that the meter be re-read, the Public Works Coordinator
shall have the meter re-read.
   (E)   Testing. The city may test a meter for accuracy at any time. When a
customer feels that any bill is excessive, the customer may demand in writing
that the meter be tested. If the test shows the meter to be inaccurate, it
shall be repaired or replaced.
   (F)   Adjustment of bill. If a test shows a meter to be inaccurate by more
than 5%, the bill for the immediate past service period and for the elapsed
portion of the current service period shall be adjusted accordingly. If, by
reason of stoppage of the meter or any other reason, it is not possible to
determine with reasonable accuracy the amount of water actually used, the
Public Works Coordinator may estimate by any reasonable method the amount of
water which was used. In no event shall any adjustment be made for any service
period prior to the immediate past service period.
(Prior Code, § 53.07) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 53.08 SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   The Public Works Coordinator shall establish such service requirements
regarding the size, nature, and laying of water service pipes and making
connection with the public water system as may be reasonable or necessary for
the safe, efficient, and healthful provision of water service.
(Prior Code, § 53.08)
CHAPTER 54: NATURAL GAS
Section
General Provisions
   
54.01   Provisions covered by ordinance
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Duties and function of Gas Utility Department
Regulations and Requirements
   
54.15   License
   
54.16   Permits
   
54.17   Temporary use of gas
   
54.18   Gas utility’s facility
   
54.19   Consumer service line
   
54.20   Meter and regulation facilities
   
54.21   Internal piping and gas-burning equipment and appliances
   
54.22   Emergencies
   
54.23   Rough piping inspection
   
54.24   Tests or final piping inspection
   
54.25   Inspection where gas not used for one year
   
54.26   Certificate of approval
   
54.27   Disconnection of dangerous or defective facilities
   
54.28   Gas utility’s refusal of service
   
54.29   Standards applicable
   
54.30   Vents as nuisances
   
54.31   Requirements of new or used gas appliances
   
54.32   Heating appliance conversion
   
54.33   Repairs or alterations
   
54.34   Devices for reducing gas consumption
   
54.35   Exceeding rated capacity
   
54.36   Effect of permit
   
54.37   Liability of the city
   
54.38   Revocation or suspension of authorization
Administration and Enforcement
   
54.50   Establishment of a service charge system
   
54.51   Natural Gas Service Fund
   
54.52   Administration
   
54.53   Discontinuance of service
   
54.54   Delinquent charges; lien, suit, interest
 
   
54.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.01 PROVISIONS COVERED BY ORDINANCE.
   The city hereby establishes a natural gas ordinance that will:
   (A)   Regulate the construction, installation, operation, and maintenance
and safety standards for new and existing gas facilities and gas appliances by:
      (1)   Prescribing installation, construction, operation, maintenance, and
safety standards for new and existing gas facilities and gas appliances;
      (2)   Regulating the repair, alteration, extension, and improvement of
gas facilities and appliances;
      (3)   Providing for the issuance of permits for the installation,
extension, alteration, or repair of gas facilities and appliances and for the
temporary use of gas;
      (4)   Providing for an authorization process for persons engaged in the
business of constructing, installing, extending, altering, or repairing of gas
facilities or appliances; and
      (5)   Prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions.
   (B)   Establish a natural gas service charge system.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHAPTER. 
Chapter 54, the Natural Gas Ordinance.
   CITY. The City of Battle Lake.
   CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Battle Lake,
Minnesota.
   CONSUMER. Any person, corporation, partnership, or any other entity using
gas, including gas for residential, commercial, or industrial purposes or any
combination of such purposes.
   CONSUMER SERVICE LINE. The piping from the gas main up to and including the
meter.
   GAS. Artificial gas, natural gas, or mixed gas consisting of both artificial
and natural gas.
   GAS APPLIANCE. Any domestic appliance such as stove, heater, burner, water
heater, or other appliance or device used for burning gas or using gas in its
operation.
   GAS FACILITY. Piping, fittings, meters, and other facilities used in the
distribution, transmission, or delivery of gas or for use in gas appliances.
   GAS FITTER. Any person who is registered with and bonded by the State
Department of Labor and Industry to construct, install, extend, alter, or
repair any gas facility or gas appliance (including any person licensed by the
state as a master plumber).
   GAS UTILITY DEPARTMENT or GAS UTILITY. Includes any officer representing the
city who is charged with the responsibility of performing functions as herein
prescribed, all as determined by the City Council.
   PERMITTEE. The person (firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
or organization of any kind) having a valid permit issued hereunder.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.03 DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF GAS UTILITY DEPARTMENT.
   The Gas Utility Department shall, and is authorized and directed to, enforce
the provisions of this chapter and shall promulgate and enforce reasonable
rules and regulations for carrying out its provisions and intent. The Gas
Utility Department, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any
building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections
and ascertaining whether there has been compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, in accordance with §
10.20. It shall be the duty of the Gas Utility Department to confer, from time
to time, with the local Health Department and local Fire Department and
otherwise obtain from proper sources all helpful information and advice
regarding the safe and proper operation of gas facilities and gas appliances,
and it shall present to the City Council recommendations for its consideration
and reference thereto.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 54.15 LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall construct, install, extend, alter, repair, or improve
any gas facility or gas appliance within the gas utility system unless such
person has first been authorized to perform such service by the Gas Utility
Department and is a state licensed master plumber or has filed and posted bond
with the State Department of Labor and Industry pursuant to the mechanical
surety bond and fee requirement.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter apply only to such work as is performed
on the property or premises of consumers.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.16 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall construct, install, extend, alter, or repair a gas
facility or a gas appliance without first obtaining a permit to do such work
from the Gas Utility Department; provided however, that a permit hereunder is
not required for setting or connecting to a gas distribution line any gas stove
or room heater or for the repair of leaks in any gas facility. The gas utility
shall not be required to obtain a permit in the performance of any work
pertaining to its own gas system. The provisions of this chapter shall apply
only to such work as is performed on the property or premises of consumers.
   (B)   Each permit shall state the kind of work to be performed and it is
unlawful for any person to do or perform any work other than that designated in
said permit.
   (C)   Each permit shall state the location by street and house number of the
consumer’s premises where such work is to be done and shall be issued for each
consumer’s premises.
   (D)   The permit shall terminate 90 days after issuance unless extended by
the Gas Utility Department for good and sufficient cause.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.17 TEMPORARY USE OF GAS.
   When only the temporary use of gas is desired, the Gas Utility Department,
upon application, may issue a permit for a temporary use for a period not
exceeding 60 days; provided, the consumer’s gas facility is given a test
similar to that required for any facility for which a longer use is
contemplated.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.18 GAS UTILITY’S FACILITY.
   No person, unless an employee of the Gas Utility Department or having the
express authorization of the gas utility shall repair, alter, or open a gas
facility of the gas utility or set or remove a gas service meter or do any work
on the gas supply system of the gas utility.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.19 CONSUMER SERVICE LINE.
   The city shall own and maintain the consumer service line. The city shall
have the right to prescribe the size, location, and termination points of the
consumer service line and meter connection.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.20 METER AND REGULATION FACILITIES.
   When changes in building or arrangements therein render the meter
inaccessible or exposed to hazards, the city shall, at the consumer’s expense,
arrange for the relocation to a site acceptable to the city, of the meter and
regulation facilities, together with any portion of the consumers service line
necessary to accomplish such relocation. The consumer shall not permit anyone
who is not an authorized agent of the city to connect or disconnect the city’s
meters regulators or any portions of the service line. The meter and regulation
facilities are not part of the consumer service line and shall remain the
property of the city.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.21 INTERNAL PIPING AND GAS-BURNING EQUIPMENT AND APPLIANCES.
   The consumer shall own and maintain, in an operable and safe order, the
internal piping from the outlet of the meter to all gas-burning equipment and
appliances. The consumer shall own and maintain all gas-burning equipment and
appliances.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.22 EMERGENCIES.
   In the event of any emergency endangering the life, health, safety, or
property of any person necessitating immediate repairs to any gas facility or
gas appliance, the owners of such gas facility or appliance, without first
obtaining a permit, shall take or cause to be taken immediate emergency action
for the protection of life, health, safety, and property through such
appropriate measures as may be required to cure or remedy the dangerous
conditions. No later than the next succeeding business day, such owner shall
apply for a permit as prescribed in § 54.05.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.23 ROUGH PIPING INSPECTION.
   Rough piping inspection shall be made by the gas fitter after all piping
authorized by the permit has been installed and before such piping has been
covered or concealed or any fixture or gas appliance has been attached thereto.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.24 TESTS OR FINAL PIPING INSPECTION.
   Tests or final piping inspection shall be made by the gas fitter after all
piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which
are to be concealed by plaster or otherwise have been installed but before
being concealed and before any fixture or gas appliances have been attached.
This inspection shall include a pressure test at which time the piping shall
stand an air pressure of ten pounds per square inch for a period of at least 15
minutes without any perceptible drop in pressure. All tools, apparatus, labor,
and assistance necessary for the test shall be furnished by the permittee.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.25 INSPECTION WHERE GAS NOT USED FOR ONE YEAR.
   A new work permit shall be required for a consumer’s premises which have
already been piped for gas but in which no gas has been used for a period of 12
consecutive months or more.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.26 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.
   Upon the completion of the work for which a permit has been issued, the gas
fitter shall inspect said work. If, after inspection, it is found that such
work has complied with the provisions of this chapter and has been performed in
full conformity with this chapter, the gas fitter shall sign the permit
certifying to the compliance and submit it to the gas utility. The gas utility
shall use this certification as its authority to grant gas service.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.27 DISCONNECTION OF DANGEROUS OR DEFECTIVE FACILITIES.
   The Gas Utility Department is authorized to cause to be disconnected any gas
facility that may be defective or in such condition as to endanger life,
health, safety, or property. In all cases where such disconnection is made, a
notice shall be affixed thereto and shall state that the same has been
disconnected by the Gas Utility Department, together with the reason or reasons
therefor, and that it is unlawful for any person to remove said notice or to
reconnect said gas facility or appliance until authorized by the Gas Utility
Department to do so.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.28 GAS UTILITY’S REFUSAL OF SERVICE.
   The gas utility is authorized to discontinue or refuse to supply gas for any
gas facility or gas appliance which it may find to be defective or leaking or
in such condition as to endanger life, health, safety, or property. In such
case, the gas utility shall immediately give written notice of discontinuance
or refusal of service to the consumer. It is unlawful for any person to
reconnect said gas facility or appliance until authorized to do so by the Gas
Utility Department.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.29 STANDARDS APPLICABLE.
   (A)   The construction, installation, extension, maintenance, alteration, or
repair of any gas facility, gas appliance, vent, or vent connector or any other
work pertaining to gas facilities and gas appliances within the scope of this
chapter shall be performed in accordance of the provisions of this chapter and
with requirements of Standards and Provisions of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters for the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping, Bulletin
No. 54, all such code provisions being on file in the office of the City Clerk/
Treasurer and available for public inspection, and are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated into this chapter to the same extent as if included
verbatim herein, and constituting standards of the city for the purposes of
this chapter.
   (B)   In the event any of the provisions of such codes conflict with any of
the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and
be controlling. All amendments and additions to the provisions of said code
when ordered by the City Council to be filed with the Clerk/Treasurer shall
thereupon become amendments and additions hereto and shall have the same force
and effect as the original codes herein identified; provided, that if any
provision of such amendments and additions are in conflict with any of the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and be
controlling.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.30 VENTS AS NUISANCES.
   No person shall permit or suffer any vent to unduly annoy the residents,
occupants, or owners of any building in the neighborhood. If such annoyance is
caused by any vent, the Gas Utility Department shall cause the vent to be
altered, relocated, improved, or carried to such height as may be necessary for
the protection of the neighboring property.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.31 REQUIREMENTS OF NEW OR USED GAS APPLIANCES.
   It is unlawful for any person to install or use any new or used gas
appliance which has not been approved by the American Gas Association Testing
Laboratories, Inc. or Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. It shall be considered an
approved appliance within the meaning of this chapter, provided it is marked or
labeled with a distinctive trademark or name as a means of identification and
bears information showing the approval of such laboratories and the rated heat
input in BTU per hour. All new hot water heaters and heating appliances shall
also be equipped with an American Gas Association approved, complete shut-off
type pilot.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.32 HEATING APPLIANCE CONVERSION.
   All heating appliances which are converted to natural gas shall be vacuumed,
cleaned, and brushed down, and before a gas supply is furnished by the gas
utility to a consumer who has previously been using butane or other liquefied
petroleum gases, the gas fitter shall properly adjust all appliances to ensure
safe operation of the burners and proper combustion of the gas.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.33 REPAIRS OR ALTERATIONS.
   Repairs or alterations to gas facilities or gas appliances shall be made
with such materials, by such methods, and according to such standards as are
provided for by this chapter for new work, except when, in the opinion of the
Gas Utility Department, it is impractical to do so.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.34 DEVICES FOR REDUCING GAS CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   No person shall install or use any device intended as an adjunct or
addition to a gas appliance or to be suspended above or wholly or partially to
enclose any burner of a gas appliance in such manner as to reduce the
effectiveness of the ignition of the gas issuing from the burner or impair
combustion of said burner.
   (B)   No person shall cause gas supplied by the gas utility to bypass the
meter by which the amount of gas supplied by the utility is measured.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.35 EXCEEDING RATED CAPACITY.
   In no case shall a gas appliance be fired or adjusted to pass a greater
amount of gas than the rated capacity of the particular gas appliance.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.36 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be deemed or construed to be
a permit for, or approval of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or
any other law. No permit purporting to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this chapter shall be valid.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.37 LIABILITY OF THE CITY.
   This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any
official or employee thereof any liability or responsibility for damages to any
person injured by a defect in any gas facility or appliance or any work in
connection therewith; nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be
deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspections authorized hereunder or by the issuance of any certificate of
approval, permit or license hereunder by the Gas Utility Department.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.38 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF AUTHORIZATION.
   Any authorization granted under the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Gas Utility Department whenever it shall be made to
appear that the person authorized has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter. In the event the Gas Utility Department shall suspend or revoke
authorization, notification shall be delivered personally or left with a
responsible person at the place of business or left in a conspicuous place on
the premises and mail a copy to the address.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 54.50 ESTABLISHMENT OF A SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
   The city hereby establishes a natural gas service charge system whereby:
   (A)   All revenue collected from consumers of the natural gas utility will
be used to defray all expenditures incurred for purchase and transportation of
natural gas, annual system operation, maintenance, and replacement and for debt
service on capital expenditure incurred in constructing natural gas facilities;
   (B)   Each consumer and/or property owner, where a meter has been installed,
shall pay his or her proportionate share of operation, maintenance, and
replacement costs of the natural gas utility based and total annual costs of
operating and maintaining the utility;
   (C)   Each consumer shall pay debt service charges to retire capital costs
for initial construction of the utility;
   (D)   Service rates and charges to consumers of the natural gas utility
shall be determined using a budget-based formula found in the appendix to the
ordinance establishing natural gas service rates. Subsequent changes in natural
gas service rates shall be adopted in an annual ordinance establishing rates
and fees and published in the local newspaper; and
   (E)   Natural gas service charges will be administered in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.51 NATURAL GAS SERVICE FUND.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a Natural Gas Service Fund.
   (B)   This will be an income fund to receive all revenues generated by the
natural gas service charge system and all other income dedicated to the
operation, maintenance, replacement, and construction of the natural gas
utility including taxes, special charges, fees, and assessments intended to
retire construction debt.
   (C)   The city also establishes the following income and expenditure
accounts relative to the Natural Gas Service Fund:
      (1)   Operation and Maintenance Account;
      (2)   Equipment Replacement Account; and
      (3)   Debt Service Fund.
   (D)   All revenues generated by the natural gas service charge system, and
all other income pertinent to the system including taxes and special
assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be held by the Clerk/
Treasurer separate and apart from other funds of the city.
   (E)   Revenues generated by the natural gas service charge system sufficient
to ensure adequate replacement of system components, shall be held separate and
apart in a Capital Equipment Replacement Account.
   (F)   Revenue generated by the natural gas service charge system sufficient
for operation and maintenance shall be held separate and apart in the Operation
and Maintenance Account.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.52 ADMINISTRATION.
   The natural gas service charge system shall be administered according to the
following provisions.
   (A)   (1)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall maintain a proper system of accounts
suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment replacement,
and debt retirement costs of the natural gas facility and shall furnish the
City Council with a report of such costs annually in the city’s financial
report.
      (2)   The City Council shall annually determine whether or not sufficient
revenue is generated for the effective operation, maintenance, replacement, and
management of the natural gas facility and whether sufficient revenue is being
generated for debt retirement.
      (3)   The city shall reassess and, as necessary, revise the natural gas
service charge system to ensure the proportionality of the consumer charge and
to ensure the sufficiency of the funds to maintain the capacity and performance
to which the facility was constructed, and to retire the construction debt.
   (B)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall be responsible for maintaining all records
necessary to document compliance with the natural gas service charge system.
   (C)   Bills for natural gas service shall be issued on a monthly basis
succeeding the period for which service was rendered. The Clerk/Treasurer shall
compute the amount due to the city from each consumer of the natural gas
service and shall mail the consumer a statement of charges as soon as
practicable after the end of each period of service. The Clerk/Treasurer shall
establish such monthly or other service periods for a consumer as the Clerk/
Treasurer deems best. The Clerk/Treasurer shall establish and shall specify in
the statement a due date to be uniform as to time allowed for payments for all
consumers and to be not less than 15 days after mailing of the statement, upon
which all charges then due for municipal natural gas service are to be paid.
Amounts owed for municipal gas service shall be due and payable to the Clerk/
Treasurer on the due date specified in the statement and shall be paid on or
before that date. Any bill not paid in full five days after the due date will
be considered delinquent. The penalty shall be computed as 10% of the original
bill and shall be increased the same 10% for every month the bill is
outstanding.
   (D)   The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service to
such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable to the city, with
the exception of those services established by renters who have prepaid for
natural gas service until satisfactory credit history has been established.
   (E)   Volumes of gas used shall be determined on the basis of the meter
reading, and billings shall reflect the units of gas utilized. Any error in
reading the meter shall not affect the liability for gas used as determined by
a correct subsequent reading of the meter. When a meter is not able to be read,
the city may estimate the volume of gas used and issue a billing based on such
estimate. A meter registering between 3% fast and 3% slow shall be deemed for
all purposes to be registering correctly. A meter registering incorrectly shall
be replaced by the city at its expense. Periodically, the city may test meters
using standard industry practices to determine accuracy. If a consumer requests
a meter test and the meter is found to be correct as defined above, the
consumer shall pay the applicable meter testing fees.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.53 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The city may discontinue gas service to a consumer as follows.
      (1)   In any case where charges for natural gas service have not been
paid within 30 days after the date due, and where satisfactory arrangements
have not been made, natural gas services to the premises may be discontinued in
accordance with the provisions of this division (A)(1) and of division (A)(2)
below. When service has been discontinued, service shall not be restored until
all delinquent charges, including reconnection charges, are paid, or
arrangements satisfactory to the Clerk/Treasurer are made for their payment.
      (2)   The procedure set forth in this section shall apply to
discontinuance of service for non-payment of amounts owed. This shall also be
subject to such additional requirements, if any, as are provided by law or by
regulation.
      (3)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall cause written notice of intention to
discontinue service for non-payments of amounts owed to be served upon the
consumer. Mailed notice shall also be given to the owner, if the owner is not
the consumer served. The notice shall state that if payment is not received on
or before a date stated in the notice, the natural gas service will be
discontinued. The date shall be not less than three days after the date upon
which the notice is given. The notice shall also state that the person may,
before that date, file with the Clerk/Treasurer a demand for hearing on the
matter, in which case, service shall not be discontinued, pending decision on
the issue at the hearing. If a timely demand is made for a hearing, a hearing
at which the applicant for hearing shall be heard shall be held by the City
Council not sooner than three days after the date upon which the request is
received by the Clerk/Treasurer. If, as a result of the hearing, the City
Council finds that there is an unpaid charge and that there is no legal reason
why service shall not be discontinued, the City Council may order that service
be immediately discontinued.
      (4)   Pursuant to M.S. § 216B.097, as it may be amended from time to
time, no service of a residential consumer shall be discontinued if the
disconnection affects the primary heat source for the residential unit when the
disconnection would occur during the period between October 15 and April 15,
the consumer has declared inability to pay on forms provided by the city, the
household income of the consumer is less than 185% of the federal poverty level
as documented by the consumer to the city, and the consumer’s account is
current to billing period immediately prior to October 15 or the consumer has
entered into a payment schedule and is reasonably current with payments under
the schedule. The Clerk/Treasurer shall, between August 15 and October 15 of
each year, notify all residential consumers of these provisions.
   (B)   The procedure for discontinuance of gas service by a consumer is as
follows.
      (1)   Volume charges, as set forth in the appendix to the ordinance from
which this chapter is derived, may be discontinued by a consumer upon sale or
conveyance of property to a new owner (contract for deed arrangements will not
be recognized as a property transfer unless recorded with the County Recorder).
The new property owner will remain responsible for the base rate.
      (2)   Gas service may be discontinued upon removal of a structure from a
property.
      (3)   Discontinuance of gas service by a consumer in any other case shall
not terminate a property owner’s responsibility for base rate charges as
established in the appendix to the ordinance from which this chapter is
derived.
      (4)   Discontinuance of gas service for any other reason shall be made in
accordance with requirements set forth in other parts of this code pertaining
to discontinuance of service for those reasons.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.54 DELINQUENT CHARGES; LIEN, SUIT, INTEREST.
   The City Council has declared the following.
   (A)   Each and every natural gas service charge levied by and pursuant to §
54.52(D) is hereby made a lien upon the land or premises served, and all such
charges which are on December 31 of each year past due and delinquent shall be
certified to the County Auditor as taxes or assessments on the real estate.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be held or construed as in any way stopping or
interfering with the right of the city to levy as taxes or assessments against
any premises affected by any delinquent or past due natural gas service
charges.
   (B)   As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at its discretion,
file suit in a civil action to collect such amounts as are delinquent and due
against the occupant, owner, or user of the real estate, and shall collect as
well all attorney’s fees incurred by the city in filing the civil action. Such
attorney’s fees shall be fixed by order of the court.
   (C)   In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and chargeable to
recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the owner or user of
the real estate being serviced by the gas utility shall be liable for interest
upon all unpaid balances at the rate of 18% per annum.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2016)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Police duties as to enforcement
   
70.02   Application to emergency vehicles
   
70.03   Prima facie violation
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 POLICE DUTIES AS TO ENFORCEMENT.
   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this title. Police
officers are authorized to direct all traffic within the city, either in person
or by means of visible or audible signal, in conformity with this chapter and
state traffic laws. During a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or
safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions
require, notwithstanding the provisions of this code and of state traffic laws.
Officers of the Fire Department may direct traffic or assist the police in
directing traffic at the scene of a fire or in the immediate vicinity of a
fire.
(Prior Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 APPLICATION TO EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this title shall not apply to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when at the scene of
a reported emergency. However, the driver shall operate and park the emergency
vehicle with due regard for the safety of others and in accordance with state
laws applicable to authorized emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 70.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 PRIMA FACIE VIOLATION.
   The presence of a vehicle in or upon any public street, alley, or highway in
the city stopped, standing, or parked in violation of any part of this code
regulating or prohibiting parking or traffic shall be prima facie evidence that
the person in whose name the vehicle is registered as owner committed or
authorized the commission of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 70.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Except when another penalty is expressly provided in the provision, any
person violating any provision of this title shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and may be sentenced as provided in §
10.99, upon conviction.
(Prior Code, § 70.99)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Speed limit
   
71.02   Exhibition driving
   
71.03   Inattentive driving
§ 71.01 SPEED LIMIT.
   No person shall drive a vehicle on any street or alley within the city at a
greater speed than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for traffic,
the surface and width of the roadway and other conditions then existing. No
person shall drive a vehicle on any street or alley at a speed in excess of 30
mph, or such other speed as is posted or as is otherwise provided by law. No
person shall drive a vehicle at such a slow rate of speed or in such a manner
so as to impede the normal, reasonable, and lawful flow of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   No person shall start, turn, accelerate, decelerate, or otherwise operate a
motor vehicle on any public or private way or property within the city in any
manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or backfire, squealing of tires,
skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or gravel, or in a manner
simulating a race. Squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or the
throwing of sand or gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 INATTENTIVE DRIVING.
   No person shall operate or halt any motor vehicle upon any public or private
way or property within the city inattentively or imprudently in light of
circumstances then existing, or without reasonable care for the rights of
others or the safety of persons or property.
(Prior Code, § 71.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Definitions
   
72.02   Unauthorized parking
   
72.03   Disable vehicles
   
72.04   Abandoned vehicles
   
72.05   Repair of vehicles; display of vehicles for sale
   
72.06   Impoundment and disposition of motor vehicles
   
72.07   Special parking prohibition for snow removal
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition applies unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. passed 10-10-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 72.02 UNAUTHORIZED PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall park or stand any vehicle upon the private property of
any other person without the consent of the owner, occupant, lessee, or other
person in charge of the property. Nor shall any person park or stand any
vehicle upon any public park or other public property except along any roadway
where parking is permitted or in an area set aside for parking of vehicles.
   (B)   No person shall park or stand any vehicle upon an area set aside for
parking of vehicles in violation of posted parking regulations. Violators of
parking regulations shall be subject to the provisions of §§
10.35 through
10.44 regarding administrative citations.
   (C)   No person shall park any vehicle where temporary signs are posted
reading “no parking - police order” as long as these signs are in place.
   (D)   No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended
or unattended, upon any alley within this municipality; provided that this
shall not prohibit the parking of vehicles for less than a period of one hour
along any alley for the purpose of having access to any property abutting
thereon for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or other material
when access cannot conveniently be secured upon the property itself.
   (E)   The City Council may, from time to time, by motion or resolution,
designate portions of the highways, streets, and public lands within the
corporate limits of this municipality as no parking zones or limited parking
zones and shall cause these zones to be marked by appropriate signs. The
location of signs limiting parking shall be prima facie evidence that the City
Council has, by proper resolution or motion, authorized the establishment of
these no parking or limited parking zones. The City Council shall make a
determination of no parking zones or limited parking zones on the basis of
convenience to the public and traffic hazards. No person shall park any vehicle
in a no parking zone or any limited parking zone for a longer period than is
specified on the signs marking the zones, and violation thereof shall be a
petty offense.
(Ord. passed 10-10-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 9-14-2021) Penalty,
see §
72.99
§ 72.03 DISABLED VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle which becomes disabled while traveling on
any street or alley such that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the vehicle on the street or alley shall move the vehicle
as close to the curb or edge of the roadway as may be done. If the vehicle
cannot be immediately moved or towed away, the driver shall immediately report
the disability to the Police Department.
   (B)   No owner or driver of a vehicle which is disabled shall allow it to
remain upon the traveled portion of any street or alley, or allow a disabled
vehicle to be parked along any street or alley, even though parking of it would
otherwise be lawful, for any longer than is reasonably necessary to cause the
vehicle to be moved or towed away.
(Ord. passed 10-10-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 9-14-2021) Penalty,
see §
72.99
§ 72.04 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   No driver or owner shall abandon any vehicle upon any street, alley, or
public property within the city. The leaving of any vehicle not reasonably
capable of being driven for transportation, or which cannot be driven without
being repaired, upon any street, alley, or public property for more than seven
days is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. Vehicles
determined to be abandoned pursuant to this section shall be subject to the
same impoundment and disposition provisions contained within § 
72.05.
(Ord. passed 10-10-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 9-14-2021) Penalty,
see §
72.99
§ 72.05 REPAIR OF VEHICLES; DISPLAY OF VEHICLES FOR SALE.
   (A)   No person shall repair any vehicle on any street or alley, except to
make emergency repairs necessary to enable removal of the vehicle from the
street or alley.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle on any public street or alley for the
purpose of displaying it for sale or for any sales purpose.
(Ord. passed 10-10-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 9-14-2021) Penalty,
see §
72.99
§ 72.06 IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any person, at the direction of the Chief of Police, is hereby
authorized to remove, or have removed at his or her direction, a vehicle from
any public or private way or place, under any of the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated, the City Council hereby finding and determining such vehicles under
such circumstances to be obstructions to traffic or public nuisances. Such
vehicle is authorized to be removed under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   When a vehicle upon a public way is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of
physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for
its custody or removal;
      (2)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or parked
illegally so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic, or left unattended on any public street with engine
running or with keys in the ignition switch or lock;
      (3)   When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon any area or
portion of a public street in violation of or contrary to a parking limitation
or prohibition established by the City Traffic Engineer, provided such area or
portion of such public street has been posted with an official sign giving
notice both of such limitation or prohibition and of the fact that such area or
portion of such street is a “tow away” area;
      (4)   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any traffic ordinance and
is an obstruction or hazard or potential obstruction or hazard to any lawful
function or limits the normal access to a use of any public or private
property;
      (5)   When a vehicle is left on a public way or place and appears to be
abandoned, or a complaint is received that it is abandoned and remains there
continuously for a period of 72 hours after notice is posted on the windshield
that it will be impounded, or when an automobile hulk or junker is left on
public or private property for such a period;
      (6)   When the driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by the Police
Department and the vehicle would thereby be left unattended upon a street,
highway, or restricted parking area, or other public way;
      (7)   When a vehicle is found being driven upon the streets or other
public way of the city and the same is not equipped with all of the necessary
parts and equipment as required for a fully operational motor vehicle, or does
not meet the standards for the parts or equipment required therein;
      (8)   When the driver of a vehicle is reasonably suspected of using
license plates or a license permit unlawfully, misusing the license plates or
license permit issued to the driver, or a vehicle is driven or parked without
proper license plates or license permit, or with no license plates or license
permit, or driven or parked with an invalid or expired license permit;
      (9)   When the driver of a vehicle is driving without an operator’s
license or chauffeur’s license which is current and valid, or who does not have
such license in the driver’s immediate possession, or who drives a vehicle
contrary to restrictions imposed upon the license, or who drives a vehicle
while his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license has been denied, suspended,
canceled, or revoked by the state;
      (10)   When any vehicle is reasonably suspected of being a stolen
vehicle, or parts thereof to be stolen parts;
      (11)   When the driver of any vehicle is taken into custody for a
suspected felony or misdemeanor, or when the vehicle is suspected of containing
stolen goods, or other contraband; or
      (12)   When any vehicle is parked or stopped in an emergency access lane
in violation of or contrary to a parking limitation or prohibition established
by city ordinance, provided that such emergency access lane has been posted
with an authorized sign giving notice both of such limitation or prohibition
and of the fact that such area or portion of such public roadway or private
property is a “tow away” area.
   (B)   No vehicle may be towed from public property unless a peace officer or
a duly delegated parking enforcement officer has prepared, in addition to the
appropriate citation, a written towing report describing the motor vehicle and
the reason for towing. The report required by this division (B) must be signed
by the officer and the tow driver.
   (C)   (1)   Within five calendar days after the impounding of a vehicle
pursuant to this section, notice that the vehicle has been impounded shall be
given by the Chief of Police to the owner and all readily identifiable lien
holders. The notice shall be made by mailing to the owner thereof at his or her
last known address, as shown by the records of the Commissioner of Public
Safety, a written notice of such impoundment. If it is impossible to determine
with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and
all lien holders, the notice shall be published once in the legal newspaper.
The notice given pursuant to this division (C), whether in writing or by
publication, shall state:
         (a)   The date and place for the taking, the year, make, model, and
serial number for the impounded vehicle, if such information can be reasonably
obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held;
         (b)   Inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim
the vehicle upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from
taking the vehicle into custody; and
         (c)   The failure of the owner of lien holders to exercise their right
to reclaim the vehicle, together with all contents, within the time allowed in
this section, should be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title, and
interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the transfer of title to
and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents pursuant to this section.
      (2)   If a vehicle remains unclaimed after 30 days from the date the
notice was sent pursuant to this division (C), a second notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of
the vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record.
   (D)   Towing and storage charges shall be established by resolution of the
City Council. In addition to the towing and storage charges, clerical and
administrative expenses incurred by the city, and reasonable daily storage
expenses shall be charged.
   (E)   Before the owner or his or her agent or any lien holders shall be
permitted to remove any vehicle impounded pursuant to this section, they shall
furnish satisfactory evidence of the owner’s identity and ownership of said
vehicle. The owner shall pay such fees for the towing and storage of said
vehicle, clerical and administrative expenses, and storage fees as set forth by
the City Council. The owner shall sign a written receipt for said vehicle.
   (F)   No vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released so
long as it is designated as a police “hold” without a written release thereof
from the Chief of Police or a designated representative of the Chief of Police.
   (G)   If, after the notices required by this section have been provided and
a minimum period of 45 days has elapsed from the date that the vehicle and
contents were taken into custody, the Chief of Police, by and through the city,
may proceed to sell the same by sealed bid or by public auction, after first
giving notice of such sale in the official legal newspaper. The notice pursuant
to this section shall be published no less then ten days prior to the date of
such sale as set forth herein. Said notice of sale shall include the time and
place of such sale, stating further whether such sale shall be by sealed bid or
by public auction or both. Records stating with reasonable certainty the
manufacture’s trade name, vehicle identification number, license number,
ownership, if available from the records of the Commissioner of Public Safety,
shall be kept and available for public inspection at the place of sale.
Determination of whether the sale shall be by sealed bid or public auction
shall be left to the discretion of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. passed 10-10-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
§ 72.07 SPECIAL PARKING PROHIBITION FOR SNOW REMOVAL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      SNOW REMOVAL PERIOD. The time from November 1 to March 31 of next year
following.
      STREETS WITH A CURB. Include the area from curb to curb.
      STREETS WITHOUT A CURB. Shall be stopped or parked parallel and (a
minimum of three feet) to the right of the paving, improved, or main traveled
part of the street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this definition.
   (B)   Parking prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person to park or leave
standing a vehicle during the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on all streets
and avenues within the area identified as the city limits each year from
November 1 to March 31 of the next year following.
(Ord. passed 10-10-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 9-14-2021) Penalty,
see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   For any violation of §
72.07, see penalty under §
70.99 regarding petty misdemeanors and also §
10.43 regarding administrative fines.
(Ord. passed 10-10-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Non-Motorized Toy Vehicles
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Prohibited uses
Use of Trails
   
73.15   Definitions
   
73.16   Trail uses
   
73.17   Regulation of operating of bicycles, e-bikes and scooters on trails
   
73.18   Exceptions to motor vehicle exclusion
   
73.19   Use of rest areas
   
73.20   Protection of trails
Special Vehicles
   
73.35   Special vehicles
   
73.36   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
73.37   Motorized foot scooters
   
73.38   Medium-speed electric vehicles and neighborhood electric vehicles
NON-MOTORIZED TOY VEHICLES
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-MOTORIZED SCOOTERS. A two or more wheeled platform that usually has a
handle, and is meant to be stood on. It is also meant to be propelled by manual
power such as feet or hands.
   SKATEBOARD. A four or more wheeled platform that is meant to be propelled by
manual power such as feet or hands.
§ 73.02 PROHIBITED USES.
   It shall be illegal for any person to engage in any of the following
activities:
   (A)   Using any type of skateboard or non-motorized scooter on Lake Avenue;
   (B)   Using any type of skateboard or non-motorized scooter on Main Street
in two blocks of Lake Avenue;
   (C)   Using any type of skateboard or non-motorized scooter on any public
sidewalk within the city;
   (D)   Using any type of skateboard or non-motorized scooter on any city-
owned or leased parking lots within the city;
   (E)   Using any type of skateboard or non-motorized scooter in an unsafe,
careless, or reckless manner or non-restricted public roadways, or in any
manner that could endanger the skateboard/scooter operator, pedestrians, or
other vehicle operators; and/or
   (F)   Using any type of skateboard or non-motorized scooter on private
property without express permission.
Penalty, see §
70.99
USE OF TRAILS
§ 73.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. Any land-based vehicle powered by human muscle.
   CLASS 1 E-BIKE. The CLASS 1 E-BIKE is a pedal assisted bike. The bike’s
motor will support till 20 mph. Then, the motor will automatically cut its
power. A pedal-assisted e-bike means the bike has to be pedaled to activate the
motor. The throttle won’t work separately.
   CLASS 2 E-BIKE. A CLASS 2 E-BIKE is a throttle assisted bike. But, the
throttle will support only 20 mph top speed. A CLASS 2 E BIKE has a separate
throttle control. So, the bike does not have to be pedaled to activate the
motor. Just twist the throttle and the e-bike will run fully on the motor.
   CLASS 3 E-BIKE. CLASS 3 E-BIKES can be called really speedy. These bikes can
reach 28 mph speed. But, it’s a pedal assisted bike. Therefore, to activate the
throttle, the bike has to be pedaled.
   HORSEBACK RIDING. Includes all modes of human travel produced in part by
non-human muscle.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle or gas powered and any vehicle
propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, dune buggies, mini bikes, motorcycles, golf carts, mopeds,
motor scooters, motorized bicycles, and ATVs.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, or association.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
and steered by skis or runners.
   TRAILS. All of the land contained within the area, designated by the city as
part of its recreational trail system.
(Ord. passed 10-8-2024)
§ 73.16 TRAIL USES.
   (A)   Generally. Subject to limitations imposed herein, unless otherwise
specifically provided, the trails of the city are intended to be used for
hiking, bicycling, rollerblading, skateboarding, snowshoeing, cross-country
skiing, e-bikes and electric scooters and generally all forms of non-motorized
recreation.
   (B)   Motor vehicles. No motor vehicles shall be operated upon the trails
unless otherwise excluded in §
73.18.
   (C)   Horseback riding. Horseback riding is not permitted on the trails.
   (D)   Snowmobiles. No snowmobiles shall be operated upon the trails.
   (E)   Traffic control.
      (1)   Trail signs shall be obeyed.
      (2)   Trail users must stay on the right half of the trail when meeting
another trail user.
      (3)   When passing or overtaking another trail user, passing shall occur
on the left and only when such left half is clearly visible and free from
oncoming traffic for sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and
passing to be completed without interfering with the safety of any trail user
approaching from the opposite direction or any trail user being overtaken.
      (4)   Any trail user who is about to enter or cross a trail shall yield
to the right-of-way of any trail user already on the trail to be entered or
crossed.
   (F)   Temporary closing. Temporary closings for aircraft crossing where
permitted by City Council by use of gates and stop signs.
   (G)   Speed limits. Speeds shall be limited to 15 miles per hour on the
Glendalough Trail where the trail starts at the school until the trail meets
North Shore Drive. The balance of the trail along North Shore Drive until it
meets County Road 16 shall be limited to 20 miles per hour.
(Ord. passed 10-8-2024) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.17 REGULATION OF OPERATING OF BICYCLES, E-BIKES AND SCOOTERS ON TRAILS.
   (A)   Manner and number riding. No bicycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped,
except:
      (1)   On a baby seat attached to the bicycle, provided that the baby seat
is equipped with a harness to hold the child securely in the seat and that
protection is provided against the child’s feet hitting the spokes of the
wheel; or
      (2)   In a seat attached to the bicycle operator.
   (B)   Carrying articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handle bars or from properly operating the brakes of the bicycle.
   (C)   Bicycle equipment.
      (1)   No person shall operate a bicycle at nighttime unless the bicycle
or its operator is equipped with a lamp which shall emit a white light visible
from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector of a
type approved by the Department of Public Safety which is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. No person may operate a
bicycle at any time when there is not sufficient light to render persons and
vehicles on the trail clearly discernible at a distance of 500 feet ahead
unless the bicycle or its operator is equipped with reflective surfaces that
shall be visible during the hours of darkness from 600 feet when viewed in
front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. The reflective
surfaces shall include reflective materials on each side of each pedal to
indicate their presence from the front or the rear and with a minimum of 20
square inches of reflective material on each side of the bicycle or its
operator. Any bicycle equipped with side reflectors as required by regulations
for new bicycles prescribed by the United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission shall be considered to meet the requirements for side
reflectorization contained in this division (C). A bicycle may be equipped with
a rear lamp that emits a red flashing signal.
      (2)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a
brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry,
level, clean pavement.
      (3)   No person shall operate upon a trail any bicycle equipped with
handlebars so raised that the operator must elevate the hands above the level
of the shoulders in order to grasp the normal steering grip area.
      (4)   No person shall operate upon a trail any bicycle which is of such a
size as to prevent the operator from stopping the bicycle, supporting it with
at least one foot on the trail surface, and restarting in a safe manner.
      (5)   Electric foot scooters are allowed on the same trails as bicycles,
and operators have the same rights and responsibilities as the operator of a
bicycle, according to state law. The following Minnesota laws are specific to
motorized foot scooters:
         (a)   An electric foot scooter may not carry any additional passengers
besides the operator.
         (b)   No one under age 12 may operate a motorized foot scooter.
         (c)   People under 18 who are using an electric foot scooter must wear
a helmet.
         (d)   Foot scooters with gasoline or other liquid fuel-propelled
motors are prohibited.
   (D)   Turning, lane change. An arm signal to turn right or left shall be
given continuously during the last 100 feet traveled by the bicycle before
turning, unless the arm is needed to control the bicycle, and shall be given
while the bicycle is stopped waiting to turn.
   (E)   Bicycle parking. A bicycle parked on a trail shall not impede the
normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
   (F)   Peace officer operating bicycle. The provisions of this section
governing operation of bicycles do not apply to bicycles operated by peace
officers while performing their duties.
(Ord. passed 10-8-2024) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.18 EXCEPTIONS TO MOTOR VEHICLE EXCLUSION.
   The following motor vehicles are exempt from the general prohibition
contained in §
73.16:
   (A)   Military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement vehicles used for
official or emergency purposes;
   (B)   Vehicles authorized by permit, lease, or contract;
   (C)   Vehicles owned by private persons engaged in the upkeep and
maintenance of the trail systems under the direction of the local unit of
government that manages the trail;
   (D)   Vehicles registered to or operated with the permission of a land owner
on whose lands the trail system has been constructed, but only with respect to
operation on the land of that owner;
   (E)   Segways, hoverboards and other self-balancing devices are defined in
Minnesota law as “electric personal assistive mobility devices.” They are
allowed on paved trails, or wherever pedestrians are allowed. They must be
operated at a speed that is reasonable and prudent under the conditions;
   (F)   Motorized wheelchairs or other motorized devices operated by an
individual who is physically disabled; and
   (G)   Temporary closing for aircraft crossing where permitted by City
Council by use of gates and stop signs.
(Ord. passed 10-8-2024)
§ 73.19 USE OF REST AREAS.
   (A)   Camping. There shall be no overnight camping in rest areas along the
trail.
   (B)   Hunting. No uncased firearm or bow and arrow shall be possessed within
the trail right-of-way at any time. No firearm or bow and arrow shall be
discharged within the trail right-of-way at any time.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.20 PROTECTION OF TRAILS.
   (A)   General. No person shall disturb, destroy, injure, damage, or remove
any property within the trail system including, but not limited to, vegetation,
wildlife, signs, or facilities.
   (B)   Bill posting. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or fix any
placard, bill, notice, or sign upon any structure, tree, stone, fence, or
enclosure within the trail system.
   (C)   Obstructions. No person shall place or cause to remain within the
trail system any obstruction to the free use and enjoyment of the trail. Any
obstruction left on the trail may be removed at the owner’s expense. If an
obstruction of material is removed, and is not claimed and the payment of
expenses offered within a reasonable time, which in no case shall be more than
30 days, it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of M.S. §
16B.25, as it may be amended from time to time, concerning the disposal of lost
or abandoned property.
   (D)   Refuse. No person shall burn or dispose of garbage, refuse, litter, or
trash within the trail right-of-way except in receptacles provided for that
purpose.
Penalty, see §
70.99
SPECIAL VEHICLES
§ 73.35 SPECIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart, utility task
vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck on streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
other public property without obtaining a permit as provided herein.
      (2)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by
the city and shall contain all of the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The nature of the applicant’s physical handicap, if any;
         (c)   Model name, make, and year and number of the motorized golf
cart, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck;
         (d)   Current driver’s license or reason for not having a current
license; and
         (e)   Other information as the city may require.
      (3)   The permit fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 34, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (4)   Permits shall be granted for a period of one year and must be
renewed annually. The license period will be from January of the year to
January of the following year. License fees will not be prorated based on date
of purchase.
      (5)   No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the following
conditions are met.
         (a)   The applicant must demonstrate that he or she currently holds or
has held a valid state driver’s license to operate a mini-truck.
         (b)   The applicant may be required to submit a certificate signed by
a physician that the applicant is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart,
utility task vehicle, or all-terrain vehicle on the roadways designated.
         (c)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance
with the provisions of state statutes concerning insurance coverage for the
golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck. A
certificate of insurance must be provided at the time of permit application.
         (d)   The applicant has not had his or her driver’s license revoked as
the result of criminal proceedings.
      (6)   Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles, all-terrain vehicles,
and mini-trucks are permitted to operate only on city streets, not state or
federal highways, except to cross at designated intersections.
      (7)   Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles, and all-terrain
vehicles may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to sunset.
They shall not be operated in inclement weather conditions or at any time when
there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway
at a distance of 500 feet.
      (8)   Motorized golf carts shall display the slow-moving vehicle emblem
provided for in M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended from time to time, when
operated on designated roadways.
      (9)   Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles, all-terrain vehicles,
and mini-trucks shall be equipped with a rear-view mirror to provide the driver
with adequate vision from behind as required by M.S. § 169.70, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (10)   The operator of a motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-
terrain vehicle, or mini-truck may cross any street or highway intersecting a
designated roadway.
      (11)   Every person operating a motorized golf cart, a utility task
vehicle, an all-terrain vehicle, or a mini-truck under permit on designated
roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other
vehicle under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from
time to time, except when these provisions cannot reasonably be applied to
motorized golf carts or mini-trucks and except as otherwise specifically
provided in M.S. § 169.045, subd.7, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (12)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder
upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of
this section or M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, or if
there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate the motorized
golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck on the
designated roadways.
      (13)   The number of occupants on the golf cart, utility task vehicle,
all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck may not exceed the design occupant load.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over the motorized
golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck and being
the licensee.
      MINI-TRUCK. As defined in M.S. § 169.011, subd. 40(a), as it may be
amended from time to time, a motor vehicle that has four wheels; is propelled
by an electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters
or less; has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds; contains an enclosed
cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator; commonly resembles a pickup truck or
van, including a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle; and was
not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards
required of motor vehicles in the 49 C.F.R. §§ 571.101 to 571.404, as it may be
amended from time to time, and successor requirements. A MINI-TRUCK does not
include: a neighborhood electric vehicle or a medium-speed electric vehicle; or
a motor vehicle that meets or exceeds the regulations in the 49 C.F.R. §
571.500, as it may be amended from time to time.
      MOTORIZED GOLF CART. Any passenger conveyance being driven with four
wheels with four low-pressure tires that is limited in engine displacement of
less than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry weight less than 800 pounds.
      UTILITY TASK VEHICLE. As defined by M.S. § 169.045, subd. 1(3), as it may
be amended from time to time, a side-by-side, four-wheel drive, off-road
vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an internal combustion engine
with a piston displacement capacity of 1,200 cubic centimeters or less, and has
a total dry weight of 1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds.
   (C)   Authorized city staff may operate city-owned motorized golf carts and
mini-trucks without obtaining a permit within the city on city streets,
sidewalks, trails, rights-of-way, and public property when conducting city
business.
   (D)   A mini-truck may be operated under permit on designated roadways if it
is equipped with all of the following:
      (1)   At least two headlamps;
      (2)   At least two tail lamps;
      (3)   Front and rear turn-signal lamps;
      (4)   An exterior mirror mounted on the driver’s side of the vehicle and
either an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger’s side of the vehicle or an
interior mirror;
      (5)   A windshield;
      (6)   A seat belt for the driver and front passenger; and
      (7)   A parking brake.
(Ord. 74, passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 4-8-2023; Ord. 74, passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.36 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A self-balancing device with
two non-tandem wheels, designed to transport not more than one person, and
operated by an electric propulsion system that limits the maximum speed of the
device to 15 mph.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a person operating an electric
personal assistive mobility device has the rights and responsibilities of a
pedestrian.
   (C)   (1)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may be operated
on a bicycle path.
      (2)   No person may operate an electric personal assistive mobility
device on a roadway, sidewalk, or bicycle path at a rate of speed that is not
reasonable and prudent under the conditions. Every person operating an electric
personal assistive mobility device on a roadway, sidewalk, or bicycle path is
responsible for becoming and remaining aware of the actual and potential
hazards then existing on the roadway or sidewalk and must use due care in
operating the device.
      (3)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may be operated on a
roadway only under the following circumstances:
         (a)   While making a direct crossing of a roadway in a marked or
unmarked crosswalk;
         (b)   Where no sidewalk is available;
         (c)   Where a sidewalk is so obstructed as to prevent safe use;
         (d)   When so directed by a traffic control device or by a peace
officer;
         (e)   Temporarily in order to gain access to a motor vehicle; and/or
         (f)   As provided in division (C)(7) below by City Council resolution.
      (4)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may not be operated
at any time on a roadway with a speed limit of more than 35 mph except to make
a direct crossing of the roadway in a marked crosswalk.
      (5)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may not be operated
at any time while carrying more than one person.
      (6)   The City Council may, by resolution, designate exclusive city
streets within its jurisdiction where the operation of electric personal
assistive mobility devices is not permitted, provided that any street so
designated has a speed limit of more than 35 mph.
      (7)   A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device
on a sidewalk must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians at all times. A person
operating an electric personal assistive mobility device on a bicycle path must
yield the right-of-way to bicycles at all times.
      (8)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may not be operated
unless the device bears reflectorized material on the front, back, and wheels,
visible at night from 600 feet when illuminated by the lower beams of headlamps
of a motor vehicle.
(Ord. 74, passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 4-8-2023; Ord. 74, passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.37 MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTER. A device with handlebars designed to be stood or
sat upon by the operator, and powered by an internal combustion engine or
electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human
propulsion, and that has no more than two 12-inch or smaller diameter wheels
and has an engine or motor that is capable of a maximum speed of 15 mph on a
flat surface with not more than 1% grade in any direction when the motor is
engaged. An electric personal assistive mobility device, a motorized bicycle,
an electric-assisted bicycle, or a motorcycle is not a MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTER.
   (B)   Operation of a motorized foot scooter on city bicycle paths, bicycle
lanes, bicycle trails, or bikeways is prohibited except as provided in division
(C) below.
   (C)   The City Council may, by resolution, designate specific bicycle paths,
bicycle lanes, bicycle trails, or bikeways as available for use by motorized
foot scooters.
   (D)   Every person operating a motorized foot scooter shall have all rights
and duties applicable to the operator of a bicycle, except in respect to those
provisions relating expressly to motorized foot scooters and in respect to
those provisions of law that by their nature cannot reasonably be applied to
motorized foot scooters.
   (E)   No person may operate a motorized foot scooter upon a sidewalk, except
when necessary to enter or leave adjacent property. No person may operate a
motorized foot scooter that is carrying any person other than the operator.
   (F)   No person under the age of 12 years may operate a motorized foot
scooter.
   (G)   No person under the age of 18 years may operate a motorized foot
scooter without wearing properly fitted and fastened protective headgear that
complies with standards established by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (H)   A motorized foot scooter must be equipped with a headlight and a
taillight that comply with standards established by the Commissioner of Public
Safety if the vehicle is operated under conditions when vehicle lights are
required by law.
   (I)   A person operating a motorized foot scooter on a roadway shall ride as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except in
the following situations:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction;
      (2)   When preparing for a left turn, in which case the operator shall
stop and dismount at the right-hand curb or right edge of the roadway, and
shall complete the turn by crossing the roadway on foot, subject to
restrictions placed by law on pedestrians; and/or
      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid impediments or conditions that
make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge, including, but
not limited to, fixed or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians,
animals, surface hazards, or narrow lanes.
(Ord. 74, passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 4-8-2023; Ord. 74, passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.38 MEDIUM-SPEED ELECTRIC VEHICLES AND NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MEDIUM-SPEED ELECTRIC VEHICLE. An electrically powered four-wheeled motor
vehicle, equipped with a roll cage or crushproof body design, that can attain a
maximum speed of 35 mph on a paved level surface, is fully enclosed and has at
least one door for entry, has a wheelbase of 40 inches or greater and a wheel
diameter of ten inches or greater, and except with respect to maximum speed,
otherwise meets or exceeds regulations in the 49 C.F.R. § 571.500, as it may be
amended from time to time, and successor requirements.
      NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE. An electrically powered motor vehicle that
has three or four wheels, and has a speed attainable in one mile of at least 20
mph, but not more than 25 mph on a paved level surface.
   (B)   Operation of neighborhood electric vehicles on city streets is
prohibited except as provided in (C) below.
   (C)   The City Council may, by resolution, designate exclusive city streets
within its jurisdiction where the operation of neighborhood electric vehicles
or medium-speed electric vehicles is permissible, provided that no street so
designated has a speed limit of more than 35 mph.
   (D)   A neighborhood electric vehicle or a medium-speed electric vehicle may
be operated on public streets and highways only if it meets all equipment and
vehicle safety requirements in 49 C.F.R. § 571.500, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (E)   Authorized city staff may operate city owned neighborhood electric
vehicles and medium-speed electric vehicles within the city on city streets,
sidewalks, trails, rights-of-way, and public property when conducting city
business.
(Ord. 74, passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 4-8-2023; Ord. 74, passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   NOISE CONTROL
      
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
95.   MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
      
96.   MAILBOXES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Licensing
   
90.03   Tag and collar
   
90.04   Restraint of dogs; confinement of certain animals
   
90.05   Animals creating nuisance prohibited
   
90.06   Impounding animals
   
90.07   Rabies shot required
   
90.08   Dogs in heat
   
90.09   Biting dogs to be quarantined
   
90.10   Cats or animals of allied class
   
90.11   Certain animals regulated
   
90.12   Non-domestic animals
   
90.13   Farm animals
   
90.14   Revocation of license or permit
   
90.15   Potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs
   
90.16   Domesticated animals in city parks
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and
poultry), or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
ANIMALS shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   ANIMALS, DOMESTIC. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated
household pets. Unless otherwise defined, DOMESTIC ANIMALS shall include dogs,
cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish,
non-poisonous, non-venomous, and non-constricting reptiles or amphibians, and
other similar animals.
      (2)   ANIMALS, FARM. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or
performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, FARM
ANIMALS shall include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine
family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese),
swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees, and other animals
associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.
      (3)   ANIMALS, NON-DOMESTIC. Those animals commonly considered to be
naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly
considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of
people. Unless otherwise defined, NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS shall include:
         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family felidae), including
lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards, and jaguars, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated house cats;
         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae),
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated dogs;
         (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet;
         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk
(whether or not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those
members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets;
         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles, and alligators; and
         (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which
can be reasonably defined by the terms of this section, including, but not
limited to, bears, deer, monkeys, and game fish.
   AT LARGE. A dog shall be termed AT LARGE when it is not under restraint, as
defined herein.
   CHICK. A chicken between zero to four weeks.
   CHICKEN. Fowl of the genus Gallus and species gallus domesticus that is
commonly referred to as DOMESTICATED FOWL.
   CHICKEN COOP. Any structure used for the housing of chickens.
   CHICKEN RUN. An outdoor area for the keeping and exercising of chickens.
   HARBORER. Any person who has custody of any dog or cat or permits a dog or
cat to be kept or to stay on or about the HARBORER’S premises.
   LICENSED VETERINARIAN. A person or persons licensed by the state and/or
owning or conducting a veterinary practice within the city.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, or legal entity owning, keeping, or
harboring a dog or cat.
   POLICE. The police officers of the city, or any person, firm, or agency
hired or engaged by the city to assist the police in the performance of their
duties.
   RESTRAINT. A dog is under RESTRAINT if it is controlled by a leash not
exceeding eight feet in length; or if it is under the voice or signal command
of a competent person, providing that the dog will immediately respond to and
obey the voice or signal commands of such person; or if it is within the
boundaries of the owner’s or harborer’s premises.
   ROOSTER. A male chicken.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
§ 90.02 LICENSING.
   (A)   Requirements. No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog or cat within
the city limits unless such dog or cat is licensed as provided herein.
   (B)   Application. Written application shall be made in writing at the
office of the Clerk/Treasurer. The application shall state the name and address
of the owner of the dog or cat, the name, breed, age, sex, and color of the dog
or cat. Initial licensing shall be accompanied by a certificate of vaccination
from a qualified source certifying that the dog or cat has been vaccinated
against rabies, or has received a booster shot therefor, immediately preceding
the application.
   (C)   Fee. The lifetime license fee shall be established by the City Council
in January of each year for the following year for each dog or cat. The
lifetime license fee shall be paid at the time of making the application.
   (D)   Terms of license. All dog(s) and cat(s) owners shall be issued a one-
year license. The license period will be from January of the following year.
License fees will not be prorated based on date of purchase. New residents
moving in to the city shall be allowed 30 days from establishing residence to
obtain a lifetime license for each of their dog(s) or cat(s). For current
residents obtaining a new dog or cat, the lifetime license shall be obtained
within 14 days of obtaining the new dog or cat.
   (E)   Exception. No license shall be required of dogs and cats less than six
months of age.
   (F)   Owner’s responsibility. The owner of each dog or cat that is housed,
kept, or harbored within the city is responsible for maintaining current
vaccinations for all of their dogs or cats.
   (G)   Non-transferable. No license is transferable from one pet to another
or from one owner to another owner. A license is only issued to the specific
pet as identified in the application and only valid for the identified pet.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 TAG AND COLLAR.
   All dogs and cats shall be harnessed or collared. The Clerk/Treasurer shall,
upon issuance of a lifetime license, provide the applicant with a metallic tag
which shall be numbered, and which shall be securely fastened to the animal’s
collar or harness at all times.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 RESTRAINT OF DOGS; CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this code for the dog or cat of any person
who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. Dogs or cats on a
leash and accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by and under the
control and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively
restrained by command as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public
land unless the city has posted an area with signs reading “dogs or cats
prohibited.”
   (B)   The owner or harborer shall confine within a building or secure
enclosure, any fierce, dangerous, or vicious dog or cat, and not permit such
animal out of such confinement unless and until it is securely muzzled and in
control of a competent person.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 ANIMALS CREATING NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which
habitually barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined as barking for
repeated intervals of at least five minutes with less than one minute of
interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow them to
defecate on public property or the property of another without immediately
removing the excrement and disposing of it in a sanitary manner.
(Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
Cross-reference:
   Noisy animals, see §
93.09
§ 90.06 IMPOUNDING ANIMALS.
   (A)   Authority of police. The police, or any other duly appointed person,
may take and impound any animal which is not being kept, confined, or
restrained in a manner consistent with the requirements of this chapter. The
police or appointed person may enter upon private premises, in accordance with
§
10.20, where it appears that there is reasonable cause to believe that an
animal is not being kept, confined, or restrained as herein required.
   (B)   Notice to owner. Immediately upon the impounding of an animal wearing
a current license tag, the police shall make every reasonable effort to notify
the owner or harborer of such impoundment, and of the conditions whereby the
owner or harborer may regain custody of the animal. Verbal notice shall be
immediately confirmed in writing by the police.
   (C)   Reclaiming. Any animal impounded hereunder may be reclaimed by the
owner or harborer of same within five days after receiving notice of
impoundment, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, upon payment to
the Clerk/Treasurer of an impounding fee which shall be established by the City
Council in January of each year, together with the actual costs incurred for
boarding. If the animal is a dangerous animal as defined by law, it shall be
kept for seven regular business days, and if it is a cruelly treated animal as
defined by law, it shall be kept for ten regular business days. If the animal
being reclaimed has no license, and a license is required, a license shall be
issued, and the fee for it paid prior to the release from impoundment.
   (D)   Dogs which cannot be impounded. If an animal is rabid, or otherwise
diseased, vicious, or dangerous, and cannot be impounded after a reasonable
effort or without serious risk to the impounder or others, such animal may be
immediately killed.
   (E)   Destruction. If an animal taken up and impounded has not been
reclaimed within the times specified in division (C) above, then the city may,
at its discretion, destroy or euthanize the animal.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 RABIES SHOTS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or harbor a dog within
the city, if the dog has not had a vaccination for rabies within the time
required under standard veterinary practices. It is the owner’s responsibility
to maintain up to date and current records of rabies vaccinations. Proof of
rabies vaccinations may be requested from time to time from the city. Failure
to provide proof of valid rabies vaccinations as required by the city will be a
violation of this section.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 DOGS IN HEAT.
   Any female dog in heat shall be confined indoors, or impounded for the
duration of her season (oestrus cycle) in a commercial dog kennel, the cost of
which shall be borne by the owner.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 BITING DOGS TO BE QUARANTINED.
   Whenever any dog has bitten a person, the owner or custodian of such dog or
animal, having been so notified, either orally or in writing, shall immediately
quarantine the dog or animal at the owner’s home or other suitable place of
confinement, as directed by the responsible officer of the city for a period of
14 days after the occurrence. During the quarantine period, the animal shall be
securely confined in a building or in a yard enclosed by a fence so constructed
that the animal cannot escape or otherwise leave the enclosure, and which will
not permit other animals or persons to enter, for the purpose of preventing the
animal from biting or otherwise coming in contact with person or other animals.
Upon a reasonable suspicion that the dog may be rabid, the dog shall be
subjected to the necessary tests by a doctor of veterinary medicine for the
purpose of determining if it is infected with rabies. The confinement, testing,
treatment, in addition to all other expenses incurred as the result of a dog
biting a person shall be the expense of the owner of the animal.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 CATS OR ANIMALS OF ALLIED CLASS.
   It shall be the obligation and responsibility of the owner of any animal of
this class to prevent the animal from molesting, defiling, or destroying any
property, public or private. It shall be unlawful for any owner of an animal of
this class to permit or allow the animal to roam or engage in activities which
otherwise constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 CERTAIN ANIMALS REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor in the city any of the following
animals, or animals of allied genera without first obtaining a written
permission therefor from the City Council: horses, cows, sheep, goats, swine,
chickens, ferrets, animals of class reptilia or allied classes which are
venomous or of the constrictor type, birds, or other animals the keeping in
captivity of which is prohibited by law.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer for
sale, any non-domestic animal within the city. Any owner of a non-domestic
animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days in which to
remove the animal from the city, after which time the city may impound the
animal as provided for in this chapter. An exception shall be made to this
prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually providing
assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals brought into
the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research
laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.
(Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 FARM ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep, maintain, or harbor farm animals other than farm
poultry within the city.
   (B)   Farm poultry shall only be kept in an agricultural district of the
city, or on one residential lot (single parcel) of at least 20 acres in size
provided that no animal shelter shall be within 300 feet of an adjoining piece
of property. An exception shall be made to this section for those animals
brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic,
scientific research laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition. No more than
ten chickens may be kept, maintained, or harbored per permit and only one
permit may be issued per parcel.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain, possess, or
otherwise control any chicken within the city without a permit issued by the
city.
   (D)   An application for a permit hereunder shall be filed with the City
Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee upon an application form furnished by
the city. The permit fee, which shall be paid and filed with the permit
application, shall be in an amount established by City Council resolution. A
permit issued hereunder shall be for the duration of two years from the date of
issuance. The initial permit application shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
      (1)   The full name and address of the following persons:
         (a)   The applicant signed thereto; and
         (b)   The owner(s) of the premises on which chickens are sought to be
kept and for which the permit would apply.
      (2)   The street address of the premises on which chickens are sought to
be kept;
      (3)   The number of chickens sought to be kept on the premises, up to a
maximum of ten;
      (4)   A detailed sketch plan of the premises on which chickens are sought
to be kept. The sketch plan shall include: the location of the residence on the
premises; the location of accessory structures on the premises; and the
location, dimensions, and design of the chicken coop and chicken run and
setbacks to the side and rear property lines. The information regarding the
coop and run shall establish compliance with the chicken coop and chicken run
specifications provided in this section;
      (5)   A statement certifying whether the property’s homeowners’
association rules, if any, prohibit the keeping of chickens on the property for
which the application sought;
      (6)   If the applicant is not the fee owner of the premises on which the
chickens are sought to be kept and for which the permit would apply, the
application shall be signed by all fee owners of the premises; and
      (7)   Any other and further information the city deems necessary.
   (E)   At least 30 days prior to the expiration of the current permit, the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, on a
form prepared by the city, an application for permit renewal. There shall not
be a fee for a timely filed application for permit renewal. The renewal permit
application shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The number of chickens the applicant currently maintains on the
property;
      (2)   Confirmation that the chicken coop and chicken run remain in the
same location on the premises. If the applicant seeks to move the location of
the structure, the applicant shall file an initial permit application and pay
the permit fee therefor; and
      (3)   Any other and further information the city deems necessary.
   (F)   The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee may grant an initial
or renewal permit under this section; however, a permit may not be issued or
renewed unless the application filed demonstrates compliance with the
requirements of this division (F). A permit shall not be issued or renewed
until the city inspects and approve the premises, including the chicken coop
and chicken run, at which chickens are sought to be kept. At the city’s
discretion, the inspection may occur through the review of documentation and
photos specified by the city. The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee
shall deny a permit hereunder for any of the following reasons.
      (1)   The application is incomplete or contains false, fraudulent, or
deceptive statements.
      (2)   The applicant does not or has not complied with one or more of the
provisions of this section.
      (3)   The premises for which the permit is sought, including, but not
limited to, the proposed or existing chicken coop or chicken run, is not in
compliance with any provisions of this section, other city code provisions, or
state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building, or safety.
      (4)   The proposed chicken coop or chicken run would result in a
violation of or be inconsistent with the accessory structure zoning regulations
elsewhere in this code.
      (5)   The applicant or owner of the premises where the chickens are to be
kept has been convicted of a violation under this section or a similar
regulation of this state or political subdivision thereof.
      (6)   The applicant does not own or lease the chickens proposed to be
kept on the premises.
      (7)   The applicant is not the occupant of the premises for which the
permit is sought to be issued.
   (G)   A permit granted under this section shall be subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   The owner of the chickens must occupy the premises for which the
permit is issued.
      (2)   The premises, including the chicken coop and chicken run thereon,
for which a permit is issued shall at all reasonable times be open to
inspection by the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee or any other city
official, in accordance with §
10.20, to determine compliance with this section, other city code provisions,
and state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building, or safety.
      (3)   A permit issued hereunder shall be nontransferable. It is unlawful
to keep, harbor, maintain, possess, or otherwise control any chicken on
property that is not identified on the permit.
      (4)   All feed for the chickens shall be stored in metal, water-tight,
vermin-proof containers with properly fitting lids.
      (5)   A chicken coop and chicken run are required. The construction and
location of the chicken coop and chicken run shall be in compliance with the
applicable building and zoning regulations of the city and the following
requirements.
         (a)   The interior floor space of the chicken coop shall be a minimum
size of four square feet for each chicken authorized under the permit.
         (b)   The chicken coop and chicken run shall be professionally
constructed or of similar construction standards and materials. The exterior
finish materials of the chicken coop shall be:
            1.   Weather-resistant, protective covering material, decay-
resistant wood, or if exterior finish wood is not decay resistant, then the
wood finish shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or
protective covering (e.g., siding, fascia wrap); and
            2.   In accordance with the accessory structure regulations set
forth in the zoning regulations in this code.
         (c)   The construction of and materials used for the chicken coop and
chicken run must be adequate to prevent access by rodents.
         (d)   The chicken run shall be attached to the chicken coop. The
chicken coop and run shall be deemed as a single accessory structure and
subject to the accessory structure regulations set forth in the zoning
regulations of this code.
         (e)   The floor area of the chicken run shall be a minimum size of ten
square feet for each chicken authorized under the permit.
         (f)   The total square footage of the chicken coop and chicken run
shall not exceed 200 square feet.
         (g)   The chicken run shall be fully enclosed by fencing or other
similar material and may include a roof instead of fencing over the top of the
run.
         (h)   The chicken coop and chicken run shall be located on the
premises in compliance with the following setbacks:
            1.   At least ten feet from the rear lot line;
            2.   At least ten feet from the side lot lines; and
            3.   The chicken coop and chicken run shall be closer to the
residence on the permitted property than an inhabitable building on a
neighboring property.
         (i)   The chicken coop and chicken run, or any portion thereof, shall
not be located in the FRONT YARD, which is defined as any area located between
the front lot line and the front setback line or front building line, whichever
is further from the front lot line, running from side lot line to side lot
line.
         (j)   The chicken coop and chicken run shall be kept in good repair as
to be in compliance with the property maintenance regulations elsewhere in this
code.
         (k)   The chicken coop and chicken run shall be kept in a sanitary and
odor-free condition, including the regular and frequent removal and proper
disposal of any accumulated chicken feces or waste, dirt, or filth that could
create a safety or health hazard. Composting of chicken feces and waste is
prohibited.
         (l)   The chicken coop and chicken run shall be immediately removed
when:
            1.   A permit granted under this section expires or is revoked; or
            2.   When the chicken coop and chicken run are no longer used for
harboring chickens.
      (6)   The keeping, harboring, maintaining, or possessing of any chicken
under a permit issued pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with the
following.
         (a)   No more than ten chickens shall be kept or harbored on the
premises to which the permit applies.
         (b)   Roosters are prohibited.
         (c)   Slaughtering of chickens on any property zoned for residential
or institutional use is prohibited except for educational purposes.
         (d)   No chickens shall be kept, maintained, housed, or permitted
inside any residential dwelling or any garage.
         (e)   Chickens shall be kept in the chicken coop or chicken run at all
times. When transferring a chicken into or out of the coop or run, the chicken
shall be transported in a fully enclosed container, such as a cage.
         (f)   Chickens shall not be kept in such a manner as to constitute a
public nuisance. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed a public nuisance.
         (g)   No chicken eggs shall be sold or offered for sale; all chicken
eggs shall be for personal use or consumption.
      (7)   A violation of any provision of this section or any provisions of
the permit issued hereunder shall constitute grounds for revocation of a
permit.
(Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   The failure of any owner to comply with the requirements of this chapter
shall constitute grounds for the immediate revocation of any license or permit
issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
§ 90.15 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. Any agency of the state, county, municipality,
or other governmental subdivision of the state which is responsible for animal
control operations in its jurisdiction.
      ATTACK. The deliberate action of a dog, whether or not in response to a
command by a person, to bite, to seize with its teeth, or to pursue any human,
animal, or inanimate object, with the intent to destroy, kill, wound, injure,
or otherwise harm the object of its action.
      DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that has:
         (a)   Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;
         (b)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the
owner’s property; or
         (c)   Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      GREAT BODILY HARM. Has the meaning given to it under M.S. § 609.02, subd.
8, as it may be amended from time to time.
      OWNER. Any person keeping, harboring, or having control of, or permitting
any animal habitually to be or remain on, or be lodged or fed within, such
person’s house, yard, premises, excluding veterinarians or kennel operators
temporarily maintaining on their premises, for a period of 30 days or less,
animals owned by others.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that:
         (a)   When unprovoked, inflicts a bite on a human or domestic animal
on public or private property;
         (b)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private
property, other than the dog owner’s property, in an apparent attitude of
attack; or
         (c)   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury, or otherwise threatens the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
      PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed
to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure
sides and a secure top and shall provide protection from the elements for the
animal. A PROPER ENCLOSURE does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a
house, garage, or other structure that would allow the animal to exit of its
own volition, or any house or structure in which the windows are open or in
which door or window screens are the only obstacles that prevent the animal
from exiting.
      PROVOCATION. An act that an adult could reasonably expect may cause a dog
to attack or bite.
   (B)   Potentially dangerous dogs; declaration of a potentially dangerous
dog.
      (1)   Declaration. A city animal control officer or other law enforcement
official may declare that a dog is a potentially dangerous animal if the animal
has:
         (a)   Without provocation, inflicted bite(s) on a human or domestic
animal on public or private property;
         (b)   Without provocation, chased or approached a person upon the
streets, sidewalks, or other public or private property, other than the dog
owner’s property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or
         (c)   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
without provocation, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.
      (2)   Notice of declaration of potentially dangerous dog to owner. Upon a
determination by an animal control officer or other law enforcement official
that a dog is potentially dangerous, the city shall serve notice of the
potentially dangerous dog designation on the owner of such dog. Notice shall be
served upon the owner of the dog personally or by certified mail. Service upon
any owner is effective as to all owners. The notice must include:
         (a)   A description of the dog and the authority and purpose for the
potentially dangerous dog declaration; the time, place, and circumstances that
resulted in the dog being declared a potentially dangerous dog; and the
telephone number of the person who made the declaration that the dog is a
potentially dangerous animal;
         (b)   A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing
concerning the potentially dangerous dog declaration, and that failure to do so
within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a
hearing under this section;
         (c)   A statement that if an appeal request is made within 14 days of
the notice, the owner must immediately comply with the requirements of this
section regarding potentially dangerous dogs and continue to do so until such
time as the hearing officer issues an opinion on the appeal;
         (d)   A form to request a hearing under this division (B);
         (e)   A statement that any hearing must be held within 14 days of the
request to determine that validity of the potentially dangerous dog
declaration. The hearing officer must be an impartial employee of the local
government or an impartial person retained by the local government to conduct
the hearing;
         (f)   A statement that in the event the potentially dangerous dog
declaration is upheld by the hearing officer, actual expense of the hearing up
to a maximum of $1,000 will be the responsibility of the dog’s owner; and
         (g)   A statement that the hearing officer shall issue a decision in
the matter within ten days after the hearing, and that the decision must be
delivered to the dog’s owner by hand delivery or registered mail as soon as
practical, and a copy must be provided to the city’s animal control authority.
   (C)   Dangerous dog.
      (1)   Declaration of a dangerous dog. A city animal control officer or
other law enforcement official may determine that a dog is a dangerous dog if
the animal has:
         (a)   Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;
         (b)   Killed or caused substantial bodily harm to a domestic animal
without provocation while off the owner’s property; or
         (c)   Been previously found to be potentially dangerous and, after the
owner had notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively
bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      (2)   Notice of declaration of dangerous dog to owner. Notice shall be
served upon the owner of the dog personally or by posting a copy of it at the
place where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a person residing on the
property; and telephoning, if possible. Service upon any owner is effective as
to all owners. The notice must include:
         (a)   A description of the seized dog; the authority for and purpose
of the dangerous dog declaration and seizure; the time, place, and
circumstances under which the dog was declared dangerous; and the telephone
number and contact person where the dog is kept;
         (b)   A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing
concerning the dangerous dog declaration and that failure to do so within 14
days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a hearing
under this section;
         (c)   A statement that if an appeal request is made within 14 days of
the notice, the owner must immediately comply with the requirements of this
section and M.S. § 347.52, paragraphs (a) and (c), as they may be amended from
time to time, and continue to do so until such time as the hearing officer
issues an opinion on the appeal;
         (d)   A statement that if the hearing officer affirms the dangerous
dog declaration, the owner will have 14 days from receipt of the decision to
comply with all requirements of M.S. §§ 347.51, 347.515, and 347.52, as they
may be amended from time to time;
         (e)   A form to request a hearing under this division (C)(2); and
         (f)   A statement that all actual costs of care, keeping, and
disposition of the dog are the responsibility of the person claiming an
interest in the dog, except to the extent that a court or hearing officer finds
that the seizure or impoundment was not substantially justified by law.
      (3)   Hearing. Any hearing must be held within 14 days of the request to
determine the validity of the dangerous dog declaration. The hearing officer
must be an impartial employee of the local government or an impartial person
retained by the local government to conduct the hearing. In the event the
dangerous dog declaration is upheld by the hearing officer, actual expenses of
the hearing up to a maximum of $1,000 will be the responsibility of the dog’s
owner. The hearing officer shall issue a decision in the matter within ten days
after the hearing. The decision must be delivered to the dog’s owner by hand
delivery or registered mail as soon as practical, and a copy must be provided
to the animal control authority.
      (4)   Registration. No person may own, keep, possess, harbor, maintain,
or otherwise have a dangerous dog in the city unless the dog is currently
registered as provided in this section. Registration must be completed within
14 days after the owner’
      (5)   Certificate of registration. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue
an annual certificate of registration to the owner of the dangerous dog if the
owner presents sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   Payment has been made for the annual dangerous dog registration
fee, which shall be fixed, determined, and amended by the City Council and
adopted by resolution;
         (b)   An owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall keep the dog in a
proper enclosure that has been inspected and approved by the city;
         (c)   All owners of dangerous dogs within the city shall display in a
prominent place on their property a warning symbol approved by the State
Commissioner of Public Safety to inform children that there is a dangerous dog
on the property. The warning symbol must be the uniform symbol provided by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The animal control authority may charge the
registrant a reasonable fee to cover costs related to obtaining an appropriate
warning symbol. In addition, a similar symbol is required to be posted on the
proper enclosure of such animal;
         (d)   A dangerous dog must have a standardized, easily identifiable
tag identifying the dog as dangerous and containing the uniform dangerous dog
symbol acquired by the city affixed to the dog’s collar at all times. The tag
shall be of the design approved by the State Commissioner of Public Safety;
         (e)   An owner of a dangerous dog shall obtain a surety bond issued by
a surety company authorized to conduct business in this state in an amount of
at least $300,000 payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog, or a
policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to
conduct business in this state in an amount of at least $300,000 insuring the
owner for any personal injury inflicted by the dangerous dog; and
         (f)   All owners of dogs declared dangerous shall cause the dog to be
implanted with a microchip for identification and provide the city animal
control officer with the name of the microchip manufacturer and the serial
identification number of the implanted microchip. If the microchip is not
implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the animal control authority. In
either case, all costs related to purchase and implanting of the microchip must
be borne by the dog’s owner.
      (6)   Sterilization. Upon designation of a dog as dangerous, the animal
control officer shall require the owner to cause the dog to be sterilized at
the owner’s expense and provide the city animal control authority with proof
thereof, including the name, address, and telephone number of the veterinarian
who performed the procedure, within 30 days of the date the dog was determined
to be dangerous. If the owner does not have the animal sterilized within 30
days, the animal control authority shall seize the dog and have it sterilized
at the owner’s expense.
      (7)   Review of designation. Beginning six months after a dog has been
declared a dangerous dog, an owner may request annually that the animal control
authority review the designation. The owner must provide evidence that the
dog’s behavior has been changed due to the dog’s age, neutering, environment,
completion of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive
behavior, or other factors. If the animal control authority finds sufficient
evidence that the dog’s behavior has changed, the authority may rescind the
dangerous dog designation.
   (D)   Leash and muzzle. An owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog
shall keep the dog, when not confined in a proper enclosure, muzzled and
restrained by a leash not longer than four feet, and under the physical
restraint of a responsible person.
   (E)   Microchip identification. The owner of a dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog must have a microchip implanted in the dog for identification,
and the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the
microchip must be provided to the animal control authority. If the microchip is
not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the animal control
authority. In either case, all costs related to purchase and implantation of
the microchip must be borne by the dog’s owner.
   (F)   Exemption. A dog shall not be declared a potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person:
      (1)   Who was committing, at the time, an unlawful trespass or other tort
upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog;
      (2)   Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or
who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused,
or assaulted the dog; or
      (3)   Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (G)   Law enforcement exemption. The provisions of this section do not apply
to dogs used by law enforcement officials for law enforcement work.
   (H)   Appeal of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog designation. Within
14 days after receipt of notice of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog
declaration, the owner may request a hearing to appeal the designation. The
request must be in writing filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (I)   Appeal hearing procedure.
      (1)   Setting hearing date. In the event an appeal is filed with the City
Clerk/Treasurer, a hearing shall be scheduled within two weeks of the date the
request for appeal is received.
      (2)   Notice of hearing date. In the event that an appeal is filed,
notice shall be mailed to the owner stating the date, time, place, and subject
of the hearing.
      (3)   Designated hearing officer. The City Clerk/Treasurer or a
designated hearing officer shall convene a hearing, at which time, the dog
owner shall have the opportunity to present evidence and testimony to support
the appeal of the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog designation. The
hearing officer may receive evidence and testimony from the animal control
officer or law enforcement official and other parties who wish to be heard.
      (4)   Written recommendation. Upon receiving the evidence and testimony,
the hearing officer shall make a written recommendation to the City Council
which may confirm or rescind the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog
designation.
   (J)   Confiscation.
      (1)   Seizure. The animal control officer or law enforcement official
shall immediately seize any potentially dangerous and dangerous dog if, after
14 days after the owner has notice of the designation and the owner has not
filed an appeal of the designation, and:
         (a)   The dog is not validly registered under this section;
         (b)   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure;
         (c)   The dog is outside the proper enclosure and not under physical
restraint of a responsible person as required under this section;
         (d)   The owner does not secure the proper surety bond or liability
insurance as required under this section; or
         (e)   The owner is required to sterilize the dog and fails to do so.
      (2)   Reclamation. An owner may reclaim a potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog seized under this section by paying impounding and boarding fees
and presenting proof to the city that the requirements of this section have
been met. The city may dispose of a dog not reclaimed within seven days, and
the owner is liable to the city for the costs incurred in confining and
disposing of the dog.
   (K)   Destruction of dog in certain circumstances. A dog that has previously
been declared a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog that inflicts
substantial or great bodily harm on a human being on public or private property
without provocation may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner by the
animal control officer. The animal control officer may not destroy the dog
until the dog owner has had an opportunity for a hearing on an appeal under the
provision of this section. Upon determination following appeal that destruction
is appropriate, the owner of the dangerous dog shall pay the costs incurred in
confiscation, boarding, and destruction.
   (L)   Fees. The city may charge the owner an annual fee in addition to any
regular dog license, to obtain a certificate of registration for a potentially
dangerous or dangerous dog under this section. Fees may also be charged for
signs and tags that are designated as the official symbol of a potentially
dangerous or dangerous dog. Annual fees for registration, signs, and tags may
be set by resolution of the City Council and amended by City Council Resolution
from time to time.
   (M)   Notice of dog’s removal. An owner of a potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog must notify the animal control officer, in writing, of the death
of the dog or its transfer to a new owner or jurisdiction within 30 days of the
death or transfer. The owner shall provide the animal control officer, the
name, address, and telephone number of the new owner, or address where the dog
will reside in the new jurisdiction. An animal that has been removed from the
city pursuant to this provision may not re-enter the city. If a dangerous dog
is removed from the city, it must be registered as a dangerous dog in its new
jurisdiction.
   (N)   Notice to property owner. A person who owns a potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog and who rents property from another where the dog will reside,
must disclose to the property owner prior to entering the lease agreement, and
at the time of any lease renewal, that the person owns a potentially dangerous
or dangerous dog that will reside on the property.
   (O)   Notice on transfer. A person who transfers ownership of a dangerous
dog must notify the new owner that the animal control authority has identified
the animal as dangerous. The current owner must also notify the animal control
authority in writing of the transfer of ownership and provide the animal
control authority with the new owner’s name, address, and telephone number.
(Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN CITY PARKS.
   (A)   In order to maintain the comfort, safety, and cleanliness of our city
parks and beach areas, it shall be unlawful for any person to bring, keep, or
allow any domesticated animal, whether leashed or unleashed, into city parks
where signs prohibit such activity.
   (B)   In a designated park where signs allow domesticated animals, the city
will provide a waste station so that owners or keepers of domesticated animals
may clean up after them.
(Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The first violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be a petty
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $50. A second violation within six months
of the first violation shall be a petty misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
$100. A third violation within six months of the second violation shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.
   (B)   A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large
in violation of §
90.04(A) shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 12-11-2018; Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
External Solid Fuel-Fired Heating Devices
   
91.01   Purpose
   
91.02   Applicability
   
91.03   Definitions
   
91.04   Permit required
   
91.05   Other requirements
   
91.06   Liability
 
   
91.99   Penalty
EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICES
§ 91.01 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is intended to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the city by regulating the air pollution and fire
hazards of outdoor fire boilers.
§ 91.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to all outdoor fire boilers within the city.
   (B)   This subchapter does not apply to grilling or cooking food using
charcoal, wood, propane, or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
   (C)   This subchapter does not apply to burning for the purpose of
generating heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace, or other heating device within
a building used for human or animal habitation.
   (D)   This subchapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene,
natural gas, gasoline, or kerosene in a device intended for heating,
construction, or maintenance activities.
   (E)   This subchapter does not apply to campfires; a small outdoor fire
intended for recreation or cooking but not including a fire intended for
disposal of waste wood or refuse.
§ 91.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICE. A device designed for external
solid fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived for the interior of a
building and includes solid fuel-fired stoves, solid fuel-fired cooking stoves,
and combination fuel furnaces or boilers which burn solid fuel. SOLID FUEL-
FIRED HEATING DEVICES do not include natural gas-fired fireplace logs or wood-
burning fireplaces or wood stoves in the interior of a dwelling.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, company, or other
association.
   REFUSE or GARBAGE. Any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps,
leaves, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter. This would include, but
not be limited to, food wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint
or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition
debris, or other household or business wastes; asphalt and products containing
asphalt; treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished, or
treated with preservatives; any plastic material including, but not limited to,
nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam and synthetic fabrics, plastic
films, and plastic containers; rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like
products.
   STACKS or CHIMNEYS. Any vertical structure incorporated into a building and
enclosing a flue or flues that carry off smoke or exhaust from a solid fuel-
fired heating device, especially the part of such a structure extending above a
roof.
§ 91.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The city requires any person to obtain a permit for any external solid
fuel-fired heating device or external storage unit that is sold, purchased, or
installed after this subchapter becomes effective.
   (B)   Installation should be made and inspected by a licensed contractor who
is knowledgeable about the type of system being installed.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All external solid fuel-fired heating devices, used, installed, or
purchased within the city limits are required to meet emission standards
currently required by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
Underwriters Laboratories (UL) listing. No person shall use an external solid
fuel-fired heating device in violation of this division (A).
   (B)   All outdoor external solid fuel-fired heating devices and storage
units are subject to public nuisances as described in Chapter 92.
   (C)   Any dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, and soot or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities, or any use of an external solid fuel-fire heating
device to burn solid fuels other than those solid fuels for which the external
solid fuel-fired heating device was designed, is declared a public nuisance.
   (D)   The outdoor external solid fuel-fired heating devices shall not be
located less than 50 feet from any combustible or structures. Clearance may be
reduced to 20 feet provided that the unit is enclosed in a noncombustible
building (steel or concrete). The outdoor external solid fuel-fired heating
device shall be located at least 500 feet from the nearest building which is
not on the same property as the unit. Persons should check with their
individual insurance carrier for any required limits that do not comply with
this division (D) and inform the City Clerk/Treasurer’s office of individual
policy requirements.
   (E)   All stack or chimneys must be so constructed to withstand high winds
or other related elements and according to the specifications of the
manufacturer of the external solid fuel-fired heating device. The stack height
shall be a minimum of 20 feet (maximum 40 feet) above ground level, but shall
also extend at least as high as the height of the roofs of residents within 500
feet. All stacks or chimneys must be of masonry or insulated metal with a
minimum six-inch flue. A factory-built or masonry chimney with a spark arrester
screen is also required. No person shall use an external solid fuel-fired
heating device in violation of this division (E).
   (F)   Only fuels designed for burning in an external solid fuel-fired
heating device may be burned. No garbage or refuse may be burned in an external
solid fuel-fired heating device. No person shall use an external solid fuel-
fired heating device in violation of this division (F).
   (G)   Ashes removed from a wood heating appliance may contain hot (live)
embers which remain live for days. Ashes must be placed in a metal container
equipped with a lid or cover.
   (H)   Wood/fuel must be stored at least 48 inches away from the external
solid fuel-fired heating device. The areas surrounding said unit must be kept
clear of combustibles or wood chips, bark, and debris.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 LIABILITY.
   A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire boiler shall be
responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting
from damage caused by the fire.
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating a provision of §§
91.01 through
91.06 is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine per occurrence
plus the costs of prosecution in any case.
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
Refuse, Junk, and Nuisance Regulation
   
92.01   Findings
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Public nuisance
   
92.04   Refuse storage
   
92.05   Dumping prohibited
   
92.06   Junk storage
   
92.07   Exterior of structures
   
92.08   Additional unlawful acts
   
92.09   Enforcement
   
92.10   Weeds; generally
   
92.11   Fish house and dark house
Trees, Grass, and Weeds
   
92.25   Authority and purpose
   
92.26   Definitions
   
92.27   Responsibilities of city and private property owners
   
92.28   Tree planting, maintenance, and removal
   
92.29   Tree protection
   
92.30   Claims
   
92.31   Tall grass and weeds
   
92.32   Personal liability
   
92.33   Assessment
 
   
92.99   Penalty
REFUSE, JUNK, AND NUISANCE REGULATION
§ 92.01 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that unregulated deposit and storage of junk and
unregulated storage and non-mandatory collection of refuse are not only
potential, but immediate habitat for rodents, the spread of noxious weeds and
other hazardous conditions of decay which are unsanitary, unhealthy, and an
ecological blight. The City Council further finds that such hazardous
conditions must not only be halted in the future, but also corrected for the
present. The City Council recognizes that the regulations, prohibitions, and
remedies provided for herein are bold steps, but absolutely essential to the
health of the residents and ecology of the community.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. passed 1-8-2019)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK.
      (1)   All unregistered, unlicensed, or inoperable (including, but not
limited to, the lack of major component parts) motor vehicles, motorized
vehicles, equipment, bicycles, boats, outboard motors, or trailers, or parts or
components thereof;
      (2)   All inoperable (including, but not limited to, the lack of major
component parts) agricultural implements or parts or components thereof,
machines and mechanical equipment of all kinds or parts or components thereof,
and by-products or waste from manufacturing operations of all kinds;
      (3)   All used lumber or waste resulting from building construction,
renovation, remodeling, or demolition;
      (4)   All felled trees and tree branches that are not immediately
processed into lumber, wood for fuel, fence components, or other such ultimate
use; or
      (5)   All old or scrap metal, plastic, rubber, or other material, yard
waste, demolition waste, hazardous waste, tires, white goods, or solid waste:
         (a)   To be dumped, thrown, scattered, or deposited upon any public or
private land within the city; or
         (b)   To be deposited in one or more garbage cans, dumpsters, or other
containers for waste containment, processing, or removal unless the material is
from a source from which the container is designated to receive such material.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE.
      (1)   Maintaining or permitting a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of the
public;
      (2)   Interfering with, obstructing, or rendering dangerous for passage
any street, public right-of-way, or waters used by the public;
      (3)   Any other act or omission declared by law to be a public nuisance;
      (4)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after
the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall; and
      (5)   Placing snow on city streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, or
any other public property without approval from the city.
   PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH. Nuisances affecting health where an
unreasonable, unwarrantable, or unlawful use by a person of his or her personal
property causes another individual or the general public to be consequently
damaged, including:
      (1)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
      (2)   All diseased animals running at large;
      (3)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water having noxious odors or
determined to harbor disease or pose a danger of infection;
      (4)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
      (5)   Accumulation of manure, refuse, or other debris;
      (6)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-
tight, or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit
foul and disagreeable odors;
      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal,
or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances;
      (8)   All noxious weeds, unmowed grass in excess of ten inches, and other
rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property, except areas which
are not accessible for periods in excess of ten days due to ponding of water;
      (9)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, and soot or cinders in
unreasonable quantities; and
      (10)   Burning of household garbage.
   REFUSE.
      (1)   All organic and inorganic material resulting from the manufacture,
preparation, or serving of food or food products;
      (2)   Spoiled, decayed, or waste food from any source;
      (3)   Bottles, cans, glassware, paper or paper products, crockery, ashes,
rags, and discarded clothing;
      (4)   Tree, lawn, or bush clippings, and weeds;
      (5)   Furniture, household furnishings, or appliances, or parts or
components thereof; and
      (6)   Human or household waste of all kinds not included in any other
portion of this definition.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. passed 1-8-2019)
§ 92.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   It is unlawful for any person or entity to permit or maintain a public
nuisance upon any premises.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 REFUSE STORAGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or entity to store refuse within the
city for a continuous period in excess of seven days.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, it shall not be
unlawful for grass clippings, leaves, garden and yard wastes to be composted on
the premises from which they were collected, nor for the city to operate a
community collection spot for such materials.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 DUMPING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cause or permit dumping of garbage, trash, refuse, cans,
paper, ashes, junk, or junk vehicles.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 JUNK STORAGE.
   It is unlawful for any person or entity to park or store junk on any
premises unless it is housed within a completely enclosed building or on duly
licensed junk dealer premises, or within the confines of a fence, which fence
shall be at least six feet high as measured from ground elevation to top of
fence. Any such fence shall be constructed of wood, metal, concrete, or similar
materials which do not permit viewing of the interior of the fenced area from
external view, and shall be so constructed such that the same does not permit
the junk therein confined from escaping said area by force of wind, rain, snow,
or sleet, seeping, erosion, fire, or flood.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 EXTERIOR OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The exterior, including all painted surfaces, of all structures and
accessory structures, including detached garages, shall be maintained in a
workmanlike state of maintenance and repair.
   (B)   Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting
boards or timbers, and falling or loose stucco.
   (C)   All doors and windows shall be maintained in good repair, fit
reasonably well within their frames, and be free of open breaks or holes.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 ADDITIONAL UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or entity to deposit offal of the body
of a dead animal in any place other than a sanitary landfill or other
facilities approved by statute or ordinance.
   (B)   It is a misdemeanor for any person or entity to store, deposit, or
dispose of any refuse which is in flames or heated to the point of danger or
fire.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   If any person or entity fails or refuses to comply with this subchapter, the
city may, upon reasonable notice in writing, personally given or mailed to the
owner of such premises via first class mail at the address appearing on the tax
rolls, and as an additional and not alternate to any other remedy provided
herein, abate the violation, physically remove any junk disposing of it as
valueless, and certify all costs thereof to the County Auditor to be applied to
the tax rolls as a special assessment on the subject property. Notice by first
class mail is deemed to have been delivered upon mailing.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. passed 1-8-2019)
§ 92.10 WEEDS; GENERALLY.
   (A)   Weeds prohibited. No person owning, occupying, or in control of any
property in the city shall permit any ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison
sumac, or any other noxious weed to grow upon the property.
   (B)   Weed Inspector. Pursuant to the requirements of M.S. § 18.79, as it
may be amended from time to time, the Mayor shall be the Weed Inspector. The
Weed Inspector may appoint one or more assistant weed inspectors who shall have
all the powers and authority of the Weed Inspector. The Weed Inspector shall
have such powers and duties as are provided by law, by administrative
regulation, or by this code.
   (C)   Eradication. Whenever any person fails to cut, destroy, or otherwise
eradicate any weeds prohibited in division (A) above, or any other weeds
prohibited by law, the Weed Inspector may cause the weeds to be cut, destroyed,
or otherwise eradicated. In doing so, the Weed Inspector shall give notice to
the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the property in accordance with the
requirements of M.S. § 18.83, as it may be amended from time to time, and other
applicable laws. The cost and expense of the work done shall be a charge due to
the city from the person or persons notified and, if the owner was notified,
shall be a lien in favor of the city and may be collected in the manner
specified in M.S. § 18.83, as it may be amended from time to time, and other
applicable laws.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 FISH HOUSE AND DARK HOUSE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DARK HOUSE. A structure set on the ice of state waters that is darkened
to view fish in the water beneath the surface.
      FISH HOUSE. A structure set on the ice of state waters to provide shelter
while taking fish by angling.
   (B)   Public nuisance prohibited, temporary parking/seasonal parking.
      (1)   No person shall allow a fish house or dark house to be parked in
any manner which creates a public nuisance as defined previously in this
subchapter.
      (2)   No person shall allow a fish house or dark house to be temporarily
parked on any public property adjoining or abutting State Highway #78 for a
period of time longer than reasonably necessary to move the structure.
      (3)   No person shall allow a fish house or dark house to be parked on
public property without current and validly displayed licensure.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
TREES, GRASS, AND WEEDS
§ 92.25 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is promoting preservation, protection, and
planting of trees within the city. In perpetuating a healthy city forest, it is
necessary and desirable to regulate tree planting and maintenance on public
property within the city. To ensure the health of the city forest, the
authority to require removal of hazard trees from public or private property is
needed.
(Ord. 136, passed 11-26-2013; Ord. 98, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 11-14-
2023)
§ 92.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOULEVARD. Area between curb or street edge and the private property/parcel
line. This publicly owned area is defined by the distance noted on official
city maps from the center of the street or cul-de-sac to the property’s lot
line.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any area or building owned by the city including sidewalks,
alleys, and public parking lots, but not limited to, boulevards, parks,
playgrounds, wetlands, and streets.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Portion of property reserved for public use and
accepted for such use by the city to provide circulation and travel to abutting
properties, including, but not limited to, streets, boulevards, alleys,
sidewalks, and easements for public utilities.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any public or private facility or system for producing,
transmitting, or distributing communications, electricity, gas, oil products,
water, sanitary water, or storm water, which directly or indirectly serves the
public or any part thereof within the corporate limits of the city.
   TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. This is an undesirable practice, causing shock
to the tree, leaving it susceptible to disease and affecting the overall health
by disturbing the crown to root ratio.
   TREE. Any tree, shrub, hedge, or woody vegetation.
      (1)   Sizes.
         (a)   SMALL TREES. Those growing to a maximum height of 30 feet.
         (b)   MEDIUM TREES. Those growing to maximum height of 30 to 50 feet.
         (c)   LARGE TREES. Those growing to a maximum height of over 50 feet.
      (2)   Descriptions.
         (a)   BOULEVARD TREE. A tree planted within the strip of land lying
between property lines and the edge of streets, avenues, boulevards, or
roadways within the city.
         (b)   PARK TREE. A tree growing in designated parks owned by the city
to which the public has free access.
         (c)   PUBLIC TREE. Any tree growing on public rights-of-way and city-
owned lands, including boulevard and park trees.
         (d)   PRIVATE TREE. All trees growing on private property within the
city limits.
         (e)   HAZARD TREE. Any public or private tree or part thereof which
has an infectious or destructive disease, insect problem, or other pestilence
which endangers the growth, health, life, or well-being of trees in the city,
or which threatens to or is capable of causing a spread of a disease,
pestilence, or insect infestation:
            1.   Is determined to be infected with a shade tree pest or
disease, including, but not limited to, Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, or emerald
ash borer;
            2.   Is dead, dying, broken, or decayed;
            3.   Obstructs street lights, traffic signs, or the view of any
street intersection;
            4.   Obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
            5.   Is causing the surface of a public street, curb, or sidewalk
to be upheaved or otherwise disturbed;
            6.   Poses an imminent threat to the sewer system, electric power
lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvement; or
            7.   Constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or well-
being of the general public.
   URBAN FOREST. A forest or collection of trees growing within a city. It may
include any kind of woody plant vegetation growing in and around the city.
(Ord. 98, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 92.27 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY AND PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   The city will designate resources for the planting and care of public
trees and other vegetation. This includes assigning and managing city staff to
complete necessary tasks. If needed, the city shall appoint or contract with a
licensed tree trimmer to perform the duties imposed by this subchapter. The
tree trimmer will provide proof of liability insurance and worker’s
compensation insurance.
   (B)   Any owner of private property abutting a boulevard shall have the
following responsibilities for public trees located in the boulevard adjacent
to the owner’s property:
      (1)   Periodic watering of trees, located in the boulevard, when
necessary to maintain good health and vigor;
      (2)   Protection of trees against damage caused by lawn mowers, weed
trimmers, snow blowers, and similar equipment;
      (3)   The city may maintain boulevard trees, but residents are encouraged
to care for trees in the boulevard adjoining their property according to these
specifications; that branches are no closer than eight feet above sidewalks or
level of turf and a minimum of 12 feet above the street; and
      (4)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to accomplish
the trimming and/or removal of private trees, with due consideration for public
safety concerns, such as, a duty to adequately block off any affected street,
sidewalk, and/or yard area to make certain there are no pedestrians under a
proposed fall line of the trees or branches to be trimmed and that adequate
consideration for protection of neighboring property is also provided. Third
parties are required to provide proof of liability insurance.
   (C)   Every owner of property abutting on any public street or alley shall
cut the grass and weeds from the edge of his or her property line to the edge
of the street or alley, or, for unimproved streets and alleys, to the center of
the roadway.
   (D)   If the grass or weeds in such place are ten inches or more in height,
it shall be sufficient evidence of a violation of this section. All property
owners in the city are responsible for controlling the growth and spread of
weeds, whether on public or private property.
(Ord. 98, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.28 TREE PLANTING, MAINTENANCE, AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Planting trees in the right-of-way. It is unlawful for any person to
plant trees within the right-of-way.
   (B)   Utilities. No public trees may be planted under or within ten lateral
feet of any overhead transmission or primary utility wire, over or within two
feet of any natural gas transmission line, over any underground water line,
sewer line, sub-drain, transmission line, or other utility. No trees shall be
planted within utility easements. A local call must be made prior to planting
to determine location of utility lines (Gopher State One-Call: 800-252-1166).
   (C)   Maintenance.
      (1)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove
public trees as may be necessary to ensure the public safety or to preserve or
enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public property.
      (2)   The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or
part thereof which is in an unsafe condition of which, by reason of its nature,
is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other
public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other
pest, including, but not limited to, Dutch elm disease, oak wilt disease, or
emerald ash borer.
      (3)   If the city chooses to plant boulevard trees on a property’s
boulevard, the property owners shall be notified in writing and have the right
to appeal the planting of the tree to the City Council by notifying the Clerk/
Treasurer and requesting a hearing.
      (4)   Every public or private tree overhanging any street or right-of-way
within the city shall be trimmed so that the branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection or
street sign and so that there shall be a clear space of at least 12 feet above
the street or eight feet above the sidewalk.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or city department to
top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may
be exempted from this subchapter at the determination of the City Inspector.
      (6)   Control of private hazard trees:
         (a)   The city maintains the right to take action on private trees
that meet the definition of hazard trees to protect the public. Every effort
will be made to cooperate with the citizen before action is taken.
         (b)   Required process for orders relating to private hazard trees is
as follows.
            1.   Except in situations of imminent danger to human life and
safety, the city representative will not enter private property for the purpose
of inspecting for hazard trees without the permission of the owner, resident,
or other person in control of the property, unless the city representative has
obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing
the entry.
            2.   All orders to remove, treat, or trim trees, eradicate, or
otherwise control the hazardous condition given pursuant to this section shall
be in writing and authorized by the city or its designated representative.
Orders shall be served in person or by mail upon the owner of the property
where such trees are located. Such orders shall afford the owner of the
property not less than 30 days or a reasonable amount of time determined by the
city from the date of the mailing of such notice to comply with such order.
            3.   If the required action is not taken by the property owner
within the specified time, the city may cause the tree concerned to be trimmed,
removed, or treated for the hazardous condition to be eradicated or otherwise
controlled. The costs of such actions shall be apportioned as provided in this
subchapter.
            4.   Disposal of wood from hazard trees must follow accepted
Department of Natural Resource standards to ensure diseased wood does not
infect healthy trees. Wood from, including, but not limited to, elms infected
with Dutch elm disease, oaks infected with oak wilt, or green ash infected with
emerald ash borer must follow DNR approved quarantine procedures.
            5.   Apportionment of costs relating to hazard trees.
            6.   a.   Public trees. In the event that the city determines that
a tree located on a boulevard or on public land as defined in §
92.26 is a hazard, the city will be responsible for the tree treatment,
trimming, or removal.
               b.   Private trees.
                  i.   In the event the city determines that a private tree is
a hazard to city-owned utilities, the homeowner will assume responsibility for
the cost of removal, treatment, trimming, or otherwise eradicating or
controlling the hazardous condition.
                  ii.   In cases wherein the tree is determined to be infected
with a shade tree pest or disease, including, but not limited to, Dutch elm
disease, oak wilt disease, and emerald ash borer, and where the city has
determined that a private tree is a hazard, the owner will be responsible for
removal, treatment, trimming, or otherwise eradicating or controlling the
hazardous private tree.
                  iii.   In situations where a private tree is dead, dying, and
decayed and deemed of being an imminent danger to public health, safety, and
well-being, the owner will be responsible for appropriate trimming or removal
of his, her, or their tree.
                  iv.   If a private hazard tree is not removed or treated as
ordered or if the owner does not voluntarily pay to the city the cost of
removal or treatment by the city, all costs incurred by the city for trimming,
tree removal, treatment, or eradicating or controlling the hazardous condition
may be recovered by the city by assessing the property.
                  v.   Permits shall not be required for trees removed from
private property, but due consideration for streets, pedestrians, neighbors,
and proof of third party liability insurance must be made.
(Ord. 98, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.29 TREE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Generally. No person may plant, remove, alter, destroy, cut, or
disturb any public tree within the city without permission from the city.
   (B)   Abuse or mutilation of public trees. No person shall damage,
transplant, top, remove, or mutilate any public tree. DAMAGE may include, but
is not limited to, the following: posting signs with nails, staples, screws, or
other devices, hanging wires of any kind, vehicle damage, weed whip, lawn mower
damage, stripping bark off the tree, and poison or toxin applications.
   (C)   Protection of public trees near construction activities. Any public
tree in the immediate vicinity of any excavation, demolition, or construction
site of any building, structure, street, or utilities work which has potential
for injury, shall be protected from injury by the person responsible for
carrying out the construction activities.
(Ord. 98, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.30 CLAIMS.
   (A)   Assessment of claim. In the event that a hazardous condition is not
removed by the date specified in the notice, the city is authorized to cause
the removal of such hazardous condition. The reasonable cost of such removal
shall be filed as an assessment against the property on which the hazardous
tree was located.
   (B)   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any ruling or order of the city may
appeal to the City Council, which shall hear the matter and make a final
decision. The City Council shall have the right to review decisions and may
modify, affirm, or reverse any determination of the City Representative.
(Ord. 98, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 92.31 TALL GRASS AND WEEDS
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this section to
protect and preserve the city’s neighborhoods and the public health, safety,
and welfare of those who live there. The Common Council determines that keeping
the city free of tall grass and noxious weeds improves the quality of life of
city residents by improving the aesthetics of the city, by eliminating harbor
for rodents and insects, and by eliminating fire hazards. At the same time, the
City Council recognizes that requiring the mowing of grasses and noxious weeds
is under certain circumstances impractical and unreasonable. The exemptions
contained within this section are intended to cover these circumstances.
      (2)   The City Council also determines that a variety of properly
maintained landscapes in the city add diversity and a richness to the quality
of life, and does not want to discourage the preservation, restoration, and
maintenance of diverse biologically stable natural plant communities or
environmentally sound practices. The City Council finds that the establishment
of native or naturalistic plant communities is an acceptable landscape
treatment in the city. However, as a protection for the larger community, this
change in vegetation must be properly planned, managed, and maintained, and the
length of transition period must be minimized or the property is likely to
create a public nuisance.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOULEVARD. The portion of the street outside the roadway that may contain
sidewalks, landscaped area, infrastructure, or amenities.
      BUFFER or BUFFER STRIP. A unit of yard, together with the plantings
required thereon, designed to mitigate nuisance between adjacent land uses or
between a land use and a public street.
      DEVELOPED. Improvements to property, including roads, paths, sidewalks,
any buildings, driveways, or out buildings.
      LANDSCAPING. The active involvement in the encouragement of selected
plants to grow on a site.
      NATIVE AND NATURALISTIC VEGETATION. Grasses and flowering broad-leaf
plants that are native to, or adapted to, the state and that are commonly found
in meadow and prairie plant communities, except weeds.
      NATIVE GRASSES. Grasses (beach grass, wood chess grass, sand reed grass,
wheat grass, bluestem grass, grama grass, brome grass, buffalo grass, switch
grass, Indian grass, wild rye) that existed in the area prior to European
settlement.
      NATIVE PLANTS. Plants that existed in the area prior to European
settlement.
      NATURAL LANDSCAPING. The use of groups of plants native to the area.
      NATURALISTIC LANDSCAPING. The use of native and non-native plants.
      NOXIOUS WEEDS. Plants so designated by the Commissioner of Agriculture
pursuant to state statutes, those identified by the county, or USDA-APHIS.
      PRAIRIE. A plant community dominated by a diversity of native perennial
herbaceous plants and grasses.
      REGULARLY CUT. Mowing or otherwise cutting vegetation so that the
dimension of the vegetation measured from the ground to the top of the
vegetation (as extended upright), regardless if that is the blade of the
vegetation or any other part of the plant, does not exceed eight inches in
height.
      TEMPORARY EROSION CONTROL GRASSES. Grasses (winter wheat, oats, annual
rye, or regreen) that are used as single growing season cover or nurse crops to
assist in the establishment of permanent vegetation.
      TRADITIONAL LANDSCAPING. The use of turf grasses and woody plants
(shrubbery and trees) with defined areas for cultivation of annual and
perennial plants.
      TRANSITIONAL PERIOD. The amount of time to change from one type of
landscaping to another. The period should not extend beyond three growing
seasons for any specific area.
      TURF GRASSES. Bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass blends with nonwoody
vegetation interspersed with them commonly used in regularly cut lawns.
      WEEDS. Prohibited noxious weeds as identified by the State Department of
Agriculture, the county, or USDA-APHIS and any undesirable or troublesome plant
that is horticulturally out of place exceeding the height limitations in this
section. For the purposes of this section, Taraxacum spp (common dandelion) is
not considered a WEED.
      WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems
where the water table is near the surface. The boundary of WETLANDS, for
purposes of this section, shall be determined according to the most recently
published U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual.
   (C)   Nuisance declared. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any
person having control of any property in the city to permit or maintain on such
property any noxious weeds, or growth of grass and weeds in excess of eight
inches in height, if the growth of grass and weeds occupies an area of at least
100 square feet and is located within 100 feet of the property line of a
platted parcel or within any platted property. No owner shall permit such weeds
and grass to be a public nuisance, but shall abate the nuisance by cutting the
weeds and grass and removing the clippings. Such clippings shall not deposited
in a manner to create areas which the vegetation will be ruined/killed.
   (D)   Exemption and conditions for exemptions. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Non-noxious weeds and grass vegetation in an identified wetland
area;
      (2)   Non-noxious weeds, grasses and herbaceous vegetation within 50 feet
of designated stormwater ponds (lying within the storm water pond property) or
within 50 feet of natural or altered creeks, rivers, and stream corridors,
including riparian buffer strips, that convey water, provided they are cut to
less than eight inches at least once per year if located within 100 feet of an
occupied residence or developed property;
      (3)   Non-noxious weed and grass vegetation growing on agriculturally-
zoned land, including pastures, that are fenced and contain animals;
      (4)   Temporary erosion control grasses;
      (5)   Maintained and weeded prairie, or natural/naturalistic landscape
vegetation that does not contain noxious weed growth, provided that the
property owner applies for and is issued a natural or naturalistic landscape
permit, and maintains the property in a condition sufficient to maintain the
permit;
      (6)   Grass and non-noxious weed vegetation in publicly owned parks
designated as natural area or private property so designated by the City
Council or any natural undisturbed areas existing beyond 15 feet of a
developed/platted property where the land and vegetation appears not to have
been graded, landscaped or otherwise disturbed by human or mechanical means in
recent time;
      (7)   Grass and non-noxious weed vegetation on natural or altered slopes
steeper than one to one; or
      (8)   Ornamental grasses.
   (E)   Natural or naturalistic landscape permits. Natural or naturalistic
landscape permits are required if a proposed landscape includes grasses that
exceed or are expected to exceed eight inches in overall height. Permit
applications shall be submitted to the city.
   (F)   Contents of natural or naturalistic landscape permit application. The
applications shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant and the legal description of
the property being permitted;
      (2)   A site plan for the area sought to be permitted. The scale of plan
should be one inch equals 30 feet and include all adjacent properties and
public streets and alleys;
      (3)   A general description of the vegetation types, plants, and plant
succession to be used; and
      (4)   A specific management and maintenance plan which shall include:
         (a)   The estimated transition period;
         (b)   The elimination of non-native or invasive vegetation;
         (c)   The replanting of the area by transplant or seeded by human or
mechanical means;
         (d)   The maintenance of the area to a height of eight inches or less
if weeds cover more than 25% of the landscaped area equaling in excess of 100
square feet;
         (e)   The maintenance of all non-woody vegetation/grasses located in a
buffer strip with a minimum distance of four feet from side and rear lot lines
is to a height of eight inches or less unless the adjacent property owner has
consented in writing that the buffer strip is not required, a copy of which is
filed with the permit application; and
         (f)   Maintenance of all vegetation within the road right-of-way or
within 18 inches of any public street, walk, bikeway, or alley to a height of
eight inches or less.
   (G)   Issuance of natural or naturalistic landscape permit. The city shall
determine the completeness of the application and shall issue the natural or
naturalistic landscape permit unless:
      (1)   The management and maintenance plan is incomplete or inconsistent
with the application requirements; or
      (2)   The transition period for the area is longer than three growing
seasons.
   (H)   Denial of natural or naturalistic landscape permit; appeal. Any person
whose application for a natural or naturalistic landscape permit is denied
shall receive written notice of such denial and may appeal that determination
to the Park Board by filing notice of such appeal within ten days of the date
on the notice of denial. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Park Board
shall set a public hearing at which the applicant and any other party wishing
to be heard shall have an opportunity to present evidence as to the applicant’s
compliance with the provisions of this section and the application procedure.
If the Park Board determines that the applicant has complied with the
application provisions of this section, including the management and
maintenance plan requirements, it shall direct the Parks and Recreation
Department to issue the natural landscape permit. The city shall affirm the
denial if it determines that the applicant has not complied with the provisions
of this section.
   (I)   Revocation of natural or naturalistic landscape permit.
      (1)   A natural or naturalistic landscape permit may be revoked by the
city for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Weeds are not maintained;
         (b)   Buffer strips are not maintained;
         (c)   Vegetation within the road right of way or within 18 inches of
public walks, streets, alleys, and paths is not maintained to a height of eight
inches or less; or
         (d)   The permittee fails to maintain the natural landscape area in a
manner consistent with the management and maintenance plan included in the
application.
      (2)   The notice of revocation shall indicate that the revocation shall
be effective on the date identified therein, which date shall be not less than
14 days later than the date of the notice, unless the permittee files a written
appeal with the Park Board. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Park
Board shall set a public hearing at which the permittee and any other party
wishing to be heard shall have an opportunity to present evidence as to the
permittee’s compliance with the provisions of this section and the approved
natural landscape permit. If the Park Board determines that the permittee has
failed to abide by the provisions of this section and the approved natural
landscape permit, it shall direct the Parks and Recreation Department to issue
a tall grass and weed violation notice pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
   (J)   Inspections and notification by city. The city shall make such
inspections as are necessary to determine whether weeds or grass constitute a
public nuisance as defined in this section and is hereby authorized to enter
onto private property for the purpose of conducting such inspection. Upon
finding such public nuisance, the inspector shall cause an administrative
citation. The city may also serve a notice by regular mail or by personal
service upon the record owner of the property. The citation or notice shall
order such owner to abate the nuisance by cutting the weeds and grass, and
removing the clippings within 48 hours of the date of the notice. The citation
or notice shall also state that if the owner fails to do so, the city will
cause the weeds and grass to be cut and the expense thereof shall be the
owner’s responsibility. Refusal to accept, or not seeing such notice by the
owner of the property shall not constitute a defense that the notice was not
received.
   (K)   Mitigation by the city. Upon finding a public nuisance associated with
weeds or grass, the city may issue to the property owner an administrative
citation or a violation notice pursuant to this section. For purposes of
mitigation of the public nuisance, the city, or assigns, may enter onto private
property to mitigate nuisance weeds or grass no earlier than four calendar days
after the date the administrative citation or violation notice has been issued.
The city shall keep a record showing the cost of the required mitigation on
each lot or parcel.
   (L)   Owner liability for cost. The owner of property for which a violation
notice or an administrative citation was issued and for which the city has
undertaken the mowing of grass or weeds shall be liable for the actual cost of
cutting and removal of the tall grass and weeds, plus such sums as determined
to reimburse the city for its costs of inspection and administration of the
work. As soon as the service has been completed and the cost determined, the
city shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and, thereupon, the amount
shall be immediately due and payable. If the owner fails to pay the bill, the
total charges for the work performed in abating the nuisance, together with
administrative and inspection charges, may be levied as an assessment against
the benefitted property.
   (M)   Establishment of costs for services. The city will establish costs for
removal services associated with mitigation of weed and grass violations, and
administration and inspection services associated with this section.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2023; Ord. passed - -2024) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.32 PERSONAL LIABILITY.
   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service has
been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of such service. As soon
as the service has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk/
Treasurer or other designated official shall prepare a bill and mail it to the
owner and thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the
office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
(Ord. 98, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 92.33 ASSESSMENT.
   Annually, the Clerk/Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each
type of current service against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable under this subchapter. After notice and hearing as provided in
M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended from time to time, the City Council may
then spread the charges against property benefitted as a special assessment
under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other
pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along
with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding
ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.
(Ord. 98, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
92.25 through
92.30 or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to provisions of
the subchapter, upon being found guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
as provided by law, plus the costs of prosecution.
         (b)   If, as the result of the violation of any provision of §§
92.25 through
92.30, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree, shrub, or other plant
located on city-owned properly is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of
such tree, shrub, or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The
replacement value of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with
the latest revision of the International Society of Arboriculture/Council of
Landscape Appraisers system.
      (2)   Any person who interferes with a city employee or other authorized
person in the performance of any current service under this chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor, but a prosecution shall be brought for such violation only on
the direction of the City Council. If convicted of such violation, such person
shall be subject to a fine as set out by the city, or imprisonment of not more
than 90 days, and the costs of prosecution in either case may be added.
(Ord. 98, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
CHAPTER 93: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
93.01   General prohibition
   
93.02   Horns, audible signaling devices, and the like
   
93.03   Exhaust
   
93.04   Defective vehicles or loads
   
93.05   Loading, unloading, parking, and unpacking
   
93.06   Radios, tape players, CD players, paging systems, and the like
   
93.07   Participation in noisy parties or gatherings
   
93.08   Loud speakers, amplifiers for advertising, and the like
   
93.09   Noisy animals
   
93.10   Schools, churches, nursing homes, hospitals, and the like
   
93.11   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing
   
93.12   Hourly restriction on certain operations
   
93.13   Exceptions
   
93.14   Enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible
noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their
enjoyment of property or affects their property value. This general prohibition
is not limited by the specific restrictions of the following sections.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 HORNS, AUDIBLE SIGNALING DEVICES, AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall sound any horn or audible signaling device on any vehicle
except as a warning of danger as required by M.S. § 169.68, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 EXHAUST.
   No person shall discharge the exhaust or permit the discharge of the exhaust
of any steam engine, stationary or mobile internal combustion engine, motor
boat, motor vehicle, or snowmobile except through a muffler or other device
that effectively prevents loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or
other noise.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 DEFECTIVE VEHICLES OR LOADS.
   No person shall use any vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such
condition as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or
other noise.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 LOADING, UNLOADING, PARKING, AND UNPACKING.
   No person shall create loud or excessive noise in loading, unloading,
packing, or unpacking any vehicle.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 RADIOS, TAPE PLAYERS, CD PLAYERS, PAGING SYSTEMS, AND THE LIKE.
   No person, except licensed dance or eating establishments or other persons
or establishments specifically authorized by this code, shall use or operate or
permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
tape player, CD player, paging system, machine, or other device for the
production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly audible manner as
to unreasonably annoy, disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose,
health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of
property or affects their property’s value. Operation of any such instrument,
player, machine, or other device and in such a manner as to be plainly audible
at the property line of the structure or building in which it is located, in
the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is
located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 PARTICIPATION IN NOISY PARTIES OR GATHERINGS.
   No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people giving
rise to noise, unreasonably annoying, disturbing, injuring, or endangering the
comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precluding
his or her enjoyment of property or affecting his or her property’s value. When
a police officer determines that a gathering is creating such a noise
disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than the owner or
tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse
immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police
officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of
the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the disturbance
is stopped.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 LOUD SPEAKERS, AMPLIFIERS FOR ADVERTISING, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person shall operate or permit the use or operation of any
loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other device for the production or
reproduction of sound where the sound is made on or projected to a street or
other public place for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the
attention of the public to any commercial establishment or vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to sound produced by the following:
      (1)   Amplifying equipment used in connection with activities which are
authorized, sponsored, or permitted by the city, so long as the activity is
conducted pursuant to the conditions of the license, permit, or contract
authorizing such activity;
      (2)   Church bells, chimes, or carillons;
      (3)   School bells;
      (4)   Anti-theft devices; and
      (5)   Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in authorized
emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.09 NOISY ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep any animal that, by its frequent or continued
noise, unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their
enjoyment of property or affects their property’s value.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, DISTURBS THE COMFORT OR REPOSE OF
PERSONS IN THE VICINITY BY ITS FREQUENT OR CONTINUED NOISE means any one of the
following.
      (1)   The animal noise occurs at a time between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
and can be heard from a location outside the building and premises where the
animal is being kept, and the animal has made such noises intermittently for
more than five minutes with one minute or less lapse of time between each
animal noise during the five-minute period.
      (2)   The animal noise can be heard from a one-block distance from the
location of the building and premises where the animal is being kept, and the
animal has made such noises intermittently for more than five minutes with one
minute or less lapse of time between each animal noise during the five- minute
period; or the animal noise can be heard from a location outside the building
and premises where the animal is being kept, and the animal has made such
noises intermittently for a period of at least five minutes with one minute or
less lapse of time between each animal noise during the five-minute period.
      (3)   The animal noise can be heard from a location outside the building
and premises where the animal is being kept, and the animal has made such
noises intermittently for a period of at least five minutes with one minute or
less lapse of time between each animal noise during the five-minute period.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
Cross-reference:
   Prohibition of animal nuisances, see §
90.05
§ 93.10 SCHOOLS, CHURCHES, NURSING HOMES, HOSPITALS, AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall create any excessive noise on or projecting across a street,
alley, or public grounds adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church, nursing home, or hospital when the noise unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of
any of its occupants or residents or when the noise unreasonably interferes
with the working of the institution, and when conspicuous signs indicate the
presence of such an institution.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.11 YELLING, SHOUTING, HOOTING, WHISTLING, OR SINGING.
   No person shall yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. so as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel,
motel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.12 HOURLY RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Recreational vehicles. No person shall, between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., drive or operate any mini-bike, all-terrain vehicle,
snowmobile, or other recreational vehicle not licensed for travel on public
highways.
   (B)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a lawn mower, hedge
clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill, or other similar
domestic power maintenance equipment except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this provision.
   (C)   Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in
any residential district except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (D)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel, or
gas-powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.13 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to the following:
   (A)   A display of fireworks by an organization or group of organizations
authorized in writing by the City Council;
   (B)   A peace officer in the discharge of his or her duty;
   (C)   A person in the lawful defense of his or her person or family;
   (D)   A discharge of a firearm by a color guard for a military funeral;
   (E)   A discharge of a firearm by a color guard, military, or police unit in
connection with a parade permitted or authorized in writing by the City
Council; and/or
   (F)   A discharge of firearms or explosives in connection with a show or
assembly permitted or licensed by the city, specifically authorizing the
activity at issue.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023)
§ 93.14 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement duties. The Police Department shall enforce the provisions
of this chapter. The Police Department, in accordance with applicable laws, may
inspect private premises other than private residences and shall make all
reasonable effort to prevent violations of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Civil remedies. Injunction, action for abatement, or other appropriate
civil remedy may enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Noise impact statements. The City Council may require any person
applying for a change in zoning classification, permit, or license for any
structure, operation, process, installation, or alteration, or project that may
be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement or a
form prescribed by the City Council. It shall evaluate each such statement and
take its evaluation into account in considering the license or permit applied
for, or the zoning change requested.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The first violation of §
93.06 shall be a petty misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $25, or
one hour of community service to be determined by the city which may include
but not be limited to one hour of listening to music selected by the Chief of
Police. A second violation within six months of the first violation shall be a
petty misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $300. A third violation within six
months of the second violation shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
up to $1,000.
   (B)   The first violation of any other provisions of this chapter shall be a
petty misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $50. A second violation
within six months of the first violation shall be a petty misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of $300. A third violation within six months of the second
violation shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.
(Ord. 96, passed 9-14-1999; Ord. passed 3-15-2023)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Camping prohibited
Park Regulations
   
94.15   Definitions
   
94.16   Rules and regulations for park use
   
94.17   Other prohibited acts
   
94.18   Variances
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 CAMPING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall camp overnight on any public street or alley, or on any
property owned, leased, or rented by the city, or in any city park, unless
authorized to do so by the City Council for a special occasion or under special
circumstances. No storage of personal items in any city park, including, but
not limited to, vehicles, campers, watercrafts, fish houses, and trailers.
STORAGE is defined as anything in excess of 72 hours.
(Ord. passed 1-9-2018) Penalty, see §
94.99
PARK REGULATIONS
§ 94.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK USE. Use of shelters, playground, tennis courts, and open area
designated for recreational use.
   PARKS. A park, playground, athletic field, trail, nature area, open space
area, or recreational facility, including adjacent parking areas, owned or
operated by the city for the purpose of recreation or open space use.
(Ord. passed 5-8-2018)
§ 94.16 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PARK USE.
   (A)   Hours for park use. No person, except authorized city personnel, shall
enter or be in or remain in any park beginning at 11:00 p.m. and ending at 5:00
a.m., except with a permit issued by the City Clerk/Treasurer and approved by
the City Council.
   (B)   Parking and use of restrooms. Parking in designated parking areas and
use of restrooms will be allowed outside of park use hours.
   (C)   Removing, defacing, or destroying property prohibited. No person shall
remove, deface, destroy, diminish, or impair the value of public property
located on or within any park, including buildings, structures, trees, shrubs,
grass, vegetation, signs, tables, benches, fireplaces, trash receptacles,
notices or placards, boundary markers or fences, or any other public property,
either real or personal.
   (D)   Erection of structures. No person shall construct or erect any tent,
building, or structure of any kind, whether permanent or temporary in
character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across
any park, except with a permit issued by the City Clerk/Treasurer and approved
by the City Council.
   (E)   Littering and dumping. No person shall litter, or cast upon or allow
to remain in, rubbish or trash of any kind or nature in or about any park.
   (F)   Motorized vehicles. Motorized vehicles shall be driven or parked only
in designated areas in any park and shall be driven therein at a maximum speed
of five mph. Snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles shall not be operated in any
park except in areas specifically designated or posted for their operation, or
as required for maintenance or for police, fire, or rescue purposes.
   (G)   Camping prohibited. No person shall camp overnight on any public
street or alley, or on any property owned, leased, or rented by the city, or in
any city park, unless authorized to do so by the City Council for a special
occasion or under special circumstances.
   (H)   Storage of personal property in any city park. Including, but not
limited to: vehicles, campers, watercrafts, fish houses, and trailers are
prohibited. For purposes of this section, STORAGE is defined as anything in
excess of 72 hours.
   (I)   Open fires prohibited. No person shall build a fire in any place in
any park at any time, except in fireplaces or receptacles provided therein by
the city or in privately owned grills that are not harmful to grass or other
vegetation.
   (J)   Sale of articles. No person shall sell any articles, or solicit for
the sale thereof, in any park without a permit issued by the City Clerk/
Treasurer and approved by the City Council.
   (K)   Animals. No domestic animals, including cats and dogs, shall be
permitted within any park with the exception of Halverson Park. No person shall
allow any domestic animal, including dogs and cats, to go unattended and
without physical restraint in Halverson Park. Pet owners and animal handlers
are responsible for cleaning up their pet’s waste and disposing of it in a
sanitary manner.
   (L)   No alcoholic beverages. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages
within any city park except when authorized by the City Council.
(Ord. passed 5-8-2018) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.17 OTHER PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful in any park for any person to:
   (A)   Disturb or interfere with any birds, animals, animal habitat, or
nesting area;
   (B)   Schedule and hold gatherings for the public without first requesting
and receiving a special event permit issued by the City Council;
   (C)   Discharge any gun, firearm, air gun, pellet gun, explosive, bow and
arrow, or other similar device, except for a peace officer or public works
employee in the discharge of his or her duties, without a permit from the City
Clerk/Treasurer and after approval by the City Council;
   (D)   Discharge fireworks except when authorized in writing by the City
Council; or
   (E)   Discharge any pollutants into any body of water in any park.
(Ord. passed 5-8-2018) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.18 VARIANCES.
   Variances to the strict application of this subchapter may be granted only
by the City Council and only in unusual circumstances. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the normal care, operation, or functions of the city or its authorized
agents in or on any city park.
(Ord. passed 5-8-2018)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
criminal penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. passed 5-8-2018)
CHAPTER 95: MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Operator regulations
   
95.03   Fueling prohibitions
   
95.04   Airport regulations
   
95.05   Use of airport by transient aircraft
   
95.06   Prohibition of controlled model aircraft
   
95.07   Leasing of municipal airport grounds
   
95.08   Motor vehicle parking
   
95.09   Fees
   
95.10   Development regulations
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AERIAL SPRAY APPLICATOR. Any person who operates an aircraft to spray
fungicides, insecticides, or herbicides upon crops and other plants or insects
from the aircraft.
   AIRCRAFT. Any vehicle designed to fly, glide, float, or sail in the air
while carrying one or more persons, including, but not limited to, airplanes,
helicopters, hot-air balloons, gliders, hang gliders, and powered gliders.
   AIRCRAFT PARKING FEES. The fees, established and from time to time amended
by the City Council in accordance with M.S. § 360.038, subd. 6, as it may be
amended from time to time, to be charged the operator of transient aircraft
parking at the airport. A copy of the applicable fee schedule is to be posted
at the airport and is to be furnished on request to the operator of transient
aircraft incident to use of the facility.
   AIRPORT. Battle Lake Municipal Airport, a publicly owned but private
AIRPORT, as defined in Minn. Rules part 8800.1900, as it may be amended from
time to time; that is, a RESTRICTED AIRPORT at which the persons who may use
the airport are determined by the owner of the airport, namely, the city.
   AIRPORT MANAGER. The person appointed to this position by the City Council.
   AVIATION FUEL AND PETROLEUM PRODUCTS. Any aviation fuel, aviation gasoline,
jet fuel, or other petroleum products used in the fueling of aircraft.
   CHEMICALS. Any substance produced by a chemical process and used to kill or
control plant growth or insects.
   COMMERCIAL USE FOR AERONAUTICAL PURPOSES. The use of the airport facilities
in such a way that the airport is indispensable to the user’s for-profit
business operation, including specifically but not exclusively: flight
instruction; aircraft sales; airframe and/or power plant repair, servicing and
inspection; aircraft rental; aircraft fuel and fuel dispensing services; air
taxi services; air charters; flying clubs; air freight services; aerial spray
applicator’s chemical loading and unloading operations; and aerial spray
applicator’s fueling or refueling operations when a chemical cargo is onboard
the aircraft.
   CONTROLLED MODEL AIRCRAFT. Any miniature, representation, or imitation of an
aircraft not capable of carrying one or more persons and operated or controlled
by radio signal or attached wire.
   FUELING FACILITY. Any temporary or permanent structures, pumps, and tanks
for the storage and/or sale of aviation fuel and petroleum products. FUELING
FACILITY includes private tanks and pumps for personal use. FUELING FACILITY
shall also include tanker or truck deliveries directly to aircraft at or upon
the airport.
   OTHER COMMERCIAL USE. Any for-profit business operation which is not a
commercial use for aeronautical purposes, including specifically but not
exclusively: auto-body repair; manufacturing operations; and the subletting of
hangar space.
   OTHER PRIVATE USE. Any private use which is not for profit, or is casual or
intermittent, and to which the airport facilities are not indispensable,
including specifically but not exclusively: storage of automobiles, boats,
trailers, and recreational vehicles.
   PRIVATE USE FOR AERONAUTICAL PURPOSES. Any use of airport facilities in such
a way that the airport facilities are indispensable to the activity, and which
use is not for profit, or is casual or intermittent, including specifically but
not exclusively: aircraft storage, personal repairs on private aircraft;
practicing landings or take-offs; medical evacuations by air ambulance; and
civil air patrol.
   TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT. Aircraft making use of the airport for personal use but
not based at the airport.
§ 95.02 OPERATOR REGULATIONS.
   All operators of aircraft, while using the airport, shall abide by the
following regulations.
   (A)   No person shall load or unload chemicals or fuel, or clean or wash
aircraft involved in aerial spray applications at the airport.
   (B)   No person shall store or dispose of chemicals at the airport.
   (C)   All pilots shall use standard patterns on take-off and landing at the
airport.
   (D)   Pilots shall be responsible for any damage to airport property and
buildings resulting from their operations.
   (E)   All pilots must give right-of-way to incoming aircraft.
   (F)   All pilots shall have in their possession a pilot’s license from the
Federal Aviation Administration to operate aircraft together with a certificate
of insurance evidencing liability insurance coverage for the operation of
aircraft in amounts, as a minimum, set by the City Council.
   (G)   Except as provided in an easement agreement dated October 9, 2012 and
recorded as document Number 1117568, access to the runway shall only be allowed
on approved taxiways.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.03 FUELING PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall directly or indirectly dispense aviation fuel or petroleum
products to transient aircraft at the airport nor shall a fueling facility,
either temporary or permanent, be established or maintained at the airport.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.04 AIRPORT REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to the airport.
   (A)   Commercial use for aeronautical purposes and other commercial use, as
defined in §
95.01, shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Private use for aeronautical purposes, as defined in §
95.01, shall be authorized and encouraged so long as the use is not in conflict
with the public interest as determined by the City Council.
   (C)   Other private use, as defined in §
95.01, shall be prohibited, except that a person who is using the airport for
private uses for aeronautical purposes may also use the airport facilities for
other private uses so long as the other private uses are clearly secondary to
the aeronautical uses.
   (D)   Aerial operations by an aerial spray applicator, as defined in §
95.01, whether into, at, or from the airport, on either a temporary or
permanent basis, are prohibited.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.05 USE OF AIRPORT BY TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT.
   Subject to the other provisions of this chapter, the parking of transient
aircraft; incident to operations into, at, or from the airport shall be limited
to the parking areas designated by the airport manager, and such parking shall
be subject to the direction and approval of the airport manager after
arrangements have been made with the airport manager or Clerk/Treasurer for
payment of applicable parking fees.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.06 PROHIBITION OF CONTROLLED MODEL AIRCRAFT.
   No person shall operate radio-controlled or wire-guided model aircraft at
the airport.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.07 LEASING OF MUNICIPAL AIRPORT GROUNDS.
   (A)   The city may enter into a grounds-leasing arrangement with an
individual or business entity to provide grounds upon which the lessee may
construct a hangar.
   (B)   In addition to the provisions of the lease agreement, the following
regulations shall apply to grounds leasing.
      (1)   Terms of lease. The City Council shall act to approve or disapprove
the time period and rental fee associated with each lease; and the Mayor, after
approval by the City Council, shall execute the lease with the lessee.
      (2)   Assignment. The lease agreement shall act to approve or disapprove
the time period and rental fee associated with each lease; and the Mayor, after
approval by the City Council, shall execute the lease with the lessee.
      (3)   Entry and inspection for illegal use. The city may enter and
inspect all airport premises, including leased premises, upon which it has
reason to believe violations of this chapter have occurred or are occurring.
The right of the city to enter and inspect the premises shall be an implied
condition of every lease of municipal airport grounds and facilities. Refusal
to permit the authorized city representative to enter and inspect leased
premises or premises on leased grounds shall be a violation of the lease, and
may result in revocation of the lease.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.08 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING.
   Any area for the parking of motor vehicles shall be provided at the airport.
The parking of motor vehicles and the use of the parking area shall be subject
to the following regulations.
   (A)   Authorized users. The authorized users of the airport motor vehicle
parking area shall be:
      (1)   Lessees of airport grounds;
      (2)   Owners/operators of transient aircraft; temporarily operating an
aircraft from the airport; and
      (3)   Visitors/guests of authorized users defined in divisions (A)(1) and
(2) above.
   (B)   Parking time limit. The time limit for the parking of motor vehicles
at the airport shall be as follows.
      (1)   Vehicles belonging to authorized users may be parked for a period
of 24 hours or less without payment of a parking fee.
      (2)   Vehicles belonging to authorized users parked in excess of 24 hours
will be subject to a parking fee.
      (3)   Authorized users desiring to park in excess of 24 hours must make
arrangements with the airport manager or Clerk/Treasurer for payment of the
requisite parking fee prior to use.
      (4)   Motor vehicles parked in violation of these regulations shall be
subject to towing and storage at the owner’s expense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.09 FEES.
   The City Council may establish, and from time to time revise, the fees to be
charged for the use of various airport facilities. This schedule of fees shall
be incorporated into, and shall thereby become a part of, this chapter and may
include the following.
   (A)   Landing fees. For the use of the runway, taxiway, and aprons at the
airport, the operators of all aircraft, whether transient aircraft or aircraft
based at the city’s airport, shall pay a landing use fee charge for each
landing of an aircraft at the airport in accordance with a schedule of landing
fees established by the City Council.
   (B)   Aircraft parking fees. For the use of aircraft parking or tie-down
areas at the airport, the operators of all aircraft making use of these areas
shall pay, or make arrangements to pay, the airport manager or the Clerk/
Treasurer the appropriate amount in accordance with a schedule of aircraft
parking fees established by the City Council.
   (C)   Lease of grounds for hangars. For the use of airport grounds for the
construction and/or location of a hangar, the lessee shall pay to the city an
annual rental fee established by the City Council.
   (D)   Motor vehicle parking. For the use of the airport vehicle parking lot
for a continuous period exceeding 24 hours, the vehicle owner shall pay, or
make arrangements to pay, the airport manager or the Clerk/Treasurer the
appropriate amount of vehicle parking fees established by the City Council.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.10 DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   The City Council wishes to ensure the orderly development of airport hangar
lots as established in the April 29, 2011 Airport Hangar Layout Plan and as
such has developed the following regulations.
   (A)   Residential zoning will apply at the airport that allows for public or
semipublic use of the property.
   (B)   Cluster development criteria will be used such that a leased lot is
“part of a whole” for impervious surface requirement purposes.
   (C)   Structures will be constructed allowing for seven and one-half foot
side setbacks, a ten-foot rear setback and zero front setback (to clarify, Lot
10 faces west, Lots 12, 14, and 15 face north, and Lots 11, 13, and 15 face
south).
   (D)   Structures will be limited in size to 60 feet by 60 feet or 3,600
square feet with a height restriction of 20 feet at roof peak, except for Lots
11, 13, and 15 where roof peaks may be 25 feet with no restriction on side
walls for any lot.
   (E)   Wells and septic systems will not be allowed. Above-ground sealed
water tanks may be allowed with a permit from the city’s Public Works Director.
   (F)   No dwelling areas or living quarters within hangars will be allowed.
   (G)   The sequence of building development will be by numbered order by tier
from east to west (excepting Lot 10).
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 96: MAILBOXES
Section
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   United States Postal Service regulations
   
96.03   Placement of mailboxes in right-of-way
   
96.04   Snowplowing; damage
   
96.05   Violations
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MAILBOX. A receptacle intended for the receipt or delivery of mail meeting
United States Postal Service standards.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of the City of Battle Lake
or designee.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. As used in this chapter the term right-of-way means all
dedicated streets, alleys and public rights-of-way, and easements and public
streets or alleys.
(Ord. passed 6-11-2024)
§ 96.02 UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE REGULATIONS.
   All mailboxes shall comply with regulations promulgated from time to time by
the United States Postal Service governing mailboxes, including amendments
thereto. To the extent such regulations conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, such regulations shall control.
(Ord. passed 6-11-2024)
§ 96.03 PLACEMENT OF MAILBOXES IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Permit required. Prior to a mailbox being placed, a right-of-way
permit must be obtained from the city.
   (B)   Location of support structure.
      (1)   No portion of a mailbox support shall be closer than 12 inches to
the vertical plane of the face of the curb;
      (2)   In areas where there is a roll curb the mailbox support shall be at
least 12 inches from the vertical plane of the outer edge of the curb; and
      (3)   In areas where there is no curb the support shall be at least 12
inches from the graded portion of the right-of-way.
   (C)   Height. The bottom of the mailbox itself shall be not less than 38
inches and not more than 45 inches above the level of the street at the point
at which the support setback is determined.
   (D)   Interference with traffic. Notwithstanding any provision set forth
herein, no mailbox shall be placed in a location where it interferes with
vehicular traffic, including access to private driveways. Mailboxes shall not
interfere with intersection sight lines.
   (E)   Gopher State One Call. Any person installing a mailbox shall comply
with the requirements of the Gopher State One Call System.
   (F)   Exceptions. Temporary mailbox installation not in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter may be allowed during construction or reconstruction
of a street.
   (G)   Newspaper boxes. No additional boxes shall be allowed attached to the
mailbox or post. Any such boxes must be placed outside of the city right-of-
way.
(Ord. passed 6-11-2024) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 SNOWPLOWING; DAMAGE.
   (A)   Claims. Any claim for damage to a mailbox by employees or agents of
the city shall be submitted to the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Limited liability.
      (1)   The city will not be responsible for damages to mailboxes placed in
the right-of-way in violation of this chapter, nor will the city be responsible
for damages resulting only from flying snow.
      (2)   The city and public utility franchises may remove any mailboxes and
mailbox supports if necessary to construct, maintain or repair facilities in
the right-of-way. In the event of damage to a mailbox resulting from the
mailbox or support structure being struck by snowplowing equipment operated by
the city or its agents, the city shall be responsible for reasonable repairs up
to and including replacement.
      (3)   The Public Works Director shall determine reasonable repairs. The
decision of the Public Works Director may be appealed to the City Council by
submitting such an appeal in writing within 30 days of the Public Works
Director’s decision.
   (C)   Snow clearance. The city plows the streets. It is the responsibility
of the postal customer to keep the approach to the mailbox clear of
obstructions to allow safe access for delivery.
(Ord. passed 6-11-2024)
§ 96.05 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The owner of any mailbox placed in violation of this chapter may be
ordered to remove the same by the Public Works Director. The Public Works
Director’s order may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written appeal
specifying the grounds therefore within ten days of the date of the Public
Works Director’s order.
   (B)   The city may remove any mailbox or support structure which constitutes
a hazard or otherwise interferes with the use of the public right-of-way. The
costs of removal are the responsibility of the owner and may be assessed
against the real estate for collection with the real estate taxes as provided
by law.
(Ord. passed 6-11-2024) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
criminal penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. passed 6-11-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS
      
113.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
114.   CANNABIS AND CANNABIS-DERIVED PRODUCTS
      115.   CANNABIS BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   State law applicable
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Interpretation
   
110.04   Public consumption
   
110.05   Consumption in unlicensed place
   
110.06   Prohibited acts by person under age for purchase
   
110.07   Allowing or inducing person under legal age to purchase or consume
   
110.08   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
Licenses
   
110.20   License required; kinds of licenses
   
110.21   Number of licenses allowed
   
110.22   Submission of information to Commissioner
   
110.23   Eligible applicants
   
110.24   Premises of applicant
   
110.25   Applications
   
110.26   Investigation
   
110.27   Issuance
   
110.28   Duration
   
110.29   Fees
   
110.30   Refunds
   
110.31   Bond and financial responsibility
   
110.32   Transfer of licenses
   
110.33   Hours of sale
   
110.34   Consumption and closing after hours
   
110.35   Premises open when sale prohibited
   
110.36   Gambling
   
110.37   Conditions
   
110.38   Suspension and revocation
   
110.39   Permit required for set-ups and bottle clubs
   
110.40   One-day permits
   
110.41   Seasonal outdoor sales
Municipal Liquor Store
   
110.55   Municipal store
   
110.56   Manager; duties
   
110.57   Employees
   
110.58   Bond
   
110.59   Financial responsibility
   
110.60   Liquor Store Fund
   
110.61   Handling of funds
   
110.62   Audit
   
110.63   Hours
   
110.64   Samples
   
110.65   Restrictions
   
110.66   Misconduct of employee
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 STATE LAW APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of this chapter relating to alcoholic beverages are adopted
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. All
requirements of M.S. Chapter 340A, pertaining to alcoholic beverages shall
apply. As permitted by M.S. Chapter 340A, this chapter also establishes
additional local regulations pertaining to alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   All words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in M.S. Chapter
340A, as it may be amended from time to time, or which are otherwise given a
special meaning there, are used in this chapter with reference to their
statutory definition or meaning unless given a special or more limited meaning
here or elsewhere in this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment which is a restaurant as defined in M.S. §
340A.101, subd. 25, as it may be amended from time to time, and which has a
seating capacity for not less than 30 guests at one time.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.03 INTERPRETATION.
   The terms 3.2% MALT LIQUOR and INTOXICATING LIQUOR are used in this chapter
to maintain consistency between terminology in this chapter and in M.S. Chapter
340A, as it may be amended from time to time. The use of the term 3.2% MALT
LIQUOR in this code does not represent a determination by the City Council that
the alcoholic beverages referred to under that term are not intoxicating
beverages.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.04 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage upon any public street,
alley, or sidewalk in the city. This prohibition shall not apply if a temporary
license has been granted for sale at the location where consumption occurs.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 CONSUMPTION IN UNLICENSED PLACE.
   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any place of business open
to the public for the consumption of alcoholic beverages knowing the place not
to hold a license or permit which allows consumption of the alcoholic beverage.
Nor shall any patron of any business establishment consume any alcoholic
beverage at the establishment unless it holds a license for consumption of the
alcoholic beverage.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 PROHIBITED ACTS BY PERSON UNDER AGE FOR PURCHASE.
   No person under the legal age for the purchase of any alcoholic beverage
shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage;
   (B)   Induce or attempt to induce another person not his or her parent or
guardian to purchase any alcoholic beverage for him or her;
   (C)   For the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic
beverage:
      (1)   Misrepresent his or her age;
      (2)   Alter any driver’s license or other identification; or
      (3)   Possess any altered or false driver’s license or other
identification.
   (D)   Enter any establishment licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages,
or the municipal liquor store, for the purpose of purchasing, having served, or
having delivered any alcoholic beverage. This provision shall not prohibit the
person from entering for any other lawful purpose;
   (E)   Consume any alcoholic beverage unless with the consent of his or her
parent or guardian while in the household of the parent or guardian giving the
consent; and
   (F)   Possess any alcoholic beverage at a place other than the household of
his or her parent or guardian. This prohibition shall apply regardless of
whether the person intends to deliver the alcoholic beverage to the household
of his or her parent or guardian for consumption there.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 ALLOWING OR INDUCING PERSON UNDER LEGAL AGE TO PURCHASE OR CONSUME.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   (A)   If a 3.2% malt liquor licensee, an intoxicating liquor licensee, or a
bottle club permittee, allow any person under the legal age to purchase any
alcoholic beverage to purchase, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverage on
the licensed premises;
   (B)   Sell, barter, furnish, or give any alcoholic beverage to a person
under the legal age for purchase of the alcoholic beverage. This shall not
apply to the parent or guardian of a person under the legal age for purchase
who gives or furnishes an alcoholic beverage to the person under the legal age
for purchase solely for consumption in the household of the parent or guardian;
   (C)   For the purpose of assisting a person under the legal age for the
purchase of any alcoholic beverage in purchasing an alcoholic beverage:
      (1)   Misrepresent the age of the person under the legal age for
purchase;
      (2)   Alter any driver’s license or other identification for the person
under the legal age for purchase; or
      (3)   Furnish to or procure for the person under the legal age for
purchase any altered or false driver’s license or other identification.
   (D)   Induce or attempt to induce any person under the legal age for
purchase of an alcoholic beverage to purchase or procure any alcoholic
beverage; and
   (E)   Induce or attempt to induce any person under the legal age for
purchase of an alcoholic beverage to consume any alcoholic beverage, other than
at the household of the parent or guardian of the person under the legal age
for purchase with the consent of the parent or guardian.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The City Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The City Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
LICENSES
§ 110.20 LICENSE REQUIRED; KINDS OF LICENSES.
   (A)   No person, except a person by law not required to obtain a license
from the city, may directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device,
sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of any alcoholic beverage as
part of a commercial transaction in the city without having obtained a license
to do so as provided in this subchapter. Any person licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor at on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale
license for 3.2% malt liquor.
   (B)   Three-point-two percent malt liquor licenses shall be of the following
kinds.
      (1)   Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. An off-sale 3.2% malt liquor
license shall permit the sale of 3.2% malt liquor in the original package for
consumption off the licensed premises only.
      (2)   On-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. An on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
license shall permit sale of 3.2% malt liquor for consumption on the licensed
premises only. An on-sale license shall be issued only to drugstores,
restaurants, hotels, clubs, and establishments used exclusively for the sale of
3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
      (3)   Temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. A temporary on-sale
3.2% malt liquor license shall permit the temporary sale of 3.2% malt liquor
for consumption on the licensed premises only. A temporary on-sale license
shall be issued only to a club or a charitable, religious, or nonprofit
organization. A temporary license may authorize the sale of 3.2% malt liquor in
any school or school building. A temporary license shall be subject to any
terms prescribed by the City Council as a condition of the issuance of the
license.
   (C)   Intoxicating liquor licenses shall be of the following kinds.
      (1)   On-sale intoxicating liquor license. An on-sale intoxicating liquor
license shall permit sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
licensed premises only. An on-sale license shall be issued only to an
individual person operating a hotel or restaurant, or to a club which does not
or cannot avail itself of a club on-sale intoxicating liquor license.
      (2)   On-sale wine license. An on-sale wine license shall permit sale of
wine of up to 14% alcohol by volume for consumption with the sale of food on
the licensed premises only. An on-sale wine license shall be issued only to a
restaurant having facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time. An on-
sale wine license shall authorize the sale of wine on all days of the week
unless the City Council restricts the license’s authorization to the sale of
wine on all days except Sundays. An on-sale wine license shall be issued only
with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. A holder of an on-sale
wine license issued pursuant to M.S. § 340A.404 subd. 5(a), as amended from
time to time, who is also licensed to sell 3.2% malt liquors at on-sale
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.411, as amended from time to time, and whose gross
receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale of food, may also sell
intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license as defined
in M.S. § 340A.404 subd. 5(c), as amended from time to time.
      (3)   Club on-sale intoxicating liquor license. A club on-sale
intoxicating liquor license shall permit sale of intoxicating liquor to club
members and bona fide guests of club members only, for consumption on the
licensed premises only. A club on-sale license shall be issued only to a
congressionally chartered veterans organization which has been in existence for
ten years or more or to any other club which has been in existence for 15 years
or more.
      (4)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license. A temporary on-sale
intoxicating liquor license shall be issued only to a club or charitable,
religious, or other nonprofit organization in existence for at least three
years. The license shall permit sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on
the licensed premises only, for not more than three consecutive days specified
in the license, in connection with a social event in the city sponsored by the
licensee. In granting the license, the City Council may authorize sale on
premises other than premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The
City Council may provide that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor
catering services with an on-sale intoxicating liquor licensee. A temporary on-
sale license shall be subject to any additional terms imposed by the City
Council. A temporary on-sale license shall not be valid until first approved by
the Commissioner of Public Safety.
      (5)   Special Sunday on-sale license.
         (a)   Special on-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor on
Sunday shall be issued only to bowling centers and to hotels, restaurants, and
clubs as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
All sales at such establishments shall be in accordance with M.S. § 340A.504,
subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (b)   The sale hours of on-sale intoxicating liquor on Sundays shall
be established by state statute. Establishments serving liquor on Sundays must
obtain a special license under division (C)(5)(a) above.
      (6)   Brewer off-sale.
         (a)   A brewer licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6, clause (c),
(i), or (j), as amended from time to time, may be issued a license by a
municipality for off-sale of malt liquor at its licensed premises that has been
produced and packaged by the brewer. The license must be approved by the
Commissioner. A brewer may only have one license under this division (C)(6).
The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed 750 barrels annually.
Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at
exclusive liquor stores in the jurisdiction in which the brewer is located, and
the malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the
applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores, except that malt
liquor in growlers only may be sold at off-sale on Sundays. Sunday sales must
be approved by the licensing jurisdiction and hours may be established by those
jurisdictions.
         (b)   Packaging of malt liquor for off-sale under this division (C)(6)
must comply with M.S. § 340A.285, as amended from time to time, and can only be
packaged in 64-ounce containers commonly known as GROWLERS or 750 milliliter
bottles for off-sale. No other off-sale containers will be allowed.
         (c)   A municipality may not issue a license under this section to a
brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or any person having an economic
interest in the brewer seeking the license or exercising control over the
brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews more than 20,000 barrels of
its own brands of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than
250,000 gallons of wine annually.
         (d)   A brew pub or brewer may, but is not required to, refill any
container or bottle with malt liquor for off-sale at the request of the
customer. A brew pub or brewer refilling a container or bottle must do so at
its licensed premises and the container or bottle must be filled at the tap at
the time of sale. A container or bottle refilled under this division (C)(6)(d)
must be sealed and labeled in the manner described in division (C)(6)(a) above.
      (7)   Brewer taproom license.
         (a)   A municipality, including a city with a municipal liquor store,
may issue the holder of a brewer’s license under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6,
clause (c), (i), or (j), as amended from time to time, a brewer taproom
license. A brewer taproom license authorizes on-sale of malt liquor produced by
the brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one brewery
location owned by the brewer. Nothing in this division (C)(7) precludes the
holder of a brewer taproom license from also holding a license to operate a
restaurant at the brewery. M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to
time, shall apply to a license issued under this division (C)(7). All
provisions of this chapter that apply to a retail liquor license shall apply to
a license issued under this division (C)(7) unless the provision is explicitly
inconsistent with this division (C)(7).
         (b)   A brewer may only have one taproom license under this division
(C)(7), and may not have an ownership interest in a brew pub.
         (c)   A municipality may not issue a brewer taproom license to a
brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or any person having an economic
interest in the brewer seeking the license or exercising control over the
brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews more than 250,000 barrels of
malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of
wine annually.
(Ord. 100, passed 11-28-2000; Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.21 NUMBER OF LICENSES ALLOWED.
   The City Council may issue the number of on-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses as permitted by M.S. §§ 340A.413 and 340A.601, as amended from time to
time. Within any limits established by law, the City Council may, by
resolution, limit the number of any other kind of license which may be issued.
The City Council, in its sound discretion, may either grant or deny the
application for any license, for the transfer or renewal of any license or the
request for any permit. No applicant has a right to a license under this
chapter, and anyone selling and/or serving alcohol within the boundaries of the
city must have a license or permit to do so and must have prior City Council
approval.
(Ord. 76, passed 12-29-1992; Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.22 SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION TO COMMISSIONER.
   Within ten days of the issuance of any on-sale intoxicating liquor license,
the Clerk/Treasurer shall submit to the State Commissioner of Public Safety the
licensee’s name and address and trade name, and the effective date and
expiration date of the license. The Clerk/Treasurer shall inform the
Commissioner of any transfer, cancellation, suspension, or revocation during
the license period of any on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The Clerk/
Treasurer shall also submit to the Commissioner any other information required
by law to be submitted concerning any license or permit of any kind.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.23 ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS.
   Applicants for licenses shall meet all requirements of law and of this
subchapter, including any special requirements for the specific license sought.
No 3.2% malt liquor license and no intoxicating liquor license shall be issued
to:
   (A)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States or who is not a
resident alien;
   (B)   A person under 21 years of age;
   (C)   A person who, within five years of the license application, has been
convicted of a willful violation of a federal or state law or local ordinance
governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or
distribution, of intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquors;
   (D)   A person who has had an intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor
license revoked within five years of the license application, or to any person
who, at the time of the violation, owns any interest, whether as a holder of
more than 5% of the capital stock of a corporation licensee, as a partner or
otherwise, in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a
corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business, or firm in which
any such person is in any manner interested; or
   (E)   A person not of good moral character and repute.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.24 PREMISES OF APPLICANT.
   The licensed premises shall meet all requirements of law and of this
subchapter, including any special requirements for the specific license sought.
In addition to any requirements which appear elsewhere in this subchapter, the
following requirements shall apply.
   (A)   No license shall be granted for any premises restricted against
commercial use through zoning ordinances and other proceedings or legal
processes regularly had for that purpose, except a license may be issued to a
restaurant in an area which was restricted against commercial uses after the
establishment of the restaurant. This restriction shall not apply to a
temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license or to a temporary on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, except to the extent required by law.
   (B)   No license shall be granted for any premises within 1,500 feet of any
public school that is not within the city. This restriction shall not apply to
a temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license or to a temporary on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, except to the extent required by law.
   (C)   No license shall be granted to any person in connection with the
premises of another to whom a license could not by law be issued. This shall
not prevent the granting of a license to a proper lessee because the person has
leased the premises of a minor, a noncitizen who is not a resident alien, or a
person who has been convicted of a crime other than a violation of M.S. Chapter
340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   No license shall be granted for any premises within 50 feet of any
public school or church, as measured by the shortest distance between the
nearest point of the licensed premises to the school or church building. This
limitation shall not apply to a temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license or a
temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The City Council may, at its
discretion, waive this requirement and continue to issue any license when the
school or church is established at the location in question after a license has
first been issued, upon finding that the public health, safety, and welfare
will not be harmed by issuance of the license.
   (E)   No license shall be granted for any premises upon which any real
estate taxes or installments of special assessments are delinquent, or upon
which any financial claims of the city are delinquent.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.25 APPLICATIONS.
   Any person desiring a license shall file with the Clerk/Treasurer a written
application. When so required by law, the application shall be in the form
prescribed by the State Bureau of Criminal Apprehension. Otherwise, it shall be
in the form prescribed by the Clerk/Treasurer. The applicant shall present any
additional information required by the City Council. Every applicant for the
issuance, transfer, or renewal of a license shall include a copy of each
summons received by the applicant under M.S. § 340A.802, as it may be amended
from time to time, during the preceding year. No person shall make any false
statement in or concerning any application.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.26 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon an initial application for any license, or upon any application
to transfer to a new licensee any existing license, the City Council shall
make, or cause to be made, such background and financial investigation of the
applicant as the City Council deems appropriate. The City Council may also
conduct such investigation regarding the licensee as it deems appropriate upon
an application for renewal of an existing license, or at any other time. The
City Council may, by ordinance, establish an investigation fee required to be
paid by each applicant for a new license or for transfer of a license, and may
require that the fee be paid by the applicant at the time of making application
for a license.
   (B)   If the City Council determines, or if the Bureau of Criminal
Apprehension on its own initiative determines, that a comprehensive background
and financial investigation is necessary upon an initial application for any
on-sale intoxicating liquor license, or upon any application to transfer to a
new licensee any existing on-sale intoxicating liquor license, the City Council
may contract with the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension for the investigation, or
it may otherwise conduct the investigation itself. In addition, a comprehensive
investigation may be required by the City Council prior to the renewal of an
existing on-sale intoxicating liquor license if the City Council deems it in
the public interest. When a comprehensive investigation is conducted, the
applicant shall pay to the city a comprehensive investigation fee not to exceed
the amount provided by law if the investigation is conducted within the state,
or the actual cost not to exceed the amount provided by law if the
investigation is required outside the state. The City Council shall, by
ordinance, fix the in-state comprehensive investigation fee, within the maximum
amount provided by law, and the City Council may, by ordinance, fix a maximum
out-of-state comprehensive investigation fee, below the maximum amount provided
by law.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.27 ISSUANCE.
   After investigation and opportunity for an applicant to be heard, the City
Council shall grant or deny the application in its discretion. If the
application is approved, the Clerk/Treasurer shall issue the license to the
applicant upon the applicant complying with all requirements of law and of this
subchapter relating to issuance of the license. If any license, bond, or
insurance is required by law to be approved by the Commissioner of Public
Safety, the license shall not become effective until approval of the
Commissioner is granted.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.28 DURATION.
   A license, other than a temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license or a
temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license, shall become effective on
January 1 of the year for which it is issued, or such later date as is
requested in the application or as the applicant complies with all requirements
of law and of this subchapter relating to issuance of the license. The license
shall expire on December 31 of the year for which it is issued. A temporary on-
sale 3.2% malt liquor license or a temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor
license shall be issued for a specific period, which shall be stated on the
license.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.29 FEES.
   (A)   Establishment. Within any limits established by law, the City Council
shall, by ordinance, establish the fee for each kind of license.
   (B)   Pro rata fees. If a license is issued for less than a full calendar
year, the fee shall be one-twelfth of the annual fee for each month or fraction
of a month for which the license is issued. The City Council may, by ordinance,
fix a minimum pro rata fee.
   (C)   Payment. An applicant shall pay the license fee in full at the time
application is made for a license. If an application is rejected, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall refund the amount paid, unless the City Council, in rejecting
the license, orders that the fee or a portion of it be retained from an
applicant making a false statement in or concerning an application or from an
applicant ineligible to receive a license.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.30 REFUNDS.
   (A)   No part of the fee for a license which has been issued may be
refunded, except a pro rata portion of the fee may be refunded to the licensee
or to the licensee’s estate if:
      (1)   The business ceases to operate because of destruction or damage;
      (2)   The licensee dies;
      (3)   The business ceases to be lawful for a reason other than a license
revocation; or
      (4)   The licensee ceases to carry on the licensed business under the
license.
   (B)   An application for refund must be made to the Clerk/Treasurer within
30 days after the business ceases to operate. The City Council may grant or
deny the refund in its discretion. If the refund is granted, there shall be
refunded one-twelfth of the annual fee for each full month remaining in the
license year. In no event shall the portion of the annual fee retained be less
than the minimum pro rata fee, if any, established for a license issued during
the license year.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.31 BOND AND FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Bond. Before issuance of a regular on-sale intoxicating liquor
license, the applicant shall file with the Clerk/Treasurer a bond with
corporate surety, or cash or United States government bonds in lieu of bond.
The bond shall be in the amount of $5,000. The bond shall be conditioned upon
the licensee obeying all laws governing the business and paying all taxes,
fees, penalties, and other charges, and shall provide that the bond is
forfeited to the city upon any violation of law. If an insurance policy under
division (B) below is made subject to all the conditions required for a bond,
to the amount required for a bond, no separate bond shall be required. This
requirement for the giving of bond shall apply only to licensees required by
law to give bond. As a condition of the issuance of any license of any kind to
a licensee not otherwise required to give bond, the City Council may require
that the licensee furnish bond or other security of not less than $1,000 nor
more than $3,000 when the City Council determines that to do so would be in the
public interest.
   (B)   Proof of financial responsibility. No license may be issued,
maintained, or renewed unless the applicant demonstrates proof of financial
responsibility with regard to liability imposed under M.S. § 340A.801, as it
may be amended from time to time. The Clerk/Treasurer shall submit to the
Commissioner of Public Safety the applicant’s proof of financial responsibility
for those licensees for which submission of proof to the Commissioner is
required. The requirement for proof of financial responsibility may be met by
filing with the Clerk/Treasurer:
      (1)   A certificate that there is in effect for the license period an
insurance policy or pool providing at least $100,000 of coverage because of
bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, $200,000 because of
bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence, $20,000 because of
injury to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence, $100,000
for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and
$200,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any one
occurrence;
      (2)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as provided in
division (B)(1) above; or
      (3)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has
deposited with the State Treasurer $200,000 in cash or securities which may
legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market value
of $200,000.
   (C)   Insurance coverage. The insurer may provide the coverage required by
this division (C) in combination with other insurance coverage. An annual
aggregate policy limit for dram shop insurance of not less than $300,000 per
policy year may be included in the policy provisions. A liability insurance
policy required by this section must provide that it may not be canceled for
any cause by either the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has
first given a ten-day notice in writing to the Clerk/Treasurer of intent to
cancel the policy. The proof of financial responsibility given shall also meet
all other requirements of law for proof of financial responsibility.
   (D)   Financial responsibility of certain licensees. The requirements of
divisions (B) and (C) above for demonstration of proof of financial
responsibility shall not apply to licensees who are not required by law to do
so, and who file with the Clerk/Treasurer an affidavit establishing that fact.
As a condition of the issuance of any license of any kind to a licensee not
required by law to demonstrate proof of financial responsibility, the City
Council may require that the licensee demonstrate proof of financial
responsibility in such amount and manner as the City Council deems advisable
when the City Council determines that to do so would be in the public interest.
   (E)   Filing. No licensee who is required to give bond or to demonstrate
proof of financial responsibility shall commence business until the requirement
is met and the bond or proof of financial responsibility, or both if
applicable, are filed with the Clerk/Treasurer. The Clerk/Treasurer shall not
issue the license until the applicant required to do so has done so.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.32 TRANSFER OF LICENSES.
   A license shall be issued to the applicant only, and may be transferred to
another applicant only with the approval of the City Council. A license shall
be issued only for the premises specified in the approved application, and may
be transferred to another place only with the approval of the City Council. Any
transfer of shares of a corporate licensee, other than a transfer of shares of
a publicly held corporation, shall constitute a transfer of the license, and
any such transfer of shares, without prior City Council approval, is cause for
revocation of the license.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.33 HOURS OF SALE.
   No sale shall be made upon any day or at any time of day that sale is
prohibited by law under the license held by the licensee.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.34 CONSUMPTION AND CLOSING AFTER HOURS.
   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee
to permit consumption of, alcoholic beverages on licensed premises more than 30
minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made.
   (B)   Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than a licensee or his
or her bona fide employee actually engaged in the performance of his or her
duties, to be on premises licensed under this chapter more than 30 minutes
after the legal time for making licensed sales.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.35 PREMISES OPEN WHEN SALE PROHIBITED.
   If any portion of any premises having an on-sale license of any kind is open
to the public when sale is prohibited, the part of the premises where alcoholic
beverages are kept shall be locked against access by the public during the time
that the premises are open while sale is prohibited. This requirement shall not
apply to any premises which are open no more than a half-hour after sale is
prohibited. Any licensee, regardless of the kind of license held, whose
premises are open to the public when sale is prohibited, shall comply with all
requirements of law, if any, which apply to licensees whose premises are open
to the public when sale is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.36 GAMBLING.
   No licensee may keep, possess, or operate, or permit the keeping,
possession, or operation on the licensed premises, of dice or any gambling
device unless specifically permitted to do so by law and not otherwise
prohibited from doing so under this code. No licensee may conduct or permit any
gambling upon the licensed premises unless specifically permitted to do so by
law and not otherwise prohibited from doing so under this code.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
Cross-reference:
   Gambling, see
Ch. 130
§ 110.37 CONDITIONS.
   Licenses issued shall be subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   The licensee shall comply with all requirements of this subchapter,
with all requirements of law, and with all requirements of administrative
regulation relating to the license.
   (B)   The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises.
   (C)   No sale shall be made to any obviously intoxicated person, to any
disorderly person, or to any person to whom sale is prohibited by law.
   (D)   The licensee shall be responsible for the conduct in the licensed
establishment, and for conditions of sobriety and order in it.
   (E)   Any sale of any alcoholic beverage by any employee authorized to sell
any alcoholic beverage in the establishment is the act of the licensee, except
as specifically otherwise provided by law.
   (F)   The licensee may not sell any alcoholic beverage to any person for the
purpose of resale, or to any person whom the licensee has reason to believe
intends to resell the alcoholic beverage, without written approval to do so
from the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (G)   The licensee shall permit any law enforcement officer, any member of
the Board of Health, and any duly acting employee of the city to enter and
inspect the premises at any time the premises are open to the public, and to
make any other inspection allowed by law.
   (H)   A license is effective only for the compact and contiguous space
specified in the license.
   (I)   If a licensee dies, the personal representative of the estate may
continue operation under the license for not more than 90 days after the death
of the licensee, but only if the personal representative would not be
prohibited under §
110.23 or prohibited by law from having a license.
   (J)   No person under 18 years of age may serve or sell any alcoholic
beverage in any licensed establishment, even if state law would otherwise
permit the service or sale.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.38 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Council shall either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke the
license or permit or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 for each
violation on a finding that the license or permit holder has failed to comply
with an applicable law, rule, or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages. No
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the license or permit holder
has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing as provided by law. The City
Council may impose the penalties provided in this section on a retail licensee
who knowingly sells alcoholic beverages to another retail licensee for the
purpose of resale, or on a retail licensee who purchases alcoholic beverages
from another retail licensee for the purpose of resale.
   (B)   Lapse or cancellation of any required bond or liability insurance, or
withdrawal of any required deposit of cash or securities in lieu of bond or
insurance, shall effect an immediate suspension of the license without further
notice or action of the City Council. Notice to the licensee of cancellation or
lapse of a bond or insurance policy, or notice to the licensee of withdrawal of
deposited cash or securities, shall constitute notice to the licensee of the
suspension or impending suspension of the license. A licensee may file with the
Clerk/Treasurer a written request for hearing upon a suspension which occurs
under this section. The City Council shall hold a hearing within ten days of
the filing of the request, or within such longer period of time as the licensee
requests and the City Council allows. After hearing, the suspension shall be
lifted if the City Council finds that the requirements for bond and for
financial responsibility are met by the licensee. A suspension under this
section shall continue until the City Council determines that the licensee
again meets the requirements for bond and for financial responsibility.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.39 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR SET-UPS AND BOTTLE CLUBS.
   (A)   Requirement. No business establishment or club which does not hold an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license may directly or indirectly allow the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquor or knowingly serve any liquid
for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first having
obtained a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety to do so as provided
by law. Any such permit issued by the Commissioner shall not be effective until
approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Local permit fee. Within the limits established by law, the City
Council shall, by ordinance, establish a local permit fee. This fee shall be in
addition to any state fee which is imposed.
   (C)   Pro rata fee. If a permit is issued for less than a full permit year,
the local permit fee shall be one-twelfth of the annual fee for each month or
fraction of a month for which the permit is issued. The City Council may, by
ordinance, fix a minimum pro rata local permit fee.
   (D)   Conditions of approval. It shall be a specific condition of all
permits approved by the City Council that the permittee comply with all
requirements of law which pertain to the permit. To the extent allowed by law,
the City Council may also impose any other reasonable conditions in giving its
approval for any permit.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.40 ONE-DAY PERMITS.
   (A)   The City Council may issue a one-day permit for the consumption and
display of intoxicating liquor to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with
a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization. The permit must be
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (B)   A one-day permit shall be valid only for the day indicated on the
permit.
   (C)   A one-day permit shall be subject to any reasonable conditions imposed
by the City Council in granting the permit.
   (D)   Within the limits established by law, the City Council shall, by
ordinance, establish the fee for a one-day permit.
   (E)   The City Council may not issue more than ten one-day permits in any
one year.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.41 SEASONAL OUTDOOR SALES.
   (A)   Any licensed establishment within the city to which an on-sale liquor
license has been issued may have an area that is contiguous to the completely
enclosed licensed premises included in the area licensed to permit the sale
and/or consumption of 3.2% malt liquor or intoxicating liquors in such
contiguous area that is not wholly within a completely enclosed building. The
licensee must declare its intention to provide outdoor sales and service within
the adjacent area and provide proof of liquor liability insurance covering the
extended area. The contiguous area shall not be part of a public grounds and
such area must be specified as included on the liquor liability insurance
certificate. In the event that an existing licensee would like to utilize areas
of their real property for special events, the licensee must apply for a
limited on-site special event permit.
   (B)   Each application pursuant to this section shall contain a description
of the outdoor area that is proposed to be licensed and shall be accompanied by
a drawing of the proposed area to be licensed. Such application shall also
include a detailed description of the barriers that will be used, method of
seating, ingress and egress arrangements, security provisions, sanitary and
fire arrangements, and lighting. The drawing required hereunder must include
the dimensions of the area, barriers, tables, aisles, and equipment, and must
be drawn proportionately to scale. The drawing shall also include adjacent
properties and uses (e.g. residential, commercial). Outdoor live entertainment
that will continue beyond 9:00 p.m.; the use of sound producing equipment that
will continue beyond 9:00 p.m.; or outdoor events within the licensed area that
will continue beyond 9:00 p.m. that require additional off-site parking or
includes anticipated attendance of more than 150 people are prohibited except
upon approval of a special event permit issued separately by the city and
approved by the City Council.
   (C)   City staff will review such request for seasonal outdoor sales of
liquors for suitability of the proposed location in light of applicable fire,
building, and life safety codes, zoning ordinances, past performance of the
licensee in maintaining order and obeying applicable laws in the licensed
outdoor area and in the principal licensed premises, the adequacy of the
proposal to provide for the safety of persons on the proposed premises, impact
on the surrounding land, adequacy of lighting, appropriateness of noise level,
suitability of ingress and egress arrangements including control of persons
entering and leaving for purposes of preventing consumption by minors, and
safety arrangements.
   (D)   An application may be denied based on the following non-exclusive list
of factors:
      (1)   Inability to comply with fire, building, and life safety codes or
inability to comply with zoning ordinances;
      (2)   Occurrences of disorderly conduct;
      (3)   Demonstrated history or inability to provide safety on the
premises;
      (4)   Adverse impact on surrounding land, inadequate lighting, in
appropriate noise levels;
      (5)   Unsuitable ingress and egress arrangements; and/or
      (6)   Such other grounds if the city finds that issuing the permit is not
in the best interest of the general health, welfare, and safety of the
citizenry.
   (E)   Sales of liquor in approved outdoor locations is limited to the hours
and date(s) dictated by the approved permit. Any licensing of premises must be
deemed experimental and as such, no expectation must be made by the licensee
that the licensing of outdoor areas will be renewed, even though no misconduct
occurred in the outdoor area, in the event the City Council determines to
repeal the general authorization for seasonal outdoor sales.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORE
§ 110.55 MUNICIPAL STORE.
   (A)   The municipal liquor store which has been established is hereby
continued for the off-sale of intoxicating liquor. It may also sell products as
authorized by M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 14, as it may be amended from time to
time. It may provide recorded or live entertainment and coin-operated amusement
devices for patrons of the dispensary. No retail sale of intoxicating liquor
shall be made at off-sale within the city except by the municipal liquor store.
   (B)   The City Council shall determine the location of the municipal liquor
store.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.56 MANAGER; DUTIES.
   (A)   The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge of a
Liquor Store Manager selected by the City Council. The Manager shall be paid
such compensation as is fixed by the City Council. The Manager shall serve at
the pleasure of the City Council.
   (B)   The Manager shall operate the municipal liquor store, subject to the
City Council’s direction. The Manager shall perform such duties in connection
with the municipal store as the City Council determines.
   (C)   The Manager shall conduct the municipal store in full compliance with
this code and with all requirements of law and of administrative regulation
which apply.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.57 EMPLOYEES.
   The City Council may employ additional employees as needed for the proper
and efficient operation of the municipal liquor store.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.58 BOND.
   The Manager shall furnish a surety bond to the city, in such amount as the
City Council may require, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties
of the Manager. The City Council, at its discretion, may require any other
employee to furnish bond. The bond premium shall be paid by the city unless the
City Council specifically requires that it be paid by the person bonded.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.59 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The municipal liquor store shall demonstrate proof of financial
responsibility as required by law.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.60 LIQUOR STORE FUND.
   The Municipal Liquor Store Fund, also known as the Municipal Liquor
Dispensary Fund, is hereby continued. All revenues received from operation of
the municipal store shall be deposited into it, and all ordinary operating
expenses shall be paid from it. Any amount borrowed from the General Fund of
the city in connection with the municipal store shall be reimbursed to the
General Fund out of the first available moneys coming into the Municipal Liquor
Store Fund thereafter. Surpluses in the Municipal Liquor Store Fund may be
transferred to the General Fund or to any other appropriate fund of the city by
resolution of the City Council and expended for any municipal purpose.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.61 HANDLING OF FUNDS.
   Handling of municipal liquor store receipts and disbursements shall comply
with the procedures prescribed by law for the receipt and disbursement of city
funds.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.62 AUDIT.
   The City Council shall provide, as soon as possible following the close of
each fiscal year, for an audit of the accounts and inventory of the municipal
liquor store for that fiscal year.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.63 HOURS.
   No sale shall be made upon any day or at any time of day that sale is
prohibited by law under the license held by the licensee, except as provided
herein.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.64 SAMPLES.
   The municipal liquor store may provide samples of alcoholic beverages as
allowed by statute and currently has in stock and is offering for sale to the
general public. The samples shall be dispensed without charge and consumed on
the premises in a quantity less than 50 milliliters of wine per variety per
customer and 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordial per variety per customer.
Samples shall be provided only as provided by law and only in compliance with
all requirements of law.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.65 RESTRICTIONS.
   The following restrictions shall apply to the municipal liquor store.
   (A)   The Manager and all other employees shall comply with all requirements
of law, of administrative regulation, and of this code which apply.
   (B)   No sale shall be made on store credit.
   (C)   No sale of any alcoholic beverage shall be made to a person under the
legal age for purchase, to an obviously intoxicated person, or to any other
person to whom sale is prohibited.
   (D)   No person who is disorderly or who is obviously intoxicated shall be
permitted to remain in the dispensary.
   (E)   No person who is under the legal age for purchase shall be permitted
to remain in the premises, unless in the company of the person’s parent or
guardian.
   (F)   No person shall be permitted to loiter in the premises.
   (G)   No person shall be permitted to gamble in the premises, except to the
extent that the gambling is permitted by law and has been specifically and duly
authorized.
   (H)   The municipal liquor store and its employees shall also comply with
any further lawful restrictions imposed by the City Council regarding further
limitations upon the hours of operation, samples which may be given, sales
which may be made and any other matter, and shall comply with all requirements
of law.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.66 MISCONDUCT OF EMPLOYEE.
   Violation of any requirement of law or of this code pertaining to the
municipal liquor store and the sale of alcoholic beverages at the store by any
municipal liquor store employee, or violation of any further lawful
restrictions imposed by the City Council, shall be cause for suspension or
discharge of the employee. An employee may also be suspended, discharged, or
otherwise disciplined for any other misconduct by the employee.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to criminal penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   A violation of §
110.08 is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is justification for
revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or 3.2% malt liquor license or
the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 6-13-2023; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Permit requirements
   
111.03   Prohibited activities
   
111.04   Exclusion by placard
   
111.05   Exemptions to requirements
   
111.06   Persons ineligible for permit
   
111.07   Revocation of permit
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise, or other personal property that the person is carrying
or otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
HAWKER.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership, or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships, and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent, or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the City Hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as REGULAR BUSINESS DAYS.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be
carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by
other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time.
The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of
this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to obtain or
attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term SOLICITOR shall mean the
same as the term CANVASSER.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location within
city limits.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019; Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 111.02 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall sell or offer for
sale any goods, wares, services, or merchandise within the city unless a permit
therefor shall first be secured as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Application for such permit shall be made to the City Clerk/
Treasurer on a form supplied by the city. The application shall state and
include:
         (a)   The name, address, date of birth, and copy of driver’s license
or photo ID of all persons associated with the application in business;
         (b)   The type of business for which the permit is desired;
         (c)   Copy of appropriate county license as required by M.S. Chapter
329, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (d)   A certificate of insurance with the city listed as additional
insured;
         (e)   In case of transient merchants, the place where the business is
to be carried on and if the business will be conducted on private property, an
approval letter from property owner along with a certificate of insurance with
the city listed as an additional insured from the property owner;
         (f)   A general description of the thing or things to be sold;
         (g)   Whether the applicant complies with requirements of this
chapter; and
         (h)   Such other information as the city may reasonably request.
      (2)   Every application shall bear the written report and recommendation
of the Chief of Police after a driver’s license check. If issuance of the
permit would not violate any city ordinance or state law and the Chief of
Police recommends issuance of the permit, it will go to the City Council for
final approval at their first regularly scheduled City Council meeting of the
month. Applications must be received at least one week prior to the first
regularly scheduled City Council meeting of the month. Once the permit has been
approved by the City Council, the permit shall be issued by the City Clerk/
Treasurer upon payment of the required fee.
      (3)   Fees for permits shall be set by ordinance by the City Council.
      (4)   Permits will be good for 30 days starting the first day of the
following month after the City Council has approved the permit. No permit may
extend beyond December 31 of the year in which it was granted.
      (5)   All permits shall be nontransferable. No refunds shall be made on
unused portions of permits. Each peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
shall secure a separate permit.
      (6)   All permits shall be carried by the permittee or conspicuously
posted in the permittee’s place of business and the permit shall be exhibited
to any officer or citizen upon request.
      (7)   Permits will not be allowed on any property along Lake Avenue,
public or private. The only public property where transient merchants will be
allowed is Lions Park. No utilities will be provided at Lions Park.
      (8)   Transient merchants located in Lions Park must provide a $5,000
bond for the duration of their approved permit.
   (C)   Permittees must remove their garbage and dispose of it properly.
   (D)   No more than two permits will be active at one time.
   (E)   Permits will only be granted after review and approval of the City
Council.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019; Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in any
of the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, use of a speaker
system, or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an
enclosed structure;
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way;
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of any individual or the general public;
   (D)   Business will not be allowed in city parks unless the merchant has
received special permission from the City Council;
   (E)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., unless they
have received a special event permit that designates additional hours;
   (F)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person;
   (G)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor,
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person;
   (H)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating, or abusive;
   (I)   Failure to provide proof of liability insurance when requested; and/or
   (J)   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall place any signs or
advertising material in any public right-of-way. Any signs or advertising
material may only be placed on private property with the owner’s permission and
will only be allowed for the duration of the permit.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019; Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48-point in size stating “no peddlers,
solicitors, or transient merchants,” or “peddlers, solicitors, and transient
merchants prohibited,” or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface, or otherwise tamper with any
sign or placard under this section.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019; Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 EXEMPTIONS TO REQUIREMENTS.
   The permit requirements of this chapter do not apply to the following:
   (A)   Any sale under court order;
   (B)   Any bona fide auction sale;
   (C)   A sale at wholesale to a retail dealer;
   (D)   Any sale of the products of a farm or garden;
   (E)   Any person soliciting money, donations, or financial assistance of any
kind for any religious, charitable, nonprofit, educational, or political
organization or selling merchandise for a fee on behalf of such an
organization;
   (F)   Any person calling upon householders at the request of said
householders;
   (G)   Garage sales, yard sales, youth sales (such as lemonade stand and
baked goods);
   (H)   Any person calling upon householders in connection with a regular
route service for the sale and delivery of products; or
   (I)   Part of a special event (special event permit required).
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019; Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 111.06 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   No permit or license shall be issued if the applicant:
      (1)   Is not legally allowed to work under state or federal law;
      (2)   Has been convicted of a crime that directly relates to the
occupation sought to be registered and has not shown competent evidence of
sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform duties of the
occupation;
      (3)   Has been the subject of an investigation by a consumer protection
agency or State Attorney General office and such investigation has indicated a
pattern of disregard of consumer rights in the conduct of the business;
      (4)   Has had a registration, license, or permit for any activity subject
to this chapter revoked by the city or any other governmental body within three
years before the application date; or
      (5)   Has falsified any information or omitted material information
required by the application.
   (B)   Denied permittees may appeal by requesting a public hearing. Request
for public hearing must be in writing and presented to the City Clerk/
Treasurer. The public hearing will take place at the next regularly scheduled
City Council meeting.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019; Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 111.07 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any license or permit may be revoked by the City Council or its designee for
a violation of any provision of this chapter if the licensee has been given a
reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019; Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the laws of
the state for misdemeanors.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019; Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
CHAPTER 112: TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
   
112.01   Purpose and intent
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   License
   
112.04   Fees
   
112.05   Basis for denial of license
   
112.06   Prohibited sales
   
112.07   Vending machines
   
112.08   Self-service sales
   
112.09   Responsibility
   
112.10   Compliance checks and inspections
   
112.11   Other illegal acts
   
112.12   Exceptions and defenses
   
112.13   Violations
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 21 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess, and use tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco related devices, electronic delivery devices, and the sales,
possession, and use are violations of both state and federal laws; and because
studies, which the city hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers
begin smoking before they have reached the age of 21 years and that those
persons who reach the age of 21 years without having started smoking are
significantly less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has been shown
to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a
financial burden on all levels of government; this chapter shall be intended to
regulate the sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
related devices, and electronic delivery devices for the purpose of enforcing
and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects
associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, and electronic delivery devices, and to further the official public
policy of the state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke
as stated in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGE VERIFICATION. Before distributing any tobacco product, the distributor
shall verify that the recipient is at least 21 years of age. Each distributor
shall examine the recipient’s government-issued photographic identification. No
such VERIFICATION is required for a person over the age of 30. That a recipient
appeared to be 30 years of age or older shall not constitute a defense to a
violation of this section.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices,
and electronic delivery devices are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of minors
as authorized by this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of
minors who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, and electronic delivery devices for educational, research, and
training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS
may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing
appropriate federal, state, or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco,
tobacco products, and tobacco related devices.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Means any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that
can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any
other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include any
product that has been approved or certified by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an
approved purpose.
   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco
products shall include but not be limited to single cigarette packs, single
bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging
of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this definition shall not be
considered INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.
   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged
cigarette.
   MINIMUM LEGAL DISTRIBUTION AGE FOR TOBACCO PRODUCTS. The provision of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery
devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to a person under the age of
21 is prohibited. This section shall not apply to provisions to any person who
is born on or before December 31, 2000.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck,
van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a
fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for
sales transactions.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products,
or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general public. The
phrase shall include but not be limited to grocery stores, convenience stores,
and restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices, without the assistance
or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee. The assistance or
intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco
product, or tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or
employee. The phrase shall not include vending machines. SELF-SERVICE SALES are
interpreted as being any sale where there is not an actual physical exchange of
the tobacco between the clerk and the customer.
   SIGNAGE. No person shall distribute or permit the provision of tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco related devices, electronic delivery devices, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices in the county unless a clearly visible
notice of the county minimum legal sales age is posted at the location where
these products are available for purchase.
   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, fine
cut, or other chewing tobacco, cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated, plug
cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff flowers,
cavendish, shorts, plug and twist tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps,
clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of
tobacco leaf prepared in a manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or
smoking.
   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling
papers, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a
manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, smoking, or inhalation of vapors of
tobacco or tobacco products.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric, or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or
electronic delivery devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or other form
of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the
tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery
device.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device without
first having obtained a license to do so from the city.
   (B)   Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided by the
city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the
applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name
of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional information
the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall forward the application to the City Council for action at its
next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. If the Clerk/Treasurer shall
determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the
application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make
the application complete.
   (C)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it
may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the
City Council shall approve the license, the Clerk/Treasurer shall issue the
license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license, notice of the
denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant’s
right to appeal the City Council’s decision.
   (D)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for one
calendar year from the date of issue.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended as provided in §
112.99.
   (F)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or
person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Council.
   (G)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be
licensed under this chapter.
   (H)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premises.
   (I)   Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more than 60 days before the
expiration of the current license.
   (J)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license
issued under this chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute
right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal
of the license.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 FEES.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this chapter shall be
established by city ordinance from time to time.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019)
§ 112.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this
chapter include, but are not limited to, the following.
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or tobacco related devices.
      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products,
or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date
of application.
      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information.
      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license.
   (B)   However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of
any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the
license.
   (C)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be
revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.06 PROHIBITED SALES.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to
sell any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic
delivery device:
   (A)   To any person under the age of 21 years;
   (B)   By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be
provided in §
112.07;
   (C)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to
make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in
order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or
electronic delivery device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the
tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery
devices between the licensee, or the licensee’s employee, and the customer;
   (D)   By means of loosies as defined in §
112.02;
   (E)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes
or other tobacco products; and/or
   (F)   By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.07 VENDING MACHINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or electronic
delivery devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all
times prohibited from entering the licensed establishment.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by any means whereby the
customer may have access to those items without having to request the item from
the licensee or the licensee’s employee and whereby there is not a physical
exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic
delivery devices between the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer. All
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and electronic delivery
devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely
accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and
accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices at the time
this chapter is adopted shall comply with this section within 90 days following
the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.09 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of
their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
related devices, or electronic delivery devices on the licensed premises, and
the sale of an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license
holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from
also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this
chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or
other authorized city official during regular business hours, in accordance
with §
10.20. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct
compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or
guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than 21 years to enter the
licensed premise to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
related devices, or electronic delivery devices. Minors used for the purpose of
compliance checks shall be supervised by city designated law enforcement
officers or other designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks
shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices when those items are
obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks
shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor’s age,
and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all
questions about the minor’s age asked by the licensee or his or her employee
and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is
asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by
state or federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or
required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.11 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter.
   (A)   Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related
device, or electronic delivery devices to any minor.
   (B)   Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco
related device, or electronic delivery device. This division (B) shall not
apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
   (C)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to
smoke, chew, snuff, or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco
related device, or electronic delivery device.
   (D)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco,
tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device and it
shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise
obtain those items on behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for
any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or
otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device,
or electronic delivery device. This division (D) shall not apply to minors
lawfully involved in a compliance check.
   (E)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.12 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices to a
minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural
ceremony.
   (B)   It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter
for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state
law.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits an underage person from handling
tobacco products in the course of lawful employment.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019)
§ 112.13 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator
shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her
right to be heard on the accusation.
   (B)   Hearings. If a person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a
hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and
provided to the accused violator.
   (C)   Hearing officer. The city official designated by the City Council
shall serve as the hearing officer.
   (D)   Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this
chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer’s reasons for
finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under §
112.99, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the
accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, those findings shall be
recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
   (E)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be
filed in the District Court for the city in which the alleged violation
occurred.
   (F)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of
this chapter.
   (G)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or whose
employee shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged an administrative
fine of $100 for a first violation of this chapter; $200 for a second offense
at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; $400 for a third, and
$750 for each offense thereafter at the same location within a 24-month period.
In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not
less than seven days.
   (B)   Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated by
division (C) below, found to be in violation of this chapter shall be charged
an administrative fee of $100.
   (C)   Minors. Minors found in unlawful possession of or who unlawfully
purchase, or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices, shall be subject to an administrative fine, or may be subject to
tobacco related education classes, diversion programs, community services, or
another penalty that the city believes will be appropriate and effective. The
administrative fine or other penalty shall be established by City Council
ordinance upon the City Council’s consultation with interested parties of the
courts, educators, parents, and children to determine an appropriate penalty
for minors in the city. This administrative fine or other penalty may also be
established from time to time by city ordinance.
   (D)   Misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from
seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter.
   (E)   Statutory penalties. If the administrative penalties authorized to be
imposed by M.S. § 461.12, as it may be amended from time to time, differ from
those established in this section, then the statutory penalties shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 1-8-2019)
CHAPTER 113: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
113.01   Purpose
   
113.02   Definition
   
113.03   Permit requirements
   
113.04   Permit application
   
113.05   Permit conditions
   
113.06   Permit issuance
   
113.07   Pedestrian walkway/alley
   
113.08   Exemptions
   
113.09   Indemnification agreement
   
113.10   Revocation of permit
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapter sets forth the procedure for the time, place, and
manner of holding certain special events on city property. This policy is
enacted in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of all residents
and visitors of the city by ensuring that special events do not create
disturbances, become nuisances, menace or threaten life, health, and property,
disrupt traffic, or threaten or damage private or public property. It is not
the intent of the City Council by enacting this policy to regulate in any
manner the content of speech or infringe upon the right to assemble, except for
regulating the time, place, and manner of speech and assembly, and this policy
should not be interpreted or construed otherwise.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023)
§ 113.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition applies unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any festival, rally, street dance, sports event, or other
attended outdoor gathering, entertainment, or celebration that is to be held in
whole or in part upon publicly owned property or public right-of-way, or, if
held wholly upon private property, will affect or impact the ordinary and
normal use by the general public of public property or public rights-of-way
and/or will create excessive noise or disruptions in a residential area within
the vicinity of the event.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023)
§ 113.03 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All special events subject to this chapter shall have a permit for a
special event reviewed and approved or approved with conditions by the City
Council before conducting the special event.
   (B)   A temporary use permit for a special event authorized in accordance
with this subchapter shall be limited to a maximum duration of 14 days per site
per calendar year unless otherwise specifically authorized by the City Clerk/
Treasurer.
   (C)   Special events shall not operate before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.
unless a special event permit (or other) for the activity has been approved by
the City Council. The permit shall supersede the provisions of specified
chapters for the duration of the event.
   (D)   Any person or organization desiring to conduct or sponsor a special
event in the city shall first obtain a special event permit from the city.
   (E)   Any person or organization desiring to sponsor a special event must
apply to the city for a special event permit.
   (F)   An organization, nonprofit, business, or individual may sponsor all
activities for anyone special event (i.e. Wenonga Days). The form must indicate
that the entity is sponsoring all activities for the special event and provide
the liability insurance certificate to the city. Without an entity willing to
serve as the “umbrella permit carrier,” each activity, food vendor, and the
like must individually apply to the city for a special event permit and provide
liability insurance.
   (G)   Food vendors must submit a copy of their permit issued by the County
or State Department of Health for serving food at the event. If the food vendor
is a participant under a sponsoring entity (umbrella permit). The sponsoring
entity must collect and submit a copy of the permit to the city with all other
paperwork.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application information. Special event applications must include the
following information:
      (1)   Description of the event and list of all activities to take place;
whether food or alcohol is being served or sold; admission fees/camping and the
like;
      (2)   Name of the applicant or sponsor with contact information;
      (3)   Proposed date(s) of the special event, together with the beginning
and ending times for each date;
      (4)   Proposed location of the special event;
      (5)   Any public health plans, including supplying water to the site,
solid waste collection, and provision of toilet facilities;
      (6)   Assistance requested from any city departments;
      (7)   Liability insurance certificate with the city listed as additional
insured unless the event is on private property; and
      (8)   Signature of the applicant.
   (B)   Permit review. The City Council will review applications and will
determine whether the permit shall be granted.
   (C)   Permit denial. The City Council may deny an application for a special
event permit if it determines from a consideration of the application or other
pertinent information that:
      (1)   The applicant fails to supply the information requested after
having been notified by the City Clerk/Treasurer of additional information or
documents needed;
      (2)   The applicant fails to agree to abide or comply with all of the
conditions and terms of the special event permit;
      (3)   Another special event permit application has already been approved
to hold another special event at the same time and place requested by the
applicant;
      (4)   The location of the special event would cause undue hardship for
adjacent businesses or residents;
      (5)   The special event would endanger public safety or health;
      (6)   The special event would seriously inconvenience the general
public’s use of public property, services, or facilities;
      (7)   The applicant fails to comply with the liability insurance
requirements or the applicant’s insurance lapses or is canceled;
      (8)   The special event would create or constitute a public nuisance, or
likely to cause significant damage to public property or facilities;
      (9)   The special event would engage in or encourage participants to
engage in illegal acts; and
      (10)   The City Council shall deny any application, other than for the
annual summer community parade, which requires the closing or detouring of any
section of State Highway #78. The City Council may approve applications that
require the crossing of State Highway #78.
   (D)   Permit standards. In addition to the general temporary use criteria to
be reviewed with the permit application, the following standards shall also
apply.
      (1)   The application shall be certified by the applicant as not
containing intentionally false or materially misleading information.
      (2)   There is a finding that the special event would not create an
unreasonable risk of significant:
         (a)   Damage to public or private property, beyond normal wear and
tear;
         (b)   Injury to persons;
         (c)   Public or private disturbance or nuisances;
         (d)   Unsafe impediments or distractions to, or congestion of,
vehicular or pedestrian travel;
         (e)   Additional and impracticable or unduly burdensome police, fire,
trash removal, maintenance, or other public services demands; and/or
         (f)   Other adverse effects upon the public health, safety, or
welfare.
      (3)   The special event shall not be of such a nature, size, or duration
that the particular location requested cannot reasonably accommodate the event.
      (4)   The special event shall not conflict with another permitted special
event at the same location in a manner that will negatively impact public
health, welfare, or safety.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023)
§ 113.05 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may condition the issuance of a special event permit
by imposing reasonable conditions concerning the time, place, and manner of the
special event, and such conditions are necessary to protect the safety of
persons and property, and the control of traffic; provided that such conditions
shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech.
   (B)   Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Alteration of the date(s), time(s), route, or location of the
special event proposed;
      (2)   Requirements for the use of city personnel and equipment;
      (3)   Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary facilities
at the special event;
      (4)   Requirements for the use of garbage containers and the clean-up and
restoration of any public property;
      (5)   Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with
noise ordinances, regulations, and laws;
      (6)   Requirements to provide notice of the special event to surrounding
property owners;
      (7)   Restrictions on the sale or consumption of food and alcohol,
including licensing;
      (8)   Provision of temporary parking facilities, including vehicular
access and egress;
      (9)   Control of nuisance factors, such as, but not limited to, the
prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, noise,
vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat;
      (10)   Regulation of temporary buildings, structures, and facilities,
including placement, height, and size, location of equipment, and open spaces,
including buffer areas and other yards;
      (11)   Provision of security and safety measures;
      (12)   Use of an alternative location or date for the proposed special
event;
      (13)   Modification or elimination of certain proposed activities;
      (14)   Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of
the duration of the special event to a shorter time period than that requested
or specified in this section; or
      (15)   Submission of a performance guarantee to ensure that any temporary
facilities or structures used for the proposed special event will be removed
from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the
property will be restored to its former condition.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023)
§ 113.06 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue the special events permit once the
application has been approved by the City Council and the applicant has agreed
to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit as well as the
requirements and restrictions as outlined by the City Council.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023)
§ 113.07 PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY/ALLEY.
   Events in this walkway must comply with the requirements of this policy. For
those events in this walkway that are time sensitive and the deadline for
requesting approval from the City Council cannot be made, the City Council will
allow the Clerk/Treasurer to determine they have met the requirements of this
policy, including insurance requirements and the Clerk/Treasurer can award the
permit. All other events in this alley will need to have City Council approval
for the permit.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   Exemptions to this chapter include the following:
   (A)   Event sponsored by city or state. Any event sponsored in whole or in
part by the city or state;
   (B)   Event or activity at the site intended for such event or activity. Any
organized activities conducted at sites or facilities typically intended and
used for such activities. Examples of the exempt activities include, but are
not limited to, sporting events such as golf, soccer, softball, and baseball
tournaments conducted on courses or fields intended and used for such
activities; fairs and carnivals at fairgrounds; wedding services conducted at
reception halls, or similar facilities; funeral services conducted at funeral
homes or cemeteries; religious services, wedding services, and funeral services
conducted at religious institutions;
   (C)   Event approved as part of another permit. Temporary special events
that are expressly approved as part of another permit shall not require
separate review under this chapter; and
   (D)   Events held at city parks such as family gatherings, birthday parties,
and other events not open to the public will be considered exempt.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023)
§ 113.09 INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.
   If the event or any portion of the event is to be held on city property or
right-of-way, prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit
applicant and authorizing officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, must
sign an agreement to indemnify, defend, and hold the city, its officials,
employees, and agents harmless from any claim that arises in whole or in part
out of the special event, except any claims arising solely out of the negligent
acts or omissions of the city, its officials, employees, and agents.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.10 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit issued may be revoked by a law enforcement officer or by any
person appointed by the City Council at any time when, by reason of disaster,
public calamity, riot, or other emergency, the law enforcement officer or other
person appointed by the City Council determines that the safety of the public
or property requires such revocation. The Chief of Police, Public Works
Superintendent, or the City Clerk/Treasurer may revoke any special event permit
issued pursuant to this policy if he or she finds that the permit has been
issued based upon false information or when the permittee exceeds the scope of
the permit. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in
writing to the permittee by personal service or certified mail at the address
specified by the permittee in its application.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
criminal penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. passed 3-15-2023; Ord. passed 6-13-2023)
CHAPTER 114: CANNABIS AND CANNABIS-DERIVED PRODUCTS
Section
   
114.01   Purpose and intent
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Prohibited acts
§ 114.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted by the City Council for the purpose of
protecting public health and safety by regulating/prohibiting the use of
cannabis and cannabis-derived products in public places and places of public
accommodation within the city.
   (B)   By enacting the 2023 Session Law, Chapter 63, H. F. No. 100
(hereinafter referred to “State Legislation”), as it may be amended from time
to time, the State Legislature passed the adult-use cannabis bill. Under that
bill, the adult use, possession, and personal growing of cannabis will become
legal on August 1, 2023.
   (C)   State legislation authorizes the adoption of a local ordinance
establishing a petty misdemeanor offense for public use of cannabis.
   (D)   The city wishes to be proactive in protecting public health and safety
by enacting regulations that will mitigate threats presented to the public by
the public use of cannabis.
   (E)   The city recognizes the risks that unintended access and use of
cannabis products present to the health, welfare, and safety of youth in the
city.
(Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Authorization, see M.S. § 152.0263, subd. 5
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS FLOWER. Cannabis flower that is approved for sale by the
State Office of Cannabis Management or is substantially similar to a product
approved by the office. ADULT-USE CANNABIS FLOWER does not include medical
cannabis flower, hemp plant parts, or hemp-derived consumer products.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PRODUCTS. A cannabis product that is approved for sale by
the State Office of Cannabis Management or is substantially similar to a
product approved by the office. ADULT-USE CANNABIS PRODUCT includes edible
cannabis products but does not include medical cannabinoid products or lower-
potency hemp edibles.
   CANNABIS FLOWER. The harvested flower, bud, leaves, and stems of a cannabis
plant. CANNABIS FLOWER includes adult-use cannabis flower and medical cannabis
flower. CANNABIS FLOWER does not include cannabis seed, hemp plant parts, or
hemp-derived consumer products.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT. Any of the following:
      (1)   Cannabis concentrate;
      (2)   A product infused with cannabinoids, including, but not limited to,
tetrahydrocannabinol extracted or derived from cannabis plants or cannabis
flower; or
      (3)   Any other product that contains cannabis concentrate.
   HEMP-DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS.
      (1)   A product intended for human or animal consumption, does not
contain cannabis flower or cannabis concentrate, and:
         (a)   Contains or consists of hemp plant parts; or
         (b)   Contains hemp concentrate or artificially derived cannabinoids
in combination with other ingredients.
      (2)   HEMP-DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS does not include artificially
derived cannabinoids, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived topical
products, hemp fiber products, or hemp grain.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. Any product that:
      (1)   Is intended to be eaten or consumed as a beverage by humans;
      (2)   Contains hemp concentrate or an artificially derived cannabinoid,
in combination with food ingredients;
      (3)   Is not a drug;
      (4)   Consists of servings that contain no more than five milligrams of
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, 25 milligrams of cannabidiol, 25 milligrams of
cannabigerol, or any combination of those cannabinoids that does not exceed the
identified amounts;
      (5)   Does not contain more than a combined total of one-half milligram
of all other cannabinoids per serving;
      (6)   Does not contain an artificially derived cannabinoid other than
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol;
      (7)   Does not contain a cannabinoid derived from cannabis plants or
cannabis flower; and
      (8)   Is a type of product approved for sale by the office or is
substantially similar to a product approved by the office, including, but not
limited to, products that resemble nonalcoholic beverages, candy, and baked
goods.
   PUBLIC PLACE or PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION.
      (1)   A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk, any enclosed,
indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited to,
theaters, restaurants, bars, food establishments, places licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor, wine, or malt beverages, retail businesses, gyms, common
areas in buildings, public shopping areas, auditoriums, arenas, or other PLACES
OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION.
      (2)   A business, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, or
transportation facility of any kind, whose goods, services, facilities
privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or
otherwise made available to the public.
      (3)   A PUBLIC PLACE or PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION does not include
the following:
         (a)   A private residence, including the individual’s curtilage or
yard;
         (b)   A private property, not generally accessible by the public,
unless the individual is explicitly prohibited from consuming cannabis flower,
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products on the property by the owner of the property; or
         (c)   On the premises of an establishment or event licensed to permit
on-site consumption.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated product containing
cannabis flower, cannabis products, artificially derived cannabinoids, or hemp-
derived consumer products. SMOKING includes carrying or using an activated
electronic delivery device for human consumption through inhalation of aerosol
or vapor from the product.
(Ord. passed 8-8-2023)
§ 114.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency
hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place or a place of
public accommodation unless the premises is an establishment or an event
licensed to permit on-site consumption of adult-use cannabis flower and adult-
use cannabis products.
   (B)   No person shall vaporize or smoke cannabis flower, cannabis products,
artificially derived cannabinoids, or hemp-derived consumer products in any
location where the smoke, aerosol, or vapor would be inhaled by a minor.
(Ord. passed 8-8-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory Reference:
   Use by minors, see M.S. § 342.09, subd. 1(7)(b)(9)
   Use in public, see M.S. §§ 342.09, subd. 1(2) and subd. 1(7)(iii), and
152.0263, subd. 5
CHAPTER 115: CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
Administration
   
115.01   Findings and purpose
   
115.02   Authority and jurisdiction
   
115.03   Enforcement
   
115.04   Definitions
Registration of Cannabis Business
   
115.20   Consent to registering of cannabis business
   
115.21   Compliance checks prior to retail registration
   
115.22   Registration and application procedure
   
115.23   Renewal of registration
   
115.24   Suspension of registration
   
115.25   Limiting of registrations
Requirements for Cannabis Businesses
   
115.35   Minimum buffer requirements
   
115.36   Zoning and land use
   
115.37   Hours of operation
   
115.38   Advertising
Temporary Cannabis Events
   
115.50   Events in city limits
   
115.51   License or permit required for temporary cannabis events
Use in Public Places
   
115.60   Use in public places
ADMINISTRATION
§ 115.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The city makes the following legislative findings:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S. Ch.
342, which authorizes the city to protect the public health, safety, welfare of
the city’s residents by regulating cannabis businesses within the legal
boundaries of the city.
   (B)   The city finds and concludes that the proposed provisions are
appropriate and lawful land use regulations for Battle Lake, that the proposed
amendments will promote the community's interest in reasonable stability in
zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed provisions are in the
public interest and for the public good.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.02 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   The city has the authority to adopt this chapter pursuant to:
   (A)   M.S. § 342.13(c), regarding the authority of a local unit of
government to adopt reasonable restrictions of the time, place, and manner of
the operation of a cannabis business provided that such restrictions do not
prohibit the establishment or operation of cannabis businesses.
   (B)   M.S. § 342.22, regarding the local registration and enforcement
requirements of state-licensed cannabis retail businesses and lower-potency
hemp edible retail businesses.
   (C)   M.S. § 152.0263, subd. 5, regarding the use of cannabis in public
places.
   (D)   M.S. § 462.357, regarding the authority of a local authority to adopt
zoning ordinances.
   (E)   This chapter shall be applicable to the legal boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Clerk/Treasurer and Police Chief or their designee are responsible
for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any violation of the
provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements
constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. Violations of
this chapter can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a
regulated activity listed in this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.04 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise noted in this section, words and phrases contained in M.S.
§ 342.01 and the rules promulgated pursuant to any of these acts, shall have
the same meanings in this chapter.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION. A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis plants
within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to mature
plant, harvest cannabis flower from mature plants, package and label immature
plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis businesses,
transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the same
premises, and perform other actions approved by the office.
   CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES. A retail location and the retail location(s) of
a mezzobusinesses with a retail operations endorsement, microbusinesses with a
retail operations endorsement, medical combination businesses operating a
retail location, including lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
   CANNABIS RETAILER. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and
not for the purpose of resale in any form.
   DAYCARE. A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human Services
to provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child's own home for
gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a 24-hour day.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. As defined under M.S. § 342.01, subd. 50.
   OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as "OCM" in this chapter.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
   PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL. OCM pre-approval for a cannabis business
license for applicants who qualify under M.S. § 342.17.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals;
nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. As defined under M.S. § 245.462, subd. 23.
   RETAIL REGISTRATION. An approved registration issued by the city to a state-
licensed cannabis retail business.
   SCHOOL. A public school as defined under M.S. § 120A.05 or a nonpublic
school that must meet the reporting requirements under M.S. § 120A.24.
   STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued by the State of Minnesota's Office
of Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES
§ 115.20 CONSENT TO REGISTERING OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   No individual or entity may operate a state-licensed cannabis retail
business within the city without first registering with the City Clerk's
office.
   (B)   Any state-licensed cannabis retail business that sells to a customer
or patient without valid retail registration shall incur a civil penalty of
$2,000 for each violation.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.21 COMPLIANCE CHECKS PRIOR TO RETAIL REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of a cannabis retail business registration, the city
shall conduct a preliminary compliance check to ensure compliance with local
ordinances.
   (B)   Pursuant to M.S. Ch. 342, within 30 days of receiving a copy of a
state license application from OCM the city shall certify on a form provided by
OCM whether a proposed cannabis retail business complies with local zoning
ordinances and, if applicable, whether the proposed business complies with the
State Fire Code and Building Code.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.22 REGISTRATION AND APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Fees.
      (1)   The city shall charge an application fee.
      (2)   A registration fee, as established in the city fee schedule, shall
be charged to applicants depending on the type of retail business license
applied for.
      (3)   An initial retail registration fee shall not exceed $500 or half
the amount of an initial state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever is
less. The initial registration fee shall include the initial retail
registration fee and the first annual renewal fee.
      (4)   Any renewal retail registration fee imposed by the city shall be
charged at the time of the second renewal and each subsequent renewal
thereafter.
      (5)   A renewal retail registration fee shall not exceed $1,000 or half
the amount of a renewal state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever is
less.
      (6)   A medical combination business operating an adult-use retail
location may only be charged a single registration fee, not to exceed the
lesser of a single retail registration fee, defined under this section, of the
adult-use retail business.
   (B)   Application submittal. The city shall issue a retail registration to a
state-licensed cannabis retail business that adheres to the requirements of
M.S. § 342.22.
      (1)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the city. Said form shall include, but is not
limited to:
         (a)   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
         (b)   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant;
         (c)   The address and parcel ID for the property which the retail
registration is sought; and
         (d)   Certification that the applicant complies with the requirements
of local ordinances established pursuant to M.S. § 342.13.
      (2)   The applicant shall include with the form:
         (a)   The application fee as required in the city's fee schedule;
         (b)   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM license
preapproval; and
         (c)   A complete background check.
      (3)   Once an application is considered complete, the City Clerk shall
inform the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward the
application to the City Council for approval or denial.
      (4)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
   (C)   Application approval.
      (1)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application shall not be
approved if the cannabis retail business would exceed the maximum number of
registered cannabis retail businesses permitted under §
115.25.
      (2)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application shall not be
approved or renewed if the applicant is unable to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
      (3)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application that meets
the requirements of this chapter shall be approved.
   (D)   Annual compliance checks.
      (1)   The city shall complete at minimum one compliance check per
calendar year of every cannabis business to assess if the business meets age
verification requirements state and city regulations.
      (2)   The city shall conduct at minimum one unannounced age verification
compliance check at least once per calendar year.
      (3)   Age verification compliance checks shall involve persons at least
17 years of age but under the age of 21 who, with the prior written consent of
a parent or guardian if the person is under the age of 18, attempt to purchase
adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products under the direct supervision of a
law enforcement officer or an employee of the local unit of government.
      (4)   Any failures under this section must be reported to the Office of
Cannabis Management.
   (E)   Location change. A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall be
required to submit a new application for registration under §
115.22(B) if it seeks to move to a new location still within the legal
boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.23 RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   The city shall renew an annual registration of a state-licensed
cannabis retail business at the same time OCM renews the cannabis retail
business' license.
      (2)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall apply to renew
registration on a form established by the city.
      (3)   A cannabis retail registration issued under this chapter shall not
be transferred.
   (B)   Renewal fees. The city may charge a renewal fee for the registration
starting at the second renewal, as established in the city's fee schedule.
   (C)   Renewal application. The application for renewal of a retail
registration shall include, but is not limited to: items required under §
115.22(B).
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.24 SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   When suspension is warranted. The city may suspend a cannabis retail
business's registration if it violates this chapter or poses an immediate
threat to the health or safety of the public. The city shall immediately notify
the cannabis retail business in writing the grounds for the suspension.
   (B)   Notification to OCM. The city shall immediately notify the OCM in
writing the grounds for the suspension. OCM will provide the city and cannabis
business retailer a response to the complaint within seven calendar days and
perform any necessary inspections within 30 calendar days.
   (C)   Length of suspension.
      (1)   The suspension of a cannabis retail business registration may be
for up to 30 calendar days, unless OCM suspends the license for a longer
period. The business may not make sales to customers if their registration is
suspended.
      (2)   The city reinstate a registration if OCM determines that the
violation(s) have been resolved.
   (D)   Civil penalties. Subject to M.S. § 342.22, subd. 5(e) the city may
impose a civil penalty, as specified in the city's fee schedule, for
registration violations, not to exceed $2,000.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.25 LIMITING OF REGISTRATIONS.
    If the city has one active cannabis retail business registration for every
12,500 residents, the city shall not register additional state-licensed
cannabis retail businesses.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES
§ 115.35 MINIMUM BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis business within
1,000 feet of a school and school athletic fields.
   (B)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis business within
500 feet of a daycare.
   (C)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis business within
500 feet of an attraction within a public park that is regularly used by
minors, including a playground, bike/pedestrian trail or athletic field.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ § 115.36 ZONING AND LAND USE.
   (A)   Cultivation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for cultivation
are permitted in as a condition use in commercial zoning districts.
   (B)   Cannabis manufacturer. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cannabis manufacturer are permitted as a conditional use in commercial zoning
districts.
   (C)   Hemp manufacturer. Businesses licensed or endorsed for low-potency
hemp edible manufacturers are permitted as a conditional use in commercial
zoning districts.
   (D)   Wholesale. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for wholesale are
permitted as a conditional use in commercial zoning districts.
   (E)   Cannabis retail. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for cannabis
retail are permitted as a conditional use in commercial zoning districts.
   (F)   Cannabis transportation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
transportation are permitted as a conditional use in commercial zoning
districts.
   (H)   Cannabis delivery. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
delivery are permitted as a conditional use in commercial zoning districts.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.37 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Cannabis businesses are limited to retail sale of cannabis, cannabis flower,
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.38 ADVERTISING.
   Cannabis businesses are permitted to erect up to two fixed signs on the
exterior of the building or property of the business, unless otherwise limited
by the city's sign ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS
§ 115.50 EVENTS IN CITY LIMITS.
   Temporary cannabis events will not be allowed within the city limits.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 115.51 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   (A)   License required. A license or permit is required to be issued and
approved by the city prior to holding a temporary cannabis event.
   (B)   Registration and application procedure. A registration fee, as
established in the city's fee schedule, shall be charged to applicants for
temporary cannabis events.
   (C)   Application submittal and review. The city shall require an
application for temporary cannabis events.
      (1)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the city, said form shall include, but is not
limited to:
         (a)   Full name of the property owner and applicant; and
         (b)   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant.
      (2)   The applicant shall include with the form:
         (a)   The application fee as required in §
115.51(B).
         (b)   A copy of the OCM cannabis event license application, submitted
pursuant to M.S. § 342.39, subd. 2.
      (3)   The application shall be submitted to the Clerk/Treasurer or other
designee for review. If the designee determines that a submitted application is
incomplete, they shall return the application to the applicant with the notice
of deficiencies.
      (4)   Once an application is considered complete, the designee shall
inform the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward the
application to the Clerk/Treasurer for approval or denial.
      (5)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
      (6)   The application for a license for a temporary cannabis event shall
meet the following standards:
         (a)   Temporary cannabis events shall only be held at licensed
cannabis retailers.
         (b)   Temporary cannabis events shall only be held between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
         (c)   No on-site consumption.
         (d)   Anyone under age 21 will not be allowed.
      (7)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that meets the
requirements of this section shall be approved.
      (8)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that does not meet the
requirements of this section shall be denied. The city shall notify the
applicant of the standards not met and basis for denial.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
USE IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 115.60 USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place or a place of
public accommodation unless the premises is an establishment or an event
licensed to permit on-site consumption of adult-use.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 12-10-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GAMBLING
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 130: GAMBLING
Section
   
130.01   Purpose and intent
   
130.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
130.03   Definitions
   
130.04   Applicability
   
130.05   Lawful gambling permitted
   
130.06   Council approval
   
130.07   Application and local approval of premises permits
   
130.08   License and permit display
   
130.09   Notification of material change to application
   
130.10   Contribution of net profits to fund administered by city
   
130.11   Records and reporting
   
130.12   Hours of operation
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 349, as they may be amended from time
to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operations,
provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful
gambling are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as
if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future
amendments of M.S. Chapter 349 are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as
if they had been in existence at the time this chapter was adopted.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the
city, to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of operations,
and to provide for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes.
§ 130.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The City Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter
additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained in
M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 130.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 349.12, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter.
   BOARD. The State Gambling Control Board.
   CITY. The City Council.
   LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.
   LOCAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the city.
§ 130.04 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful gambling
within the city except:
   (A)   Bingo conducted within a nursing home, senior citizen housing project,
senior citizen organization or church if: total prizes awarded at a single
bingo occasion do not exceed $200, no more than two bingo occasions are held
each week, no compensation is paid for any person who conducts the bingo, and a
manager is appointed to supervise the bingo;
   (B)   Raffles, if the value of all prizes awarded by the organization in a
calendar year does not exceed $1,500; and
   (C)   Raffles held by school districts and nonprofit organizations created
primarily to support programs of the school district and allowed under M.S.
Chapter 378 § 2, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 130.05 LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.
   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city, provided it is conducted in
accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.763, inclusive, as they may be
amended from time to time; M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23, inclusive, as they
may be amended from time to time, and this chapter.
§ 130.06 COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23, inclusive, as
they may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved
by the City Council, subject to the provisions of this chapter and state law.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07 APPLICATION AND LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMITS.
   (A)   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit from the Board
shall file with the City Clerk/Treasurer an executed, complete duplicate
application together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the
application as filed with the Board.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance of a premises permit, the
City Clerk/Treasurer shall transmit the application to the Chief of Police for
review and recommendation.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the matter and make a
recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no event later
than 45 days following receipt of the notification by the city.
   (D)   The City Council may impose an investigation fee, which organizations
applying for a state-issued premises permit must pay. The fee, if imposed,
shall be refunded if the application is withdrawn before the investigation
commences.
   (E)   The applicant shall be notified of the date on which the City Council
will consider the recommendation.
   (F)   The City Council shall receive the Police Chief’s report and consider
the application within 45 days of the date the application was submitted to the
City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (G)   The City Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the
application within 60 days of receipt of the application.
   (H)   (1)   The City Council shall deny an application for issuance of a
premises permit for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute,
state rule, or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last three years;
         (b)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing
its premises for gambling, of any state statute, state rule, or city ordinance
relating to operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to, laws
relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression
of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three years;
         (c)   Failure of the applicant to pay the investigation fee, if one is
imposed; and/or
         (d)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to
health, safety, and welfare of the community.
      (2)   Otherwise, the City Council shall approve the application.
§ 130.08 LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.
   All permits issued under state law shall be prominently displayed during the
permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09 NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGE TO APPLICATION.
   An organization holding a state-issued premises permit shall notify the city
within ten days in writing whenever any material change is made in the
information submitted on the application.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.10 CONTRIBUTION OF NET PROFITS TO FUND ADMINISTERED BY CITY.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city
pursuant to M.S. § 349.16, as it may be amended from time to time, shall
contribute 10% of its net profits derived from lawful gambling, except bingo
and raffles, in the city to a fund administered and regulated by the city
without cost to the fund. The city shall disburse the funds for lawful purposes
as defined by M.S. § 349.12, subd. 25, as it may be amended from time to time.
For the purpose of this requirement, NET PROFITS are defined as gross profit
less sums actually expended for allowable expenses as reported to the State
Department of Revenue. Such contributions shall be made to the city within 30
days of the end of the organization’s fiscal year.
   (B)   The city shall use such funds to assist in the operations of the City
Police Department or for other emergency services as deemed lawful by the
state.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.11 RECORDS AND REPORTING.
   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the City Clerk/
Treasurer one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with the
Board, pursuant to M.S. Chapter 349, as it may amended from time to time and
rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time. The
records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required to be
filed with the Board.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.12 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
any day of the week.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter; M.S. §§ 609.75
through 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; or M.S.
§§ 349.11 through 349.21, as they may be amended from time to time, or any
rules promulgated under those sections, as they may be amended from time to
time, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or both, plus in either case, the
costs of prosecution. In addition, violations shall be reported to the Board
and recommendation shall be made for suspension, revocation, or cancellation of
an organization’s license.
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Injury to public property
   
131.02   Interference with public construction
§ 131.01 INJURY TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall cut, deface, mark, or engrave any character, figure, letter,
or name upon any building or structure owned, occupied, or used by the city.
Nor shall any person in any manner mar, deface, or injure any tree, shrub,
plant, vine, or any public property in any park, or in or around the grounds of
any public building.
(Prior Code, § 133.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.02 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION.
   No person shall remove any barricade upon any street or other public
property, or otherwise interfere with any construction upon any street or other
public property. Nor shall any person walk upon, drive upon, or ride over or
across any street or sidewalk construction which has not been opened for
travel.
(Prior Code, § 133.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
Section
   
132.01   Interference with officer or official
   
132.02   Impersonating an officer or official
   
132.03   Refusal to aid officer
   
132.04   Interference with election
§ 132.01 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICER OR OFFICIAL.
   No person shall interfere with or attempt to interfere with any police
officer or any duly acting official of the city in the performance of the
duties of the officer or official.
(Prior Code, § 131.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.02 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR OFFICIAL.
   No person shall falsely and without authority impersonate any police
officer, or assume any uniform or badge by which a police officer is
distinguished, or without authority to do so exercise or attempt to exercise
any of the powers of a police officer. No person shall falsely and without
authority impersonate any official of the city.
(Prior Code, § 131.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.03 REFUSAL TO AID OFFICER.
   No person shall refuse to aid any police officer in the performance of
official police duties when aid is requested by the officer.
(Prior Code, § 131.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.04 INTERFERENCE WITH ELECTION.
   No person shall interfere with any election or violate any of the provisions
of law relating to elections, with respect to any election conducted wholly or
partly by or within this city.
(Prior Code, § 131.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
133.01   Curfew for minors
   
133.02   Open burning
   
133.03   Social host
Predatory Offenders
   
133.15   Purpose and intent
   
133.16   Definitions
   
133.17   Prohibitions; exceptions
   
133.18   Restrictions relating to rental property
   
133.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 133.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that, if not completed promptly, threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or Fire Department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock used by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT, OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor.
The person providing PRIMARY CARE or CUSTODY to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school-sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours for minors under the age of 18 years. No minor under the age of
18 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot,
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city
time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business, trade, profession, or occupation and the minor’s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor’s presence at work;
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor’s
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor;
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew;
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion;
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minor’s presence; and
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian,
or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or
other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one
of the exceptions to this section applies.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief,
Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides
fire protection services to the city.
      OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct, or chimney, except a RECREATIONAL FIRE as defined herein. Mobile
cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers,
and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as OPEN BURNING.
      RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than
three feet in height, contained within the border of a recreational fire site
using dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor, or soot beyond
the property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished
completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions,
neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health, or safety
hazards will not be created. No more than one RECREATIONAL FIRE is allowed on
any property at one time.
      RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE. An area of no more than a three-foot diameter
circle (measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely
surrounded by non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either
of natural rock, cement, brick, tile, or blocks or ferrous metal only on which
area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. Included are
permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a
RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE as defined herein. RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall not be
located closer than 25 feet to any structure.
      STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard,
or charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as
STARTER FUELS and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean
gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open
burn.
      WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only, such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto
logs,” charcoal, cord wood, or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not
include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or
treated with paint, glue, or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for
recreational fires when cut into three-foot lengths.
   (B)   Prohibited materials.
      (1)   No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning oils, petro
fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted, or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, sheetrock, wiring, paint, or paint fillers.
      (2)   No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of hazardous
waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
      (3)   No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation,
serving, or consumption of food.
      (4)   No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of any
leaves or grass clippings.
   (C)   Open burning prohibited. No person shall start or allow any open
burning on any property in the city without first having obtained an open burn
permit, except that a permit is not required for any fire which is a
recreational fire as defined in division (A) above.
   (D)   Burning ban or air quality alert. No recreational fire will be
permitted when the city or DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to
potential hazardous fire conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air
Quality Alert.
Penalty, see §
133.99
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention, see Ch. 91
§ 133.03 SOCIAL HOST.
   (A)   Purpose and findings. The City Council intends to discourage underage
possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a
private residence, and intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host
events or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age possess or consume
alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering
supplied the alcohol. The City Council finds that:
      (1)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 are harmful to
those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring
prevention or abatement;
      (2)   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons,
as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption,
such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic collisions;
      (3)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could
have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by
the actions of an irresponsible user;
      (4)   Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are times
when the parent(s) is/are present and condone the activity, and in some
circumstances, provide the alcohol;
      (5)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a
crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further
combat underage consumption; and
      (6)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally
responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs.
   (B)   Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to M.S. § 145A.05, as
amended from time to time.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits, including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains
0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either
alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
      EVENT or GATHERING. Any group of three or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
      HOST or ALLOW. To aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control,
or permit a gathering or event.
      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
         (a)   As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
         (b)   As a legal guardian; or
         (c)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
      RESIDENCE or PREMISES. Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
      UNDERAGE PERSON. Any individual under 21 years of age.
   (D)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to host or allow an event or
gathering at any residence, premises, or on any other private or public
property where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present and the person fails
to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption by the underage
person(s) when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage
person will or does:
         (a)   Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
         (b)   Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it.
      (2)   A person is criminally responsible for violating division (D)(1)
above if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires
with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
      (3)   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be
present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This section does not apply to conduct solely between an underage
person and his or her parents while present in the parent’s household.
      (2)   This section does not apply to legally protected religious
observances.
      (3)   This section does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor 3.2% malt
liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who
are regulated by M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   This section does not apply to situations where underage persons
are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course
and scope of employment.
      (5)   This section does not apply to landlords who are not present during
any activities prohibited under division (D)(1) above.
   (F)   Enforcement. This section can be enforced by any peace officer.
Penalty, see §
133.99
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 110
PREDATORY OFFENDERS
§ 133.15 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The city finds and declares that predatory offenders are likely to use
physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most predatory offenders
commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are
prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of
predatory offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable,
unmistakably steep. It is the intent of this subchapter to serve the city’s
compelling interest to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the city by imposing residency restrictions upon
predatory offenders and creating safety zones around locations where vulnerable
populations regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain
predatory offenders are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent
residence and wherein access by predatory offenders shall be restricted and
excluded.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 133.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CARE FACILITY. Any facility, public or private, licensed by the state or
county, which, for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or more persons
with care, training, supervision, habilitation, or developmental guidance on a
regular basis, for periods less than 24 hours per day, in a place other than
the person’s own home.
   CHILD/CHILDREN. A person or persons under the age of 18 and includes
individuals under the age of 21 who are in foster care.
   DESIGNATED PREDATORY OFFENDER. Any person who has been categorized as a
Level II or Level III predatory offender under M.S. § 244.052, as it may be
amended from time to time, a successor statute, or a similar statute from
another state in which that person’s risk assessment includes a high risk of
re-offense.
   FACILITIES FOR CHILDREN. All public parks, parkways, park facilities,
parkland, public or private schools, designated public school bus stops,
libraries, group homes, foster homes, day care and child care facilities,
public recreation centers, real estate owned by public or private schools,
city-owned property, nonprofit or commercial recreation centers, public or
private playgrounds, public or commercial swimming pools, public beaches, youth
centers, athletic fields used by children, crisis center or shelter, care
facilities for children, skate park or rink, movie theaters, bowling alley,
facilities for children’s clubs e.g., scouting, public recreational areas, and
trails including, but not limited to, snowmobile trails, conservation areas,
jogging trails, hiking trails, walking trails, bicycle trails, offices for
Child Protective Services, place of assembly, and specialized schools for
children including, but not limited to, tutoring, gymnastics, dance, and music
schools.
   PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for
14 or more consecutive days. An ownership interest by the person in such
residence is not required.
   PLACE OF ASSEMBLY. A place of assembly, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other
facility that is used for prayer by persons of similar beliefs or a special
purpose building that is designed or particularly adapted for the primary use
of conducting, on a regular basis, religious services and associated accessory
uses by a religious congregation.
   PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOLS. Establishments primarily engaged in providing
instructional services to elementary or secondary students with a curriculum
that complies with the state regulations, including public schools governed by
an elected school board, private schools, and charter schools.
   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides, for
a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year, and
which is not the person’s permanent address or a place where the person
routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive
or nonconsecutive days in any month, and which is not the person’s permanent
residence.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
§ 133.17 PROHIBITION; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any designated
predatory offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence
within 2,000 feet of any facility for children or care facility.
   (B)   Prohibition present in safety zone. It is unlawful for any designated
predatory offender to be present within 100 feet of any facility for children
or care facility.
   (C)   Prohibited activity. It is unlawful for any designated predatory
offender to participate in a holiday event involving children, such as
distributing candy or other items to children on Halloween, wearing a costume
on Halloween or during any Halloween event, wearing a Santa Claus costume on or
preceding Christmas, or wearing an Easter Bunny costume on or preceding Easter.
Holiday events in which the offender is the parent or guardian of the children
involved, and no non-familial children are present, are exempt from this
division (C).
   (D)   Measurement of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum
distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight
line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to
the nearest outer property line of the facility for children or care facility.
   (E)   Exceptions. A designated predatory offender residing within a
prohibited location as described herein does not commit a violation of this
subchapter if any of the following apply.
      (1)   The designated predatory offender established the permanent
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166
and 243.167, or a successor statute, as amended from time to time, prior to
June 10, 2010. Time spent in the Otter Tail County Jail, psychiatric or
chemical dependency treatment center, hospital, half-way house, or other care
facility shall not constitute prior permanent residence.
      (2)   The designated predatory offender was a minor when he or she
committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult.
      (3)   The designated predatory offender is a minor.
      (4)   The facility for children or care facility within 2,000 feet of the
designated predatory offender’s permanent residence was opened after the
designated predatory offender established the permanent residence and reported
and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166 and 243.167 or a
successor statute, as amended from time to time.
      (5)   The residence is the property purchased, leased, or contracted with
and licensed by the state as a psychiatric care hospital or chemical dependency
treatment facility which has on-site staffing 24 hours a day, as well as the
Otter Tail County Jail.
   (F)   Official map of prohibited locations. City staff shall maintain an
official map showing prohibited locations of residence as defined by this
subchapter. City staff shall review annually and if appropriate update the map
to reflect any changes in the prohibited locations. The map shall not be deemed
conclusive or all-encompassing since some prohibited locations change from time
to time including, but not limited to, other places where children are known to
congregate.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.18 RESTRICTIONS RELATING TO RENTAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a property owner to let or rent any place,
structure, or part thereof, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge
that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any
person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary
residence pursuant to this section if such place, structure, or part thereof,
trailer, or other conveyance, is located within a prohibited location in §
133.17(A).
   (B)   If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a
designated predatory offender after signing a lease or otherwise agreeing to
let the offender reside on the property, the owner or property manager may
evict the offender without further liability to the offender.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
133.03(D) is a misdemeanor.
   (C)   A designated predatory offender who violates §
133.17 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a designated predatory
offender maintains residence in violation of §
133.17 constitutes a separate violation.
   (D)   A property owner violating §
133.18 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. Each day a property owner
violates §
133.18 constitutes a separate violation.
(Ord. passed 12-27-2016)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   WELLHEAD PROTECTION
      
152.   SHORELAND MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
      
153.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
      
154.   RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS
      
155.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Uniform Addressing System
   
150.01   Purpose
   
150.02   City divisions
   
150.03   Building numbers
   
150.04   Number placement, size, color
   
150.05   Numbering of multiple unit dwellings
   
150.06   Maintenance of building numbers
   
150.07   City Zoning Officer to implement system
Sidewalk Construction
   
150.20   Sidewalk construction, alteration, or repairs
Signs and Fences
   
150.35   Findings
   
150.36   Purpose and intent
   
150.37   Effect
   
150.38   Definitions
   
150.39   Administration and enforcement
   
150.40   Exemptions
   
150.41   Prohibited signs
   
150.42   Temporary sign permit
   
150.43   Non-conforming signs
   
150.44   General provisions for permitted signs
   
150.45   Enforcement
   
150.46   Fences, walls, and hedges
   
150.47   General requirements
   
150.48   Residential district fences
   
150.49   Commercial and industrial district fences
   
150.50   Agricultural fences
   
150.51   Special purpose fences
   
150.52   Additional restrictions for fences in the shoreland area
 
   
150.99   Penalty
UNIFORM ADDRESSING SYSTEM
§ 150.01 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that, for the purpose of providing for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city and for protection of
public and private property, it is essential to require visible approved
addressing or identification for each separate public, residential, commercial,
or industrial building.
§ 150.02 CITY DIVISIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of assigning numbers, the city shall be divided
between east and west by State Highway #78, also known as Lake Avenue.
   (B)   The city shall be divided between north and south by Main Street.
   (C)   From the starting point, numbers shall be assigned in ascending order
with even numbers on the right and odd numbers on the left.
§ 150.03 BUILDING NUMBERS.
   (A)   Each primary structure within the city limits shall be assigned an
address by reference to the Uniform Addressing System adopted herein.
   (B)   All existing numbers of property and building that come into conflict
with the Uniform Addressing System shall be changed to conform to the Uniform
Addressing System herein adopted within 90 days of publication.
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.04 NUMBER PLACEMENT, SIZE, COLOR.
   (A)   Each primary structure shall bear the number assigned to it on the
outside near the front entrance facing the public road. Numerals indicating the
official address for each primary structure shall be visible from the street on
which the front entrance faces. The numbers shall be made of metal, glass,
plastic, or other durable material and of a contrasting color to the
background.
   (B)   In those cases where the primary structure’s address is obscured from
view from the street of address by accessory buildings, trees, shrubbery, or
other visual obstruction, the numbers shall be displayed on the mailbox in
numerals not less than two inches high, of a light reflective material and of a
contrasting color to the background. In those cases where the principal
building is obscured from view from the street of address and the residence
does not have a mailbox, the numbers shall be displayed from a permanent
mounting on the property, clearly visible from the street, displayed
prominently in numerals not less than four inches high of contrasting color to
the background. The post should be within 50 feet of the road and ten feet of
the driveway. The bottom of the address sign shall be placed at a height that
is no less than four feet above the level of the surface of the road.
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.05 NUMBERING OF MULTIPLE UNIT DWELLINGS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of every multiple
dwelling building, and the owner or occupant of every individually owned
dwelling unit in any multiple unit building to properly identify each dwelling
unit by attaching identification numbers on or adjacent to each entrance to the
individual units. The owner or manager of any multiple dwelling building with
common entrances, whether the units are rental or individually owned, shall
provide signs easily identifying the location of each dwelling unit in the
building. The signs shall be placed in an obvious location inside each entrance
to the building.
   (B)   In case a primary structure is occupied by more than one business,
each separate front entrance of such structure shall bear a separate number.
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.06 MAINTENANCE OF BUILDING NUMBERS.
   The occupant of the primary structure shall be responsible for keeping its
address numbers in good repair and clear of snow, dirt, debris, or other
obstructions.
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.07 CITY ZONING OFFICER TO IMPLEMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   The City Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to implement this section
by preparing all necessary maps and assigning numbers and by disseminating
information regarding number designations by any appropriate means.
   (B)   The list of addresses for all primary structures within the city shall
be on file at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
§ 150.20 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, OR REPAIRS.
   (A)   (1)   All sidewalks hereafter constructed, altered, or repaired shall
be of sufficient width, not less than that of the existing sidewalk, for the
pedestrian traffic using it, shall be built or rebuilt on the grade then
established and shall be built with the outer edge on a straight line as nearly
as possible.
      (2)   All sidewalks shall be constructed, altered, or repaired with a
good grade of cement, shall be properly troweled, and shall otherwise be of
good materials and work.
   (B)   The City Council may by resolution adopt any further requirements for
the construction, alteration, and repair of sidewalks. From and after the
adoption of any such requirements, all sidewalks constructed, altered, or
repaired shall conform to the requirements.
(Prior Code, § 94.02) Penalty, see §
150.99
SIGNS AND FENCES
§ 150.35 FINDINGS.
   The City Council hereby finds as follows.
   (A)   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and quality
of the environment.
   (B)   Signs provide an important medium through which individuals and
organizations may convey a variety of messages.
   (C)   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns, and detriments
to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (D)   The city’s ordinances have included the regulation of signs in an
effort to provide adequate means of expression and to promote the economic
viability of the business community, while protecting the city and its citizens
from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location, and character that
would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community and threaten the
health, safety, and welfare of the community. The regulation of the physical
characteristics of signs within the city has had a positive impact on traffic
safety and the appearance of the community.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.36 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)    It is not the purpose or intent of this subchapter to regulate the
message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of this
subchapter to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a
sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed outside a building.
   (B)   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination, and other
physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to promote the
public health, safety, and welfare;
      (2)   Maintain, enhance, and improve the aesthetic environment of the
city by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the
community;
      (3)   Improve the visual appearance of the city while providing for
effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and
the city’s goals of public safety and aesthetics; and
      (4)   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations
set for herein under the zoning authority of the city.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.37 EFFECT.
   (A)   A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed, or maintained in the city
if it is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations.
   (B)   The effect of this subchapter, as more specifically set forth herein,
is to:
      (1)   Allow a wide variety of signs types in commercial zones, and a more
limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set forth in
this subchapter;
      (2)   Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal
use of a site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter;
      (3)   Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination, or other
physical characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the
communication can be accomplished by means having lessened impact on the
environment and the public health, safety, and welfare; and
      (4)   Provide for the enforcement of the provision of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.38 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. Any sign and/or supporting sign structure which remains
without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period of one
year or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no
longer applies, shall be deemed to have been ABANDONED. Signs applicable to a
business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management
of such business shall not be deemed ABANDONED unless the property remains
vacant for a period of one year or more. Any sign remaining after demolition of
a principal structure shall be deemed to be ABANDONED. Signs which are present
because of being legally established non-conforming signs or signs which have
required a conditional use permit or a variance shall also be subject to the
definition of ABANDONED SIGN.
   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign which includes action or motion.
   AWNING. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass
designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative
embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure primarily
over a window, walk, or the like. Any part of an AWNING that also projects over
a door shall be counted as AWNING.
   AWNING SIGN. A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion
attached directly to the awning material.
   BALLOON SIGN. A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material
supported by helium, hot or pressurized air which is greater than 24 inches in
diameter.
   BILLBOARD. A sign erected for the purpose of advertising a product, event,
person, or subject not entirely related to the premises on which the sign is
located.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING SIGN. Any sign attached or supported by any structure used or
intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
   CABINET SIGN. Any wall sign that is not of channel or individually mounted
letter construction.
   CANOPY. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass on a
support, which provides shelter over a doorway.
   CANOPY SIGN. Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy made of
fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door or entrance.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof that has a readerboard for
the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic,
or symbol is defined by objects not consisting of an illumination device and
may be changed or rearranged manually or mechanically with characters,
illustrations, letters, or numbers that can be changed or rearranged without
altering the face or surface of the sign structure. CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS do
not include signs upon which characters, letters, or illustrations change or
rearrange only once in a 24-hour period.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, ELECTRONIC. A sign or portion thereof that displays
electronic, non-pictorial text information in which each alphanumeric
character, graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements
using different combinations or light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics,
light bulbs, or other illumination devices within the display area. ELECTRONIC
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled
electronic displays. ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS include projected images
or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or objects. ELECTRONIC
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS do not include official signs.
   COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity,
service, or entertainment.
   DYNAMIC DISPLAY. Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement
or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically removing
and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or
change is in the display, the sign structure, or any other component of the
sign. This includes the displays that incorporate technology or methods
allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or
mechanically replace the sign face or its components as well as any rotating,
revolving, moving, flashing, blinking, or animated display and any display that
incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input,
digital ink, or any other method or technology that allows the sign face to
present a series of images or displays.
   ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGN. Electronic, static images, static graphics,
or static pictures, with or without text information, defined by a small number
of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes
(LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs, or other illumination devices within the
display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or
by means of fade, repixalization, or dissolve modes. ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC SIGNS
include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital
displays. ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGNS include projected images or messages
with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
   ELEVATION. The view of the side, front, or rear of a given structure(s).
   ERECT. Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling, placing,
affixing, attaching, creating, painting, drawing, or any other way of bringing
into being or establishing.
   FLAG. Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of the
material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the material
by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors, patterns,
symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices.
   FLASHING SIGN. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits
changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent
illumination which includes the illusion of intermittent flashing light by
means of animation. Also any mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
twinkling, or sparkling.
   FREE-STANDING SIGN. Any sign that has supporting framework that is placed
on, or anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any building or
other structure.
   GRADE. Shall be construed to be the final ground elevation after
construction. Earth mounding criteria for landscaping and screening is not part
of the final GRADE for sign height computation.
   GROUND SIGN. Any free-standing sign with its face mounted on the ground or
mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a total height not
exceeding eight feet.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN. Computed as the vertical distance measured from the base of
the sign at grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign, whether exterior or interior, which contains an
element designed to emanate artificial light internally or externally.
   INTERIOR SIGN. A sign which is located within the interior of any building,
or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building.
   ISSUING AUTHORITY. The City Zoning Officer.
   LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NON-CONFORMING SIGN. Any sign and its support structure
lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this subchapter which fails to
conform to the requirements of this subchapter. A sign which was erected in
accordance with a conditional use permit or variance granted prior to the
adoption of this subchapter and which does not comply with this subchapter
shall be deemed to be a LEGAL NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign which was unlawfully
erected shall be deemed to be an ILLEGAL SIGN.
   MONUMENT SIGN. Any free-standing sign with its sign face mounted on the
ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a height
exceeding eight feet.
   MULTI-VISION SIGN. Any sign composed in whole or part of a series of
vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at
intervals so that partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces
a different image and, when properly functioning, allows on a single sign
structure the display at any given time one or two or more images.
   NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Dissemination of messages not classified as
COMMERCIAL SPEECH, which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service, and informational
topics.
   OFFICIAL SIGN. Signs of a public, non-commercial nature including public
notification signs, safety signs, traffic signs, direction to public facilities
when erected by or on behalf of a public official or employee in the
performance of official duty.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A commercial speech sign which directs the attention of
the public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a
location not on the same premises where such business sign is located. For
purposes of this subchapter, easements and other appurtenances shall be
considered to be outside such platted parcel of land and any sign located or
proposed to be located in an easement or other appurtenance shall be considered
an OFF-PREMISES SIGN.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. Identify or advertise an establishment, person, activity,
goods, products, or services located on the premises where the sign is
installed. ON-PREMISES SIGNS located within residential districts are not
permitted.
   PARAPET (WALL). That portion of building wall that rises above the roof
level.
   POLE SIGN. See PYLON SIGN.
   POLITICAL SIGN. Any sign which includes the name or picture of an individual
seeking election or appointment to public office, or pertaining to a
forthcoming public election or referendum, or pertaining to or advocating
political views or policies, which is erected on private property by a bonafide
candidate for political office or by a person or group supporting such a
candidate and which contains the name of the person or group responsible for
the erection and removal of the sign.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported,
including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign
may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted to another
sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground, since this
characteristic is based on the design of such a sign.
   PORTE COCHERE. A roofed structure or roof-like cover, extending from the
entrance of a building and which provides shelter over a doorway.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The building in which the principal primary use of the
lot is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses
shall not be considered PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS.
   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than two feet beyond the surface of
such building or wall face.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Legal owner of property as officially recorded by the
county.
   PUBLIC NOTICES. Official notices posted by public officers, employees, or
their agents in the performance of their duties, or as directed by such
officers, employees, or agents.
   PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. The planned right-of-way for a public street.
   PYLON SIGN. Any free-standing sign which has its supportive structure(s)
anchored in the ground and which has a face elevated above ground level by pole
(s) or beam(s) and with the area below the sign face open.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign pertaining to the sale, lease, or rental of the
real estate upon which it is located.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any district zoned for residential uses.
   ROOF. The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of a
building or structure, the structural make-up of which conforms to the roof
structures, roof construction, and roof covering section of the State Building
Code, being M.S. §§ 326B.101 et seq.
   ROOF LINE. The upper-most edge of the roof, or in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the upper-most height of said facade.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof of
a building, supported by the roof structure and extending vertically above the
highest portion of the roof.
   ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL. Any building sign erected or constructed as an integral
or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, so that
no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof
and so that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a
space of more than six inches.
   ROTATING SIGN. A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an axis.
   SHIMMERING SIGNS. A sign that reflects an oscillating, sometimes distorted,
visual image.
   SIGN. Any letter, word, or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading
matter, or representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement,
message, or visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed, or
constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires, and
structures, which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
   SIGN FACE. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the
message of the sign is exhibited.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure including the supports, uprights, bracing, and
framework which supports or is capable of supporting any sign.
   SITE. A plot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots or parcels
of land, which are intended, designated, and/or approved to function as an
integrated unit.
   STRINGER. A line of string, rope, cording, or an equivalent to which is
attached a number of pennants.
   SUSPENDED SIGN. Any building sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is connected to this surface.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, banner, pennant, balance, spinners, balloons, or
advertising display intended to be displayed for no more than 30 days.
   TOTAL SITE SIGNAGE. The maximum permitted combined area of all free-standing
and wall identification signs allowed on a specific property.
   VISIBLE. Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity (whether
legible or not) without visual aid.
   WALL. Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries of courts or a
building or structure and which has a slope of 60 degrees or greater with the
horizontal plane.
   WALL SIGN. Any building sign attached parallel to, but within two feet of a
wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits
of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such
wall or building and which displays only one sign surface.
   WINDOW SIGN. Any building sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity,
event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes
or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
   VIDEO DISPLAY SIGN. A sign that changes its message or background in a
manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which
may or may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate
movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression
of frames that gives the illusion of motion, including, but not limited to, the
illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or
contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs. VIDEO
DISPLAY SIGNS include projected images or messages with these characteristics
onto buildings or other objects.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.39 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance with this section. No person shall erect or cause to be
erected, placed, altered, or moved, any sign, unless in conformity with this
section. Nothing in this section will relieve any person from complying with
the provisions of any other ordinance of the city of other provisions of this
code.
   (B)   Permit required.
      (1)   No sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, maintained, or
moved in the city without first securing a permit from the city. The content of
the sign shall not be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve
or deny a sign permit. Application for a permit shall be in writing addressed
to the issuing authority and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Names and addresses of the owners of the display structure and
property;
         (b)   The address at which any signs are to be erected;
         (c)   The lot, block, and addition at which the signs are to be
erected and the street on which they are to front;
         (d)   A complete set of plans showing the necessary elevations,
distances, sizes, and details to fully and clearly represent the construction
and place of the signs;
         (e)   The cost of the sign;
         (f)   The type of sign (i.e., wall sign, monument sign, and the like);
and
         (g)   Certification by applicant indicating the application complies
with all requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   The issuing authority shall approve or deny the sign permit in an
expedited manner no more than 60 days from the receipt of the complete
application, including applicable fee, subject to additional review time
claimed by city pursuant to M.S. Chapter 15, as it may be amended from time to
time.
      (3)   No permit for a sign may be transferred or assigned to anyone other
than the owner of the property on which the sign is located.
   (C)   Placement provisions applicable to all signs.
      (1)   No sign may be placed so as to interfere with any electric lights,
or electrical or telephone wires or their supports, or placed in a manner which
is deemed a detriment to public safety.
      (2)   Illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent lights from being
directed at oncoming traffic. Nor shall such signs interfere with or obscure an
official traffic sign or signal. This includes indoor signs which are visible
from public streets.
      (3)   No sign or sign structure shall be erected or maintained that
prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign
or sign structure shall be attached to a stand pipe or fire escape.
      (4)   No sign or sign structure shall be placed on or protrude over the
public right-of-way except wall (maximum protrusion 18 inches), canopy, awning,
or marquee. No sign shall be placed within any drainage or utility easement or
within the public right-of-way except by the issuance of a conditional use
permit from the city and shall be located a minimum of eight feet above surface
grade.
      (5)   If a sign is not a part of the principal structure or attached
thereof, the sign location shall require a permit approved by the City Council.
The City Council will consider the proposed location of the sign and approval
will be based on the following criteria:
         (a)   Will the request cause traffic visibility issues or safety
concerns?
         (b)   Is the request incompatible with surrounding area?
         (c)   Will the location create unreasonably excessive burden on
existing storm water management, streets, snow removal, or utilities?
      (6)   Signs defined in this chapter as changeable copy signs, electronic,
multi-vision signs, portable signs, animated signs, rotating signs, shimmering
signs, stringers, dynamic signs, electronic graphic display signs, video
display signs, or suspended signs shall require a conditional use permit.
      (7)   Billboards shall require a conditional use permit approved by the
City Council and may be allowed on a very limited basis. Consideration for the
use of a billboard include:
         (a)   Will the request cause traffic visibility issues or safety
concerns?
         (b)   Is the request incompatible with surrounding area?
         (c)   Will the location create unreasonably excessive burden on
existing storm water management, streets, snow removal, or utilities?
   (D)   Maintenance. Signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained
and kept in a safe condition.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.40 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following signs shall not require a permit. These exemptions, however,
shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the
responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the
same:
   (A)   Display surface. The changing of the display surface on a painted or
printed sign only. This exemption, however, shall apply only to poster
replacement and/or on-site changes involving sign painting elsewhere than
directly on a building;
   (B)   Signs less than six square feet. Signs six square feet or less in
size, approved by the Zoning Officer;
   (C)   Political signs. Free-standing political signs, not exceeding a sign
surface area of 12 square feet each, displayed consistent with the times
allowed by M.S. § 211.045, as it may be amended from time to time;
   (D)   Residential identification sign. Sign must not exceed a sign surface
area of four square feet;
   (E)   Garbage sale signs. Free-standing signs for garage sales or similar
events occurring within the corporate limits of the city, erected on private
property with permission of the landowner. Garage sale signs must be removed
immediately after the sale is complete;
   (F)   Signs at construction sites. Signs denoting the architect, engineer,
or contractor, when placed upon work under construction, provided that the
total sign surface area of all such signs does not exceed 32 square feet in a
district zoned for commercial uses or six square feet in a district zoned for
residential uses, and provided that the sign is removed upon completion of
construction or prior to a date six months after the sign is first placed on
the property, whichever is earlier;
   (G)   Temporary event signs. Temporary signs (other than political signs)
pertaining to drives or events of civic, philanthropic, educational, or
religious organizations, provided permission of the City Zoning Officer must be
obtained to erect such signs upon or over streets or other public property, and
provided further that such signs must not be erected or posted for a period of
more than 30 days prior to the date of the event and must be removed within
three days after the event;
   (H)   Real estate signs. Real estate signs, provided the total sign surface
area for real estate signs on a property is not greater than six square feet.
Directional real estate signs off the property to be leased or sold are allowed
with the property owner’s permission and cannot be located within the right-of-
way;
   (I)   Vacation rental signs. Signs advertising property for vacation rental
cannot be more than six square feet;
   (J)   Business identification signs. One business identification sign which
is designed to replace an existing business identification sign for which a
valid sign permit exists, so long as the new sign has the same dimensions and
is in the same location as the existing sign, and is neither a lighted sign or
a prohibited sign under this section; and
   (K)   Official signs.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.41 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   Unless a sign is specifically permitted under this section, or a
temporary sign permit has been issued for the sign under this section, or a
conditional use permit has been issued for the sign under the city’s zoning
ordinance, the sign is prohibited.
   (B)   By way of example and not by way of limitation, the following signs
are specifically prohibited:
      (1)   Flashing signs, searchlights, flags, or whirling devices;
      (2)   Signs which emit sound, odor, or visible matter;
      (3)   Any sign that obstructs any part of a doorway, stairway, or fire
escape;
      (4)   Signs which project beyond the property line of the property upon
which the sign is located;
      (5)   Signs which have a structural member or other portion closer than
ten feet to a side lot line;
      (6)   Any sign which by reason of its location, color, or intensity,
creates a hazard to the safe and efficient movement of vehicles or pedestrian
traffic, including any sign which might be construed as a traffic control or
which otherwise resembles any official marker erected by a governmental body or
agency;
      (7)   Content classified as obscene as defined by M.S. § 617.241, as it
may be amended from time to time;
      (8)   Abandoned signs as defined by §
150.38; and
      (9)   Any sign within the shore impact zone of a riparian lot.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.42 TEMPORARY SIGN PERMIT.
   Temporary signs will be allowed with the following conditions:
   (A)   In keeping with the character and development of the property on which
it is located; and
   (B)   Does not interfere with traffic visibility or does not cause
unreasonable burden on storm water management, snow removal, streets, or
utilities.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.43 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Existing signs which comply with this section. Signs existing on the
effective date of this subchapter which conform to the requirements of this
subchapter and which do not require a permit may be maintained so long as they
continue to comply with this subchapter, as it may from time to time be
amended.
   (B)   Existing signs which do not comply with this section. Signs existing
on the effective date of this subchapter which would be prohibited by this
subchapter, or which would require a conditional use permit under this
subchapter but which have not received a permit under this subchapter or prior
ordinances, will be deemed to be LEGAL NON-CONFORMING SIGNS. Legal non-
conforming signs may continue to exist without a permit and without
constituting a violation of this section until one or more of the following
occurs.
      (1)   The sign is structurally altered (except for normal maintenance) in
a way which makes the sign less in compliance with this section than it was
before the alteration.
      (2)   The sign is relocated to a position making it less in compliance
with this section than it was before the relocation.
      (3)   The sign is replaced.
      (4)   Any new primary sign is erected or placed in connection with the
enterprise using the legal non-conforming sign.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.44 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PERMITTED SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs advertising goods or services available on commercial premises,
not to exceed a total of 250 square feet in area, placed to observe the setback
requirements in §
150.39.
   (B)   Advertising free-standing structures, vehicles, or any other type of
mobile property shall be considered a sign and included in calculation of the
overall square footage.
   (C)   Monument signs shall not exceed 75 total square feet of display area
and shall not exceed eight feet in height as measured from grade five feet from
the base of the monument or V-shaped sign. The total permitted square foot
display area includes all faces of a monument or V-shaped sign.
   (D)   Canopies and fixed awnings are to be considered an integral part of
the structure to which they are attached. They must meet the following
requirements.
      (1)   Awnings or canopies may have no part of the structure other than
supports nearer the ground surface than seven feet.
      (2)   The architectural style of the awning or canopy must be consistent
with the building being served.
      (3)   Awnings and canopies proposed to be built as to encroach into a
required yard setback and public right-of-way must obtain a conditional use
permit.
   (E)   The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the State
Electrical Code, being M.S. §§ 326B.31 et seq. Electrical service to such sign
shall be underground.
   (F)   The owner or agent of the building and/or property shall remove any
sign that has become obsolete by reason of termination of the business or
vacation of the premises.
   (G)   The owner, lessee, or manager of the property where a sign is located
shall remove or correct a sign within 30 days of the receipt of written notice
from the Zoning Administrator that the sign is in violation or prohibited by
the ordinance.
   (H)   Signs located within state or county right-of-way must also follow
regulations set by those government entities, specifically if they are more
restrictive than this subchapter.
   (I)   Signs allowed in the residential district will not require a permit
and will be allowed under the following regulations:
      (1)   Single-sided signs only;
      (2)   No larger than eight square feet, unless otherwise stated;
      (3)   Free-standing or attached to the main structure;
      (4)   Signs cannot be located in the right-of-way;
      (5)   Permanent residential signs must follow residential setback
requirements;
      (6)   In the case of a home occupation, as defined in Chapter 156, an
identification sign, no larger than six square feet may be affixed to the
structure;
      (7)   Temporary signs (must follow the same requirements for size, type,
and location);
      (8)   Political signs. Free-standing political signs, not exceeding a
sign surface area of 12 square feet each, displayed consistent with the times
allowed by M.S. § 211B.045, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (9)   Residential identification sign. Sign must not exceed a sign
surface area of four square feet;
      (10)   Garage sale signs. Free-standing signs for garage sales or similar
events occurring within the corporate limits of the city, erected on private
property with permission of the landowner. Garage sale signs must be removed
immediately after the sale is complete;
      (11)   Signs at construction sites. Signs denoting the architect,
engineer, or contractor, when placed upon work under construction, provided
that the total sign surface area of all such signs does not exceed six square
feet in a district zoned for residential uses, and provided that the sign is
removed upon completion of construction or prior to a date six months after the
sign is first placed on the property, whichever is earlier; and
      (12)   Vacation rental signs. Signs advertising property for vacation
rental cannot be more than six square feet.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.45 ENFORCEMENT.
   If a sign is in violation of this subchapter, or is rotted or in danger of
falling, or is otherwise unsafe or unsightly, the City Zoning Officer may give
to the owner of the property on which the sign is located written notice
specifying the violation, and requiring either the removal of the sign or
remedial work in the time and manner specified in the notice. In the event of
failure to comply with the notice within 30 days, the city may remove the sign
or cause such remedial work to be done, and the cost of the work will be paid
to the city by the owner of the property on which the sign is located. If
payment is not made within 30 days after a statement for such costs is sent to
the owner, the costs may be assessed against the property by certifying the
costs to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as the real
estate taxes. If a sign which has been removed is not reclaimed and costs paid
within 30 days after its removal, the sign may be sold or otherwise disposed of
by the city. If a sign is found to be an immediate danger to the public because
of its unsafe condition, it may be removed without notice, and written notice
of removal and reasons for such will be given to the owner of the property on
which it is located as soon as possible.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.46 FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   A fence, wall, column, pier, post, or any similar type structure, or any
combination of such structures, may be permitted on the outer limits of a
property located outside the shoreland management district, subject to the
provisions of §§
150.47 through
150.52.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.47 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person, firm, or corporation shall hereafter
construct or cause to be constructed or erected within the city any fence
without securing a zoning permit.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges. No fence, wall, or hedge shall be erected,
placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede
vision between a height of three and eight feet where it will interfere with
traffic or pedestrian visibility from a driveway or alley to a public way. The
regulations shall apply unless it can be demonstrated to the City Zoning
Officer that the structure provides an unobstructed view so as not to create a
safety hazard.
   (C)   Location. All fences shall be located entirely upon the private
property of the persons, firm, or corporation constructing, or causing the
construction, of such fence. The Zoning Officer may require any applicant for a
fence permit to establish the boundary lines of his or her property by a survey
thereof to be made by any registered land surveyor.
   (D)   Construction and maintenance. Every fence shall be constructed in a
substantial manner and of substantial material reasonably suited for the
purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. Every fence shall be
maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to
become and remain in a condition of disrepair or danger, or constitute a
nuisance. Any such fence which is or has become dangerous to the public safety,
health, or welfare is a public nuisance, and the Zoning Officer shall commence
proper proceedings for the abatement thereof. Link fences, wherever permitted,
shall be constructed in such a manner that no barbed ends shall be at the top.
   (E)   Barbed wire fences. Barbed wire fences shall not be permitted, used,
or constructed, except in agricultural, commercial, and industrial districts as
hereinafter provided.
   (F)   Solar energy access. Fences, walls, and hedges shall not interfere
with solar energy access to existing solar energy systems located on adjacent
lots.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.48 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT FENCES.
   All residential fences shall be placed within the property being fenced.
   (A)   Fences alongside property lines shall not be more than eight feet in
height for the distance commencing from a point on such side property line
located along the rear lot line and proceeding thence along such side property
line to a point thereon which would be intersected by the front wall line of
the existing principal structure on the lot. Fences extending beyond the front
wall line of the principal structure into the front yard and exceeding 36
inches will require a conditional use permit.
   (B)   Fences along any rear property line shall not exceed eight feet in
height and be set back from an alley right-of-way by ten feet.
   (C)   The screening provisions shall supersede, where applicable, the
provisions of division (B) above.
   (D)   All posts or similar supporting instruments used in the construction
of fences shall be faced inward toward the property being fenced.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.49 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT FENCES.
   All commercial and industrial fences shall be placed within the property
being fenced.
   (A)   Fences which are primarily erected as a security measure may have arms
projecting into the applicant’s property on which barbed wire can be fastened
commencing at a point at least seven feet above the ground.
   (B)   The screening provisions shall supersede, where applicable, the
provisions of subsection C.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.50 AGRICULTURAL FENCES.
   Barbed wire fences are permitted in the agricultural district.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.51 SPECIAL PURPOSE FENCES.
   Fences for special purposes and fences differing in construction, height, or
length may be permitted by the City Zoning Officer in any district in the city
provided that reasons submitted by the applicant demonstrate the purpose is
necessary to protect, buffer, or improve the premises for which such fence is
intended. The City Zoning Officer may stipulate the height, location,
construction, and type of special fence thereby permitted.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021)
§ 150.52 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS FOR FENCES IN THE SHORELAND AREA.
   (A)   Riparian lots: no fences will be allowed in the shore impact zone.
   (B)   Fences located on the lakeside of the principal structure shall not
exceed a height of three feet and remain a see-through visibility level equal
to that of a chain-link type fence.
   (C)   All fence materials must be treated so as to blend with the natural
surroundings of the setback area.
(Ord. passed 4-13-2021) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §§
150.01 through
150.07 by failing to affix the proper numbering system or by affixing
unauthorized numbers is subject to an administrative penalty or, in the
alternative, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 151: WELLHEAD PROTECTION
Section
   
151.01   Program enacted
   
151.02   Plan adopted
   
151.03   Manager appointed
   
151.04   Budget
   
151.05   Protection techniques
   
151.06   Installation
   
151.07   Permits
   
151.08   Joint enforcement
   
151.09   Administration
§ 151.01 PROGRAM ENACTED.
   The State Department of Public Health, working under the EPA’s Federal Safe
Drinking Water Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et seq., has enacted the Wellhead
Protection Program (Minn. Administrative Rules parts 4720.5100 to 4720.5590, as
it may be amended from time to time). This Program requires all public water
suppliers to develop local wellhead protection programs. The city’s Wellhead
Protection Team, with assistance from the State Department of Health, State
Rural Water Association, and Bayerl Water Resources (a private consulting
company), completed its plan in August of 2012.
§ 151.02 PLAN ADOPTED.
   (A)   The city’s Wellhead Protection Plan, hereafter referred to as WHP
Plan, was officially adopted by the City Council on April 10, 2012 and approved
by the State Department of Health on July 12, 2012.
   (B)   The WHP Plan, with its maps, shall be the basis for this chapter. The
Plan and maps shall be displayed and available for viewing at the City Clerk/
Treasurer’s office in the City Hall. The WHP Plan may be amended from time to
time as needed or required by the State Department of Health.
§ 151.03 MANAGER APPOINTED.
   The City Council has appointed a Wellhead Protection Manager or Managers.
They, with the assistance of the Zoning Officer, shall administer the WHP Plan
in the city.
§ 151.04 BUDGET.
   The City Council shall annually in the city’s budget include a line item for
the funding of the WHP Plan and its implementation.
§ 151.05 PROTECTION TECHNIQUES.
   There are two basic techniques that will be used to protect the city’s WHP
area. The first is non-regulatory. The WHP Plan contains a list of objectives
and a timeline that will educate and encourage people in the WHP area to
voluntarily do things to help reduce or eliminate potential contamination of
our drinking water aquifer. The second is regulatory. By the establishment of
this chapter, there will be oversight and control of potential contamination
sources in the “Drinking Water Supply Management Area,” hereafter referred to
as the DWSMA.
§ 151.06 INSTALLATION.
   All wells that are installed within the DWSMA are to be installed by a
licensed well driller. The wells must meet all the construction criteria and
set back requirements that are set out in Minnesota Administrative Rules
Chapter 4725, as it may be amended from time to time. Section 53.04 sites as a
violation, any possible connection between a private well and the city water
supply.
§ 151.07 PERMITS.
   (A)   Any application for a site permit, a conditional use permit, or a
variance request for parcels of land within the DWSMA must be accompanied by a
completed supplementary environmental checklist.
   (B)   The WHP Manager(s) and the Zoning Officer shall review the application
and the environmental checklist. They must determine if the information
presented adequately identifies any federal, state, or county permits that may
be required and any potential sources of contamination have been identified and
mitigated.
   (C)   When the WHP committee formulated the Plan, they identified and
established a list of potential contamination sources in the DWSMA. Most of
them were classed as non-regulatory and will be addressed with education. Some
of them will fall under the regulatory heading and will be classified upon the
passage of this chapter as existing non-conformities. They may be brought into
compliance voluntarily. If not, these non-conformities shall be brought into
compliance at such time a site permit, conditional use permit, or variance is
requested for the parcel.
§ 151.08 JOINT ENFORCEMENT.
   The city realizes that areas of the DWSMA lie outside of its corporate
boundaries. In order for the city and the township to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of all its residents and visitors, they will jointly
enforce the WHP Ordinance to ensure that their drinking water is protected.
§ 151.09 ADMINISTRATION.
   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city’s Administrative
Officer, with the assistance of the Wellhead Protection Manager(s) and the
city’s Zoning Officer. Any violation of the terms and provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by
law. Violations of this chapter can occur regardless of whether or not a permit
is required for a regulated activity. In the event of a violation or threatened
violation of this chapter, the City Council and/or the city’s Administrative
Officer, in addition to other remedies may institute appropriate actions or
proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such violations or
threatened violations, and it shall be the duty of the City Attorney to
institute such action. This will include, but not be limited to, actions for
injunctive relief before a court of competent jurisdiction.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 152: SHORELAND MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Statutory authorization
   
152.002   Policy
   
152.003   Jurisdiction
   
152.004   Compliance
   
152.005   Enforcement
   
152.006   Interpretation
   
152.007   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.008   Definitions
   
152.009   Owner liable
Shoreland Classification System and Land Use District
   
152.020   Shoreland classification system
   
152.021   Land use district descriptions
Zoning and Water Supply/Sanitary Provisions
   
152.035   Lot area and width standards
   
152.036   Placement, design, and height of structures
   
152.037   Shoreland alterations
   
152.038   Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas
   
152.039   Special provisions for commercial, industrial, public/semipublic uses
   
152.040   Conditional uses
   
152.041   Water supply and sewage treatment
   
152.042   Special restrictions in shoreline area
   
152.043   Dock placement and regulations
Non-conformities
   
152.055   Continuance of established non-conformities
   
152.056   Construction on non-conforming lots of record
   
152.057   Additions/expansions to non-conforming structures
   
152.058   Non-conforming sewage treatment systems
Planned Unit Developments (PUDs)
   
152.070   Types of PUDs permissible
   
152.071   Processing of PUDs
   
152.072   Application for PUDs
   
152.073   Site “suitable area” evaluation
   
152.074   PUD density evaluation
   
152.075   Maintenance and design criteria
   
152.076   Conversions
Administration
   
152.090   Permits required
   
152.091   Certificates of zoning compliance
   
152.092   Variances
   
152.093   Notification to the Department of Natural Resources
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained
in M.S. Chapter 103F, Minn. Regulations parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900, and
the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter 462, as they all
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.002 POLICY.
   (A)   The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the city affects the public
health, safety, and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of
public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in
the best interests of the public health, safety, and welfare to provide for the
wise subdivision, use, and development of shorelands of public waters.
   (B)   The legislature of the state has delegated responsibility to local
governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use, and development of
the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of
shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources.
   (C)   This responsibility is hereby recognized by the city.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.003 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the shorelands of the
public waterbodies as classified in §§
152.020 and
152.021. Pursuant to Minn. Regulations parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900, as
may be amended from time to time, no lake, pond, or flowage less than ten acres
in size in municipalities or 25 acres in unincorporated areas need be regulated
in a local government’s shoreland regulations.
   (B)   A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous
shoreland may, at the discretion of the governing body, be exempt from this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.004 COMPLIANCE.
   The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of lots; the
use, size, type, and location of structures on lots; the installation and
maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems, the lot alteration of
any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of
land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.005 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Administrative Officer and Police Department are responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.006 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by state statutes.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.007 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended for this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.008 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common
usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application. For the
purpose of this chapter, the words MUST and SHALL are mandatory and not
permissive. All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured
horizontally.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or ACCESSORY FACILITY. Any building or improvement
subordinate to a principal use which, because of the nature of its use, can
reasonably be located at greater than normal structure setbacks.
   ATTACHED STRUCTURE. Two buildings are attached when they share a common wall
or portion of a wall with a door, so that a person may travel from any portion
of one building to any portion of the second building without going outside.
   BED AND BREAKFAST. An owner-occupied single family residence at which
lodging and meals are provided to registered guests. The BED AND BREAKFAST
facility shall comply with all the applicable state, county, and local
regulations for providing food and lodging.
   BLUFF. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the
following characteristics:
      (1)   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
      (2)   The slope must drain toward the waterbody;
      (3)   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water
level; and
      (4)   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet
or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or greater, except
that an area with an average slope of less than 18% over a distance of at least
50 feet shall not be considered part of the BLUFF.
   BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and land located within 20 feet of the top of a
bluff.
   BLUFF, TOE OF. The lower point of a 50-foot segment with an average slope
exceeding 18% or the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher.
   BLUFF, TOP OF. For the purposes of measuring setbacks, bluff impact zone,
and administering vegetation management standards, the higher point of a 50-
foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18%.
   BOATHOUSE. A structure designed and used solely for the storage or boats or
boating equipment.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The minimum continuous area remaining on a lot or parcel of
land after all setback requirements, bluffs, areas with slopes greater than
25%, all easements and rights-of-way, significant historic sites, wetlands, and
land less than three feet above the OHWL of public water are subtracted.
   BUILDING. Any fixed construction with walls or a roof.
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water
level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
   COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. Typically, uses that provide
transient, short-term lodging spaces, rooms, or parcels and with operations
that are essentially service-oriented. For example, hotel/motel accommodations,
resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks, and other primarily service-
oriented activities are COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental, or
trade of products, goods, or services, includes storage or transmission
structures. More than two currently unlicensed vehicles stored outside on a lot
constitute a COMMERCIAL USE.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
   CONDITIONAL OR SPECIAL USE. A land use or development as defined by
ordinance that would not be appropriate generally but may be allowed with
appropriate restrictions as provided by official controls upon a finding that
certain conditions as detailed in the City Zoning Code (Chapter 156 of this
code) exist, the use or development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan
of the community, and the use is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   CONTIGUOUS. Parcels of land that have a common border.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS. Any private site, field, or tract of land abutting a
classified body of water to be used primarily for access purposes. Including,
but not limited to, non-riparian lot access.
   DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings,
seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a
principal use or site and at any point extending more than three feet above
ground.
   DOCK. A narrow platform, whether seasonal or permanent, extending waterward
from the shoreline, intended for ingress and egress for moored watercraft or to
provide access to deeper water for swimming, fishing, or other water-oriented
recreational activities. Elements considered part of a dock are storage lockers
less than three feet in height, measured from the platform of the dock, and
benches. Elements not pertinent to a dock that are prohibited include walls,
railings, or fences attached to the dock.
   DWELLING SITE. A designated location for residential use by one or more
persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational
vehicle sites.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any structure or portion of a structure, or other shelter
designed as short- or long-term living quarters for one or more persons, that
includes a kitchen, a bathroom, and at least one bedroom including, but not
limited to, rental or timeshare accommodations such as cottage, house, motel,
hotel, and resort rooms, cabins, and manufactured homes.
      (1)   DUPLEX. A building designed for or used exclusively for two-family
dwellings.
      (2)   FOURPLEX. A building designed for or used exclusively for four-
family dwellings.
      (3)   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A building or several buildings that
contain more than four dwellings within one complex or property.
      (4)   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A dwelling unit used by members of one
immediate family, including normal appurtenances such as a garage. Adult and
child foster homes and daycare programs are permitted SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
USE as provided in M.S. § 245A.14, as it may be amended from time to time.
   ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT WORKSHEET (EAW). A brief document, in worksheet
format, that helps local governments and state agencies decide whether a
proposed action is a major action with the potential for significant
environmental effects and, in the case of a private actions, whether it is of
more than local significance. If the action meets these criteria, an
environmental impact statement (EIS) should be prepared.
   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS). An informational document which
contains a thorough evaluation of the environmental effects of a proposed
project. The EIS provides information for agencies and private persons which
helps them not only to evaluate the impacts of proposed actions which have the
potential for significant environmental effects, but to consider alternative
sand to institute methods for reducing adverse environmental effects.
   EXISTING RESORT. A resort established prior to March 23, 1999, which has
remained in continuous operation.
   GRADING/FILLING. Any change of the existing on-site topography of land or
impervious surfaces, except for normal agricultural purposes.
   GUEST COTTAGE. A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain sleeping
spaces and kitchen and bathroom facilities in addition to those provided in the
primary dwelling unit on a lot.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance between the highest adjoining
ground level at the structure or ten feet above the lowest ground level,
whichever is lower, and the highest point of the roof, with the exception of
water-oriented accessory structures, which must meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   ICE RIDGE. A modification to the topographic characteristics of the
lakeshore resulting from a water basin’s expanding and contracting ice sheet
and consisting of a linear mound of soil generally parallel to the water’s
edge.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or
retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the
surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to
development. Examples include, but are not limited to, decks, rooftops,
sidewalks, patios, permeable pavers, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or
gravel driveways.
   INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities,
or other wholesale items.
   INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a
contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.
   LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land
survey, auditor’s plot, or other accepted means and separated from other
parcels or portions by the description for the purpose of sale, lease, or
separation.
   LOT WIDTH. The shortest distance between lot lines measured at the midpoint
of the building line.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
in the traveling mode, is eight and one-half body feet or more in width or 40
body feet or more in permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation. This includes “park models” that meet
this definition.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any area, whether charging a fee or free of charge,
on privately or publicly owned land used on a daily, nightly, weekly, or longer
basis for the accommodation of two or more manufactured homes or recreation
units.
   NON-CONFORMITY. Any legal use, structure, or parcel of land already in
existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official controls or
amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become established
under the terms of the official controls as now written if the official
controls had been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded, or
authorized including, but not limited to, setbacks, impervious surface, lot
size, and use of land.
   NON-RIPARIAN LOT. A parcel of land within shoreland management area without
water frontage on public waters.
   OPEN SPACE. Any space or area preserved in its natural state and
specifically not used for parking, structures, or roads.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters and wetlands. It
shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
   PARKING SPACE. An off-street area for motor vehicles not less than ten feet
by 20 feet in area, having access to a public street or alley, or private
driveway. In determining the gross area required for a specified number of off-
street parking places, including driveways and aisles, 300 square feet per
space shall be used.
   PATIO. Flat area of ground that is covered with a hard material such as
bricks, concrete, or wood.
   PERMANENT SWIMMING POOL. Any swimming pool that remains on the premises on a
year-round basis.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A type of development characterized by a unified
site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel,
whether for sale, rent, or lease, and also usually involving clustering of
these units or sites to provide areas of common open space, density increases,
and a mix of structure types and land uses. These developments may be organized
and operated as condominiums, timeshare condominiums, cooperatives, full-fee
ownership, commercial enterprises, or any combination of these, or cluster
subdivisions of dwelling units, residential condominiums, townhouses, apartment
buildings, campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, resorts, hotels, motels,
and conversions of structures and land uses to these uses.
   PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters, as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, subds. 15 and 18,
as they may be amended from time to time. However, no lake, pond, or flowage of
less than ten acres in size in municipalities need to be regulated for the
purposes of Minn. Rules parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900, as they may be amended
from time to time. The official determination of the size and physical limits
of drainage areas of rivers shall be made by the Commissioner.
   RECREATIONAL CAMPING AREA. Any area, whether privately or publicly owned,
used on a daily, weekly, nightly, or longer basis for the accommodation of two
or more recreational camping units.
   RECREATIONAL CAMPING UNIT (RCU). A relocatable single-family dwelling unit,
less than 40 feet in length, which in the traveling mode, is less than eight
and one-half body feet in width, and is less than 399 square feet when erected
on-site, including, but not limited to, tents, motor homes, fish houses with
sleeping quarters, and travel trailers.
   RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A use where the nature of
residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the development is
not service-oriented. For example, residential apartments, manufactured home
parks, time-share condominiums, townhouses, cooperatives, and full-fee-
ownership residences would be considered as RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENTS.
   RESORT. A shoreland commercial establishment that includes buildings,
lodges, structures, dwelling units, camping or recreational vehicle sites, or
enclosures, or any part thereof kept, used, maintained, or advertised as or
held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are
furnished to the public, primarily to person seeking recreation for periods of
one day or longer, and having for rent three or more cabins, rooms, campsites,
or enclosures. A shoreland commercial establishment must be primarily service-
oriented for transient lodging or guests. All cabins, rooms, dwelling units,
camping or recreation vehicle sites, or enclosures must be included in the
RESORT RENTAL BUSINESS. RESORTS must not allow residential use of a dwelling
unit or site, except dwellings used as residences for the service providers. To
qualify as a RESORT under this section, a resort must be fully licensed and
permitted under appropriate state, county, and local regulations. The entire
parcel of land must be controlled and managed by the licensee.
   RIPARIAN LOT. A parcel of land with water frontage on public waters.
   SCALE DRAWING. A signed drawing which includes and identifies a graphic
scale in feet, all existing and/or proposed structures, septic tanks, drain-
fields, lot lines, road rights-of-way, easements, OHWLs, wells, wetlands,
topographic features (e.g., bluffs), and on-site impervious surface
calculations.
   SEWAGE. Definitions relative to SEWAGE and sanitation are set forth in the
sanitation code of the county.
   SEMIPUBLIC USE. The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to
provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the
regular constituency of the organization.
   SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and management of areas
unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as
shallow soils over ground water or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils,
steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in
need of special protection.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage
treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level, top of a
bluff, lot line, and road rights-of-way.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A septic tank and soil absorption system or other
individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and regulated
in § 150.041.
   SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and
all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for
conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate
disposal.
   SHORE IMPACT ZONE (SIZ). Land located between the ordinary high water level
of a public waterbody and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the
structure setback. Only one structure may be placed in a SHORE IMPACT ZONE
which meets ordinance requirements for the SHORE IMPACT ZONE.
   SHORELAND.
      (1)   Land located within the following distances from public waters:
         (a)   One thousand feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake,
pond, or flowage; and
         (b)   300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of an
ordinance-designated floodplain on a river or stream, whichever is greater.
      (2)   The limits of SHORELANDS may be reduced whenever the waters
involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the
waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner.
   SHORELINE AREA. All property within the city which is within 60 feet of the
ordinary high water level of West Battle Lake, and that portion, if any, of
property abutting the shoreline on the lake side, and that portion of the
public waters of West Battle Lake in which an abutting owner may build docks,
piers, and boat lifts.
   SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing structure, or
other property that meets the criteria for eligibility for the National
Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic
Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the
provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time to time. A HISTORIC
SITE meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it
is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the State
Archaeologist or the Director of the State Historical Society. All unplatted
cemeteries are automatically considered to be SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITES.
   SITE PERMIT. A permit for the erection and/or alteration of any structure
controlled by this chapter issued to ensure compliance with all requirements of
this chapter.
   STEEP SLOPES. Lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over
horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.
   STRING-LINE TEST. A method of establishing a structure setback line by using
the closest adjacent points of existing structures to a proposed structure of
like use, on the two immediately adjacent lots. In the event that there is no
structure of like use on one of the immediately adjacent lots, the point of the
building line at the nearest lot line setback shall be used.
   STRUCTURE. Any building or appurtenance, including, but not limited to,
vision obstructing fences, decks, permanent swimming pools, solar panels,
patios, pergolas, and satellite dishes in excess of one meter in diameter and
towers (except for public utilities).
   SUBDIVISION. Land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or lease,
including planned unit development.
   SURFACE WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for commercial
purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral
part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants
with transient docking facilities are examples of such uses.
   TOWER. Framework or structure exceeding 35 feet in height, and any wind
generating tower, telephone communication tower, and any structure required by
any other regulations to have warning lights.
   VARIANCE. Has the same meaning as defined or described in M.S. Chapter 462,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY.
      (1)   A small, above-ground building or other improvement, except
stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because of the
relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be
located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of
such structures and facilities: watercraft and watercraft equipment storage
structures, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, saunas, patios,
and detached decks.
      (2)   Boathouses and boat storage structures given the meaning under M.S.
§ 103G.245, as it may be amended from time to time, are not WATER-ORIENTED
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   WETLAND. A surface water feature classified as a WETLAND in the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition).
   YARD. The area between any lot line and the nearest wall of any structure
built upon the lot.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 3-
14-2024)
§ 152.009 OWNER LIABLE.
   In addition to any other person or persons involved in violation or
threatened violation of this chapter, the owner of record of any property
falling under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be responsible both
criminally and civilly for any construction, alteration, excavation, or any
other activity occurring upon his or her property which is contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed
4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM AND LAND USE DISTRICT
§ 152.020 SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   The public waters of the city have been classified below consistent
with the criteria found in Minn. Regulations, part 6120.3300, as it may be
amended from time to time, and the protected waters inventory map for the
county.
   (B)   The shoreland area for the waterbodies listed below shall be defined
in §
152.009 and as shown on the official zoning map.
 
Lakes                                   Protected Waters Inventory I.D. Number
General development lakes (unnamed)     56-305
General development lakes (West Battle) 56-239
Natural environmental lakes (unnamed)   56-309
 
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed
4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.021 LAND USE DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS.
   (A)   Criteria for designation. The land use districts in division (B)
below, and the delineation of a land use district’s boundaries on the official
zoning map, must be consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the
comprehensive land use plan (when available) and the following criteria,
considerations, and objectives:
      (1)   General considerations and criteria for all land uses.
         (a)   Preservation of natural areas;
         (b)   Present ownership and development of shoreland areas;
         (c)   Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities;
         (d)   Topographic characteristics;
         (e)   Vegetative cover;
         (f)   In-water physical characteristics, values, and constraints;
         (g)   Recreational use of the surface water;
         (h)   Road and service center accessibility;
         (i)   Socioeconomic development needs and plans as they involve water
and related land resources;
         (j)   The land requirements of industry which, by its nature, requires
location in shoreland areas; and
         (k)   The necessity to preserve and restore certain areas having
significant historical or ecological value.
      (2)   Factors and criteria for planned unit development.
         (a)   Existing recreational use of the surface waters and likely
increases in use associated with planned unit development;
         (b)   Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density;
         (c)   Suitability of lands for the planned unit development approach;
         (d)   Level of current development in the area; and
         (e)   Amounts and types of ownership of undeveloped lands.
   (B)   Land use distinct descriptions. The land use districts provided in the
table below, and the allowable land uses therein for the given classifications
of waterbodies, shall be properly delineated on the official zoning map for the
shorelands of this community. These land use districts are in conformance with
the criteria specified in Minn. Regulations, part 6120.3200, subp. 3, as it may
be amended from time to time.
Land Use Districts for General Development Lakes Natural Environment Lakes
Lakes
Land Use Districts for Lakes   General Development Natural Environment Lakes
                               Lakes
Commercial District - Uses
   Agricultural: cropland   P                   P
   Commercial               P                   C
   Commercial planned unit  C                   C
development
   Industrial               C                   N
   Duplex, triplex, quad    C                   C
residential
   Parks and historic sites C                   C
   Public, semipublic       C                   C
   Residential planned unit C                   C
development
   Single residential       C                   C
   Surface water-oriented   C                   C
commercial*
   Tower                    N                   N
Residential District - Uses
   Agricultural: cropland   P                   P
   Commercial               C                   C
   Commercial planned unit  C                   C
development
   Duplex, triplex, quad    P                   C
residential
   Industrial               C                   N
   Multi-family residential C                   C
   Parks and historic sites C                   C
   Public, semipublic       C                   C
   Residential planned unit C                   C
development
   Single residential       P                   P
   Surface water-oriented   C                   C
commercial*
   Tower                    N                   N
Shoreline Area
   As permitted in §       P                   P
152.042
   Parks and historic sites P                   P
Notes to table:
C   - Conditional use
N   - Not permitted
P   - Permitted use
*   - As accessory to a residential planned unit development
 
   (C)   Use and upgrading of inconsistent land use districts.
      (1)   The land use districts adopted in the Chapter 156 of this code, as
they apply to shoreland areas, and their delineated boundaries on the official
zoning map, may not be consistent with the land use district designation
criteria specified in the table in division (B) above. These inconsistent land
use district designations may continue until revisions are proposed to change
either the land use district designation within an existing land use district
boundary shown on the official zoning map or to modify the boundary of an
existing land use district shown on the official zoning map.
      (2)   When a revision is proposed to an inconsistent land use district
provision, the following additional criteria and procedures shall apply for
lakes: when a revision to a land use district designation on a lake is
considered, the land use district boundaries and use provisions therein for all
the shoreland areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter on the lake must be
revised to make them substantially compatible with the framework in divisions
(A) and (B) above.
      (3)   When an interpretation question arises about whether a specific
land use fits within a given “use” category, the interpretation shall be made
by the Board of Zoning Adjustment. When a question arises as to whether a land
use district’s boundaries are properly delineated on the official zoning map,
this decision shall be made by the City Council.
      (4)   When a revision is proposed to an inconsistent land use district
provision by an individual party or landowner, this individual party or
landowner will only be responsible to provide the supporting and/or
substantiating information for the specific parcel in question. The City
Council will direct the Administrative Officer to provide such additional
information for the waterbody as is necessary to satisfy division (C)(1) and
(2) above.
      (5)   The City Council must make a detailed finding of fact and
conclusion when taking final action that this revision, and the upgrading of
any inconsistent land use district designations on the waterbody, are
consistent with the enumerated criteria, and use provisions of this section.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
ZONING AND WATER SUPPLY/SANITARY PROVISIONS
§ 152.035 LOT AREA AND WIDTH STANDARDS.
   The lot area (in square feet) and lot width standards (in feet) for single,
duplex, triplex, and quad residential lots created after March 23, 1999, for
the lake classifications are the following.
   (A)   Unsewered lakes.
      (1)   Natural environment.
 
        Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
        Area    Width Area    Width
Single  80,000  200   80,000  200
Duplex  120,000 300   160,000 400
Triplex 160,000 400   240,000 600
Quad    200,000 500   320,000 800
 
      (2)   General development.
 
        Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
        Area   Width  Area    Width
Single  20,000 100    40,000  150
Duplex  40,000 180    80,000  265
Triplex 60,000 260    120,000 375
Quad    80,000 340    160,000 490
 
   (B)   Sewered lakes.
      (1)   Natural environment.
 
        Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
        Area    Width Area   Width
Single  40,000  125   20,000 125
Duplex  70,000  225   35,000 220
Triplex 100,000 325   52,000 315
Quad    130,000 425   65,000 410
 
      (2)   General development.
 
        Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
        Area   Width  Area   Width
Duplex  26,000 135    17,500 135
Quad    49,000 255    32,500 245
Single  15,000 75     10,000 75
Triplex 38,000 195    25,000 190
 
   (C)   Additional special provisions.
      (1)   Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding
those in the tables in division (B) above can only be allowed if designed and
approved as residential planned unit developments under §§
152.070 through
152.076. Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters can be
used to meet lot area standards, and lot width standards must be met at both
the ordinary high water level and at the building line. The sewer lot area
dimensions in division (B) above can only be used if publicly owned sewer
system service is available to the property.
      (2)   Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads on natural
environment lakes must also meet the following standards.
         (a)   Each building must be set back at least 200 feet from the
ordinary high water level.
         (b)   Each building must have common sewage treatment and water
systems in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building.
         (c)   Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be centralized
in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building.
         (d)   No more than 25% of a lake’s shoreline can be in duplex,
triplex, or quad developments.
      (3)   One guest cottage may be allowed on lots meeting or exceeding the
duplex lot area and width dimensions presented in divisions (A) and (B) above,
provided the following standards are met.
         (a)   For lots exceeding the minimum lot dimensions of duplex lots,
the guest cottage must be located within the smallest duplex-sized lot that
could be created, including the principal dwelling unit.
         (b)   A guest cottage must not cover more than 700 square feet of land
surface and must not exceed 15 feet in height.
         (c)   A guest cottage must be located or designed to reduce its
visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation,
topography, increased setbacks, or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
      (4)   Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or as
recreation areas for use by owners of non-riparian lots within subdivisions are
not permissible.
      (5)   Lots shall not be portioned off for the purpose of providing access
to the lake by persons who are not the sole owner or renter of a property.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed
4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 3-14-2024)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.036 PLACEMENT, DESIGN, AND HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Placement of structures on lots. When more than one setback applies to
a site, structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks. Where
structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building
site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the
adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed
building site is not located in a shore impact zone (string-line test) or in a
bluff impact zone. Structures shall be located as follows.
      (1)   Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks (in feet) from
ordinary high water level. In addition to the following, one water-oriented
accessory structure designated in accordance with division (A)(2) below may be
set back a minimum distance of ten feet from the ordinary high water level.
 
                         Setbacks
Classes of Public Waters Structures        Sewage Treatment System
                         Unsewered Sewered
General development      75        60      50
Natural environment      150       150     150
 
      (2)   Additional structure setbacks. The following additional structure
setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the waterbody.
Setback From Setback (in feet)
Setback From                                                  Setback (in feet)
Corner                                                        30
Interior side yard                                            10
Rear yard/alley*                                              20
Right-of-way line of town road, public street, or other roads 30
or streets not classified
Top of bluff                                                  30
Unplatted cemetery                                            50
Note to table:
*   Storage sheds smaller than 120 square feet will be allowed a setback of ten
feet in the rear yard/alley
 
      (3)   Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory facilities, except
stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.
      (4)   Uses without water-oriented needs. Uses without water-oriented
needs must be located on lots or parcels without public-waters frontage, or, if
located on lots or parcels with public-waters frontage, must either be set back
double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially
screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions.
      (5)   Use of RCUs. The use of RCUs are allowed with the following
provisions.
         (a)   A lot without a dwelling may contain one RCU, provided:
            1.   The lot meets minimum requirements for size and all
requirements of this chapter for structures are met;
            2.   There are no water or sewer connections to the RCU;
            3.   The RCU cannot be used as a permanent dwelling;
            4.   No RCU may be skirted or permanently placed; and
            5.   An RCU may be allowed in conjunction with a land use permit
for a permanent structure for a maximum of 12 months during the construction
period.
         (b)   A lot containing one dwelling may contain one RCU for use, not
to exceed ten days within any 60-day period, provided that:
            1.   It is not located in the right-of-way and is placed solely on
the owner’s property;
            2.   It will not impede city services or obstruct traffic
visibility; and
            3.   It can only be used for storage and not for use and cannot be
hooked up to city utility services.
   (B)   Design criteria for structures.
      (1)   High water elevations. Structures must be placed in accordance with
any flood plain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not
exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed
or flood-proofed must be determined as follows:
         (a)   For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three
feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above the ordinary high
water level, whichever is higher; and
         (b)   Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor
placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if the structure is
constructed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation, electrical and
mechanical equipment is placed above the determined elevation and, if long
duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice
action and wind-driven waves and debris.
      (2)   Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot that meets minimum
size requirements may have one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting
the normal structure setback in division (A) above if this water-oriented
accessory structure complies with the following provisions.
         (a)   The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square
feet. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above grade at any point.
         (b)   The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high
water level must be at least ten feet.
         (c)   The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility
as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks, or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
         (d)   The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not
be enclosed or used as a storage area.
         (e)   The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human
habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
         (f)   The structure or facility must be within the center 50% of the
lot width measured at the ordinary high water level.
         (g)   If a lot is physically separated (i.e. public, private road
right-of-way or easement) from itself or another, they will be considered two
separate parcels.
      (3)   Stairways, lifts, and landings. Stairways and lifts are the
preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up
and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet
the following design requirements.
         (a)   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public
open-space recreational properties, and planned unit developments.
         (b)   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not
exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used
for commercial properties, public open-space recreational properties, and
planned unit developments.
         (c)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or
landings.
         (d)   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above
the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are
designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion and the
property owner applies and receives a permit.
         (e)   Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.
         (f)   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for
physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore
areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of division (B)
(3)(a) through (e) above are complied with in addition to the requirements of
Minn. Regulations Chapter 1341, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Significant historic sites. No structure may be placed on a
significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site
unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a
public repository.
      (5)   Steep slopes. The Administrative Officer (City Zoning Officer) must
evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public
waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage-treatment systems,
roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When
determined necessary, conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent
erosion and to preserve existing vegetation that screens structures, vehicles,
and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming
summer, leaf-on vegetation.
      (6)   Fences. Fences must follow regulations set forth in §§
150.35 through
150.45.
      (7)   Additional restrictions and standards in residential district.
         (a)   Construction material.
            1.   Single-family dwelling roofs shall be shingled with asphalt,
wood, tiles, metal (with concealed fasteners), or other comparable materials.
            2.   Building materials shall be attractive in appearance, of a
durable finish, and be of a quality that is compatible and harmonious with
adjacent structures. All buildings shall be of good aesthetic and architectural
quality, to ensure they will maintain and enhance the property values of the
neighboring properties.
            3.   Single-family dwellings, garages, and accessory structures
over 120 square feet of floor space or over 120 square feet of roof and roof
overhang shall be constructed of materials similar in quality and appearance to
that of the main dwelling structure on the lot.
            4.   Buildings constructed of canvas, fabric, or straw shall not be
permitted.
            5.   Building exteriors must be finished within one year of
starting construction unless an one year extension is granted by the zoning
official.
         (b)   Accessory structures. No more than two detached accessory
structures are permitted on a parcel occupied by a single-family detached
dwelling that are over 120 square feet.
   (C)   Height of structures. All structures in residential districts, except
churches and non-residential agricultural structures, must not exceed 35 feet
in height. Accessory structures cannot exceed 20 feet in height.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.037 SHORELAND ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated
to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland
aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish
and wildlife habitat.
   (B)   Vegetation alterations.
      (1)   Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures
and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas
regulated by §
152.038 are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.
      (2)   Removal or alteration of vegetation is allowed subject to the
following standards.
         (a)   Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact
zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for
forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is allowable as a
conditional use if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and
approved by the soil and water conservation district in which the property is
located.
         (b)   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees is
allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to
accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access
paths, beach and watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented
accessory structures or facilities, provided that:
            1.   The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not
substantially reduced; and
            2.   The provisions of this division (A)(2) are not applicable to
the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose
safety hazards.
   (B)   Topographic/lot alterations.
      (1)   Lot alteration (grading, filling, or excavating) necessary for the
construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways require a
lot alteration permit, but this permit can be combined with construction permit
for these facilities. However, the lot alteration standards in this section
must be incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of
structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways.
      (2)   Public roads and parking areas are regulated by §
152.038.
      (3)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(1) and (2) above, a lot alteration
permit will be required for:
         (a)   The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on steep
slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; more than 50 cubic yards anywhere
else in the shoreland district;
         (b)   The movement of up to 600 cubic yards of material outside of
steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones. Property owner must apply and
receive a conditional use permit prior to receiving a permit for the movement
of more than 600 cubic yards of material; and
         (c)   Lot alteration permits are not required for beach sand as long
as the owner follows requirements set by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
      (4)   The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to
during the issuance of site permits, lot alteration permits, conditional or
special use permits, variances, and subdivision approvals.
         (a)   1.   Grading or filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8
wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity
would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland:
               a.   Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
               b.   Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood
damage;
               c.   Fish and wildlife habitat;
               d.   Recreational use;
               e.   Shoreline or bank stabilization; and
               f.   Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as
historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or
others.
            2.   This evaluation must also include a determination of whether
the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals
by other local, state, or federal agencies such as a watershed district, the
State Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of
Engineers. The applicant will be so advised.
         (b)   Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that
ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest
time possible.
         (c)   Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for
temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be
established as soon as possible.
         (d)   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before
they reach any surface water feature must be used.
         (e)   Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil
and water conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation
Service.
         (f)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope.
         (g)   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must
be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and must
not create finished slopes of 30% or greater.
         (h)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact
zones.
         (i)   Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public
waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner under M.S. § 103G.245, as
it may be amended from time to time.
         (j)   Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent
or nearby properties.
         (k)   Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading
of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the
finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the
landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water
level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does
not exceed three feet.
      (5)   Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a public
water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, must be controlled by
local shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after
the Commissioner has approved the proposed connection to public waters.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.038 PLACEMENT AND DESIGN OF ROADS, DRIVEWAYS, AND PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   Public and private roads and parking areas must be designed to take
advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening
from view from public waters. Documentation must be provided by a qualified
individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to
minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office
technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other
applicable technical materials.
   (B)   Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and
must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable
and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may
be placed within these areas, and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.
   (C)   Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this section are
met. For private facilities, the lot alteration provisions of §
152.037(B) must be met.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.039 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, PUPLIC/SEMIPUBLIC
USES.
   (A)   Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or
semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters
may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses
with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards.
      (1)   In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and
other zoning standards in this chapter, the uses must be designed to
incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and
structures.
      (2)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must
centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation
and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and uses that depend on
patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed
information to the public, subject to the following general standards.
         (a)   No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be
placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages
may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit
issued by the County Sheriff.
         (b)   Signs must follow the requirements set forth in §§ 150.035
through 150.045.
         (c)   Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact
zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential
safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct
illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of
navigational lights.
   (B)   Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels
without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public-
waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water
level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by
vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.040 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to
the review and approval procedures, looking at compatibility of uses, and
criteria and conditions for review of conditional and special uses established
community-wide.
   (B)   The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions apply
within shoreland areas.
      (1)   Evaluation criteria. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the
topographic, vegetation, and soil conditions on the site must be made to
ensure:
         (a)   The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during and after construction;
         (b)   The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from
public waters is limited;
         (c)   The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage
treatment; and
         (d)   The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will
generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to
safely accommodate these watercraft.
      (1)   Conditions attached to conditional and special use permits. The
City Council, upon consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes
of this section, shall attach such conditions to the issuance of the
conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
section. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
         (b)   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the
requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and
         (c)   Special provisions for the location, design, and use of
structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas,
and vehicle parking areas.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.041 WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE TREATMENT.
   (A)   Water supply. Any public or private supply of water for domestic
purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the State
Department of Health and the State Pollution Control Agency.
   (B)   Sewage treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows:
      (1)   Publicly owned sewer systems must be used where available; and
      (2)   All private sewage treatment systems must conform to current county
and state regulations. Permits and inspection for on-site systems will be
controlled by the county.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed
4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.042 SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS IN SHORELINE AREA.
   In addition to being subject to all regulations which apply in the district
in which it is located, the portion of any property within the shoreline area
as defined in §
152.008 shall also be subject to the following special restrictions.
   (A)   The actual lakeshore shall be used only for docks, piers, and boat
lifts and the keeping of boats.
   (B)   A movable dock which was used the previous summer and which is
intended to be used the following summer may be kept by its owner within the
shoreline area from September 1 through May 15.
   (C)   Picnic tables, barbecue grills, and other similar property may be kept
within the shoreline area.
   (D)   Lawnmowers and other equipment used to maintain the property shall be
kept in a suitable accessory building, if one is available. If one is not, they
shall be kept under a deck or as near a structure upon the property as may be
done.
   (E)   If the keeping or parking of certain vehicles upon the portion of the
property not within the shoreline area would require that they be kept or
parked upon the front or side yard of the principal structure upon the
property, the following may be kept or parked in the shoreline area, provided
that they are kept or parked so as to be as little noticeable as possible to
users of the lake: boat trailers, and motorized vehicles actually in use,
including cars, vans, pickups, and motorcycles, but not including trucks and
buses.
   (F)   No structure may be placed within the shoreline area upon any property
which does not measure in excess of 60 feet in depth, measured at a right angle
to the ordinary high water level.
   (G)   No more than one water-oriented accessory structure or facility shall
be located within the shoreline area.
   (H)   The storage or campers and fish houses must meet both setback and
impervious surface requirements.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.043 DOCK PLACEMENT AND REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in the placing of docks in or near
public waters:
   (A)   All docks, piers, wharves, boat lifts, or other structures placed
within public waters, shall meet a minimum setback of five feet from the area
created when projecting the lot width at the shoreline into the water body,
using the lot line.
   (B)   In unique circumstances where due to the curvature of the shoreline,
such a projection of the lot width would result in an undue burden on the
property owner, the city, or their designated representative, may designate a
different setback. Such a determination shall take into consideration any
agreements between the affected landowners.
   (C)   Docks must be placed so that no portion of the dock, including the “L”
extensions or additions, and no accessory or ancillary structures or equipment
(including mooring buoys, boat lifts, shore trackers or swimming platforms)
extends across the projection of the setback from the lot line into the lake.
Docks must also be placed so as not to block access from adjacent property to
open water. The storage of all docks, and all watercraft or water oriented
items, shall also be subject to this property setback rule.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
five foot setback for docks shall not apply to the extent necessary to allow
ingress to, or egress from, a legal, non-conforming boat house or water-
oriented accessory structure.
   (E)   Docks, or portions of docks, intended as accesses to public waters
shall not be rented, leased or used by persons, or their guests, who do not own
or rent the property on which the dock is located. Renting of multiple docks or
portions of a lot shall not be allowed.
   (F)   This section shall apply to the use, maintenance and installation of
any dock and accessory or ancillary structures or equipment at any time.
   (G)   Dock length and width is subject to permitting requirements and/or
restrictions imposed by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
(Ord. passed 3-14-2024) Penalty, see §
152.999
NON-CONFORMITIES
§ 152.055 CONTINUANCE OF ESTABLISHED NON-CONFORMITIES.
   All legally established non-conformities as of March 23, 1999, may continue,
but they will be managed according to applicable state statutes and other
regulations of this community for the subjects of alterations and additions,
repair after damage, discontinuance of use, and intensification of use; except
that the standards in §§
152.056 through
152.058 will also apply in shoreland areas.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.056 CONSTRUCTION ON NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   Exempted lots. Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder on
the date of enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the
requirements of §
152.035 may be allowed as building sites without variances from lot size
requirements provided the use is permitted in the zoning district, the lot has
been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it became
substandard, was created compliant with official controls in effect at the
time, and meets sewage treatment and setback requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Variance required. A variance from setback requirements must be
obtained before any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued
for a lot. In evaluating the variance, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall
consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the
lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.
   (C)   Contiguous lots. If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under
the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of §
152.035, the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the
purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one or more
contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the
requirements of §
152.035 as much as possible.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.057 ADDITIONS/EXPANSIONS TO NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing non-
conforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other requirements of
§§
152.035 through
152.042. Any deviation from these requirements must be authorized by a variance
pursuant to §
152.092.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed
4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.058 NON-CONFORMING SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Upgrading. A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of §
152.041 must be upgraded, at a minimum, any time a permit ordinance of any type
is required for any improvement on, or use of, the property. For the purposes
of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall not be considered non-
conforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system’s improper
setback from the ordinary high water level.
   (B)   Identifying.
      (1)   The City Council has by formal resolution notified the Commissioner
that it has relinquished its oversight of on-site sewage treatment systems to
the county. The city will require upgrading or replacement of any nonconforming
system identified by this program within a reasonable period of time which will
not exceed two years.
      (2)   Sewage systems installed according to all applicable local
shoreland management standards adopted under M.S. § 105.485, as it may be
amended from time to time, in effect at the time of installation may be
considered as conforming unless they are determined to be failing, except that
systems using cesspools, leaching pits, or other deep disposal methods, or
systems with less soil treatment area separation above groundwater than
required by the State Pollution Control Agency’s Chapter 7080, as it may be
amended from time to time, for design on on-site sewage treatment systems,
shall be considered non-conforming.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUDs)
§ 152.070 TYPES OF PUDs PERMISSIBLE.
   Planned unit developments (PUDs) are allowed for new projects on undeveloped
land, redevelopment of previously built sites, or conversions of existing
buildings and land. The land use districts in which they are an allowable use
are identified in the land use district descriptions in §
152.021 and the official zoning map.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.071 PROCESSING OF PUDs.
   Planned unit developments must be processed as a conditional use, except
that an expansion to an existing commercial PUD involving six or fewer new
dwelling units or sites since March 23, 1999, is permissible as a permitted use
provided the total project density does not exceed the allowable densities
calculated in the project density evaluation procedures in §
152.074. Approval cannot occur until the environmental review process (EAW/EIS)
is considered complete.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.072 APPLICATION FOR PUDs.
    The applicant for a PUD must submit the following documents prior to final
action being taken on the application request:
   (A)   (1)   A site plan and/or a plat for the project showing locations of
property boundaries, surface water features, existing and proposed structures
and other facilities, land alterations, sewage treatment and water supply
systems (where public systems will not be provided), and topographic contours
at ten-foot intervals or less. When a PUD is a combined commercial and
residential development, the site plan and/or plat must indicate and
distinguish which buildings and portions of the project are residential,
commercial, or a combination of the two;
      (2)   Exception. For minor structural features such as decks, balconies,
porches, or similar building appurtenances that do not exceed 100 square feet
in area and do not affect property boundaries, utilities, surface water
features, or topography, a dimensioned sketch drawn to scale may be submitted
in lieu of a full site plan as long as impervious and setback permit criteria
are met.
   (B)   A property owners’ association agreement (for residential PUDs) with
mandatory membership, and all in accordance with the requirements of §
152.075;
   (C)   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, or other
instruments that:
      (1)   Properly address future vegetative and topographic alterations,
construction of additional buildings, beaching of watercraft, and construction
of commercial buildings in residential PUDs; and
      (2)   Ensure the long-term preservation and maintenance of open space in
accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in §
152.075.
   (D)   When necessary, a master plan/drawing describing the project and the
floor plan for all commercial structures to be occupied; and
   (E)   Those additional documents as requested by the Planning Commission
that are necessary to explain how the PUD will be designed and will function.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-
28-2025)
§ 152.073 SITE “SUITABLE AREA” EVALUATION.
   Proposed new PUDs or expansions to existing PUDs must be evaluated using the
following procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the
dwelling unit/dwelling site density evaluation in §
152.074.
   (A)   The project parcel must be divided into tiers by locating one or more
lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water
level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:
 
Shoreland Tier Dimensions
Class of Lake                          Unsewered (feet) Sewered (feet)
General development lakes - first tier 200              200
General development lakes - second and 267              200
additional tiers
Natural environment lakes              400              320
 
   (B)   The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding
from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary high water
level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project are then
subjected to either the residential or commercial planned unit development
density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or
sites.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.074 PUD DENSITY EVALUATION.
   The procedures for determining the “base” density of a PUD and density
increase multipliers are as follows.
   (A)   PUD “base” density evaluation. The suitable area within each tier is
divided by the single residential lot size standard for lakes. Proposed
locations and number of dwelling units or sites for the residential planned
unit development are then compared with the tier, density, and suitability
analyses herein and the design criteria in §
152.075.
   (B)   Density increase multipliers. Increases to the dwelling or dwelling
base densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards
in §§
152.035 through
152.042 are met or exceeded and the design criteria in §
152.075 are satisfied. The allowable density increases in the table below will
only be allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level are
increased to at least 50% greater than the minimum setback, or the impact on
the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management,
topography, or additional means acceptable to the local unit of government and
the setback is at least 25% greater than the minimum setback.
   (C)   Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density increases for planned
unit developments.
 
Density Evaluation Tiers Maximum Density Increase within Each Tier (%)
First                    50
Second                   100
Third                    200
Fourth                   200
Fifth                    200
 
   (D)   Transfer. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any
other tier farther from the waterbody, but must not be transferred to any other
closer tier.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.075 MAINTENANCE AND DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Maintenance and administration requirements.
      (1)   Requirement. Before final approval of a planned unit development,
adequate provisions must be developed for preservation and maintenance in
perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of
the development.
      (2)   Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent
easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and
permanent means must be provided to ensure long-term preservation and
maintenance of open space. The instruments must include all of the following
protections:
         (a)   Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PUDs);
         (b)   Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine
maintenance prohibited;
         (c)   Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and
other materials prohibited; and
         (d)   Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited.
      (3)   Development organization and functioning. Unless an equally
effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable, all
residential planned unit developments must use an owners’ association with the
following features.
         (a)   Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site
purchaser and any successive purchasers.
         (b)   Each member must pay a pro rata share of the association’s
expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites.
         (c)   Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate changing
conditions.
         (d)   The association must be responsible for insurance, taxes, and
maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.
   (B)   Open space requirements. Planned unit developments must contain open
space meeting all of the following criteria.
      (1)   At least 50% of the total project area must be preserved as open
space.
      (2)   Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way, or land covered by
road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except water-oriented accessory
structures or facilities, are developed areas and shall not be included in the
computation of minimum open space.
      (3)   Open space must include areas with physical characteristics
unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing
significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries.
      (4)   Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by
owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling
units or sites, and by the general public.
      (5)   Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment systems if the
use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems.
      (6)   Open space must not include commercial facilities or uses, but may
contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities.
      (7)   The appearance of open space areas, including topography,
vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of restrictive deed
covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other
equally effective and permanent means.
      (8)   The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, must be
included as open space. For PUDs at least 50% of the shore impact zone area of
existing developments, or at least 70% of the shore impact zone area of new
developments must be preserved in its natural or existing state.
   (C)   Erosion control and storm water management. Erosion control and storm
water management plans must be developed and the PUD must:
      (1)   Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the
likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction.
This goal must be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of
bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities,
vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques must be used to
minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control plans
approved by a soil and water conservation district may be required if project
size and site physical characteristics warrant; and
      (2)   Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably
expected quantities and qualities of storm water runoff. Impervious surface
coverage within any tier must not exceed 25% of the tier area.
   (D)   Centralization and design of facilities. Centralization and design of
facilities and structures must be done according to the following standards.
      (1)   A planned unit development must be connected to publicly owned
water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and sewage-
treatment systems must be centralized and designed and installed to meet or
exceed applicable standards or rules of the State Department of Health and §§
152.036 and
152.041. On-site sewage-treatment systems must be located on the most suitable
areas of the development, and sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors
must be provided for a replacement soil treatment system for each sewage
system.
      (2)   Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one or more groups
and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be designed and
located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant
shoreland classification: setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation
above the surface water features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the
ordinary high water level must be increased in accordance with §
152.074(B) for developments with density increases.
      (3)   Shore recreation facilities, including, but not limited to,
swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, must
be centralized and located in suitable areas. Evaluation of suitability must
include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, the soil’s depth
to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant factors. The number of spaces
provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft must not
exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit or site in the first tier
(notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an existing commercially used
harbor). Launching-ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and
unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or
sites located in other tiers.
      (4)   Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to
the local unit of government, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative
and topographic screening must be preserved, if existing, or may be required to
be provided.
      (5)   Accessory structures and facilities, except water-oriented
accessory structures, must meet the required principal structure setback and
must be centralized.
      (6)   Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed
if they meet or exceed design standards contained in §
152.036 and are centralized.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.076 CONVERSIONS.
   Local governments may allow existing resorts or other land uses and
facilities to be converted to residential planned unit developments if they
existed before 1999 and converted under M.S. § 515B.1-106, as amended from time
to time.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed
4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.090 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit is required for the construction of any structure including
decks, fences, storage sheds and signs, the installation and/or alteration of
sewage treatment systems, and those lot alteration activities not exempted by §
152.037. Application for a permit shall be made to the City Zoning Officer on
the forms provided. The application shall include the necessary information so
that the City Zoning Officer can determine the site’s suitability for the
intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment, system is, or will be,
provided.
   (B)   A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall
stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage-treatment system, as defined
by §
152.042, shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.091 CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   The City Zoning Officer shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance for
each activity requiring a permit as specified in §
152.090. This certificate will specify that the use of land conforms to the
requirements of this chapter. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance
with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter
and shall be punishable as provided in §
152.999.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.092 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances may only be granted in accordance with M.S. Chapter 462, as
it may be amended from time to time, as applicable. A variance may not
circumvent the general purposes and intent of this chapter. No variance may be
granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district in
which the subject property is located. Conditions may be imposed in the
granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties
and the public interest.
   (B)   The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for
variances in accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the conduct of
business. When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources
has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the
approved variance required in §
152.093(B) below shall also include the Board of Zoning Adjustment’s summary of
the public record/testimony and findings of facts and conclusions which
supported the issuance of the variance.
   (C)   For existing developments, the application for variance must clearly
demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for the
intended use of the property. The variance, if issued, must require
reconstruction of a non-conforming sewage treatment system.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.093 NOTIFICATION TO THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances,
amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must
be sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated representative and
postmarked at least ten days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to
consider proposed subdivisions or plats must include copies of the subdivision
or plat.
   (B)   A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions or plats, and final
decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s
designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants and variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. Violations
of this chapter can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for
a regulated activity pursuant to §
152.090. Each 24-hour day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. passed 3-23-1999; Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord.
passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022)
CHAPTER 153: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
153.01   Applicability
   
153.02   Topographic alterations/grading and filling
   
153.03   Storm water management
   
153.04   Watercourse protection
   
153.05   Exclusions
§ 153.01 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter applies to any area of the incorporated city limits not covered
by
Chapter 50 of this code.
(Ord. passed 5-1-2002; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed
8-16-2022)
§ 153.02 TOPOGRAPHIC ALTERATIONS/GRADING AND FILLING.
   (A)   Lot alteration (grading, filling, or excavating) necessary for the
construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways for
movement of more than 50 cubic yards require a lot alteration permit, but this
permit can be combined with construction permit for these facilities.
   (B)   Property owner must apply and receive a conditional use permit prior
to receiving a permit for the movement of more than 600 cubic yards of
material.
(Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 153.03 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.
   The following general and specific standards shall apply.
   (A)   General standards.
      (1)   When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain storm
water runoff before discharge to public ditches.
      (2)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential,
and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and
protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment
on the site.
      (3)   When development density, topographic features, and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle storm water
runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed
facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and
human-made materials and facilities.
   (B)   Specific standards.
      (1)   Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 40% of the lot
area or 25% of the lot area within the shoreland management area. Impervious
surface is a constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry
of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater
quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development. Examples
include, but are not limited to, decks, rooftops, sidewalks, patios permeable
pavers, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel driveways.
      (2)   When constructed facilities are used for storm water management,
they must be approved by the City Zoning Officer that they are designed and
installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local soil
and water conservation districts.
      (3)   Minimum floor elevation for building shall be established at
1,339.38 feet.
      (4)   Surface area covered by permeable pavers must be included in the
impervious surface calculation. Half of the area covered by professionally
installed and properly maintained permeable pavers will be counted as
impervious. Professionally installed means installed by an interlocking
concrete pavement institute certified installer, and properly maintained means
following the manufacturer’s suggested maintenance schedule.
      (5)   Surface area of a lot physically separated (i.e., public, private
road right-of-way or easement) from itself or another, cannot be included for
purposes of the impervious surface calculation.
      (6)   Unless otherwise provided by the property owner, a minimum 12-foot
wide driveway, from the nearest road right-of-way to the proposed structure(s),
must be included in the impervious calculation. This includes an accessory
structure that has the ability to house a vehicle and requires a garage door.
   (C)   All land-disturbing activities must comply with these minimum
requirements.
      (1)   Property and streets adjacent to the site of a land disturbance
shall be protected from sediment deposition. This shall be accomplished by
preserving a well-vegetated buffer strip around the lower perimeter of the land
disturbance, by installing perimeter controls such as sediment barriers,
filters, dikes, or sediment basins, by stockpiling soil in appropriate
locations or by a combination of such measures.
      (2)   All storm sewer inlets which are functioning during construction
shall be protected so that sediment-laden water will not enter the conveyance
system without first being filtered or otherwise treated to remove sediment.
      (3)   Property and waterways downstream from development sites shall be
protected from flooding and erosion due to increases in the volume, velocity,
and peak water flow rate of storm water runoff. Concentrated storm runoff water
leaving a development’s site must be discharged directly into a well-defined
natural or human-made off-site receiving channel or pipe.
      (4)   A permanent vegetative cover shall be established in denuded areas
not otherwise permanently stabilized forthwith after the land-disturbing
activity is complete.
      (5)   Whenever construction vehicles access public roads, the provision
shall be made to minimize the transport of sediment by runoff or vehicle
tracking onto the paved surface. Where sediment is transported onto a public
road surface, the roads shall be cleaned thoroughly at the end of each day.
      (6)   All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices
shall be maintained and repaired to assure the continued performance of their
intended function.
      (7)   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be
removed within 30 days after final site stabilization is achieved or after the
temporary measures are no longer needed.
(Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 153.04 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 8-16-2022) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 153.05 EXCLUSIONS.
   The impervious surface standard set forth in §
153.03 shall not apply to all existing impervious surface coverages for any
area contained within the chapter existing as of the date of the initial
passage of this chapter. Impervious surface area in existence at the time of
the initial passage of this chapter shall be allowed to continue and exist
despite the nonconformity with the existing provision of §
153.02. Non-conforming properties contained within this section shall be
allowed to rebuild, remodel, reconfigure, and restore the property in existence
at the time of the initial passage of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-1-2002; Ord. passed 5-9-2017; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed
8-16-2022)
CHAPTER 154: RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Findings, purpose, and intent
   
154.02   Election to manage public rights-of-way
   
154.03   Definitions
   
154.04   Administration
Regulations and Requirements
   
154.15   Permit requirement
   
154.16   Permit applications
   
154.17   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
154.18   Action on small wireless facility permit applications
   
154.19   Permit fees
   
154.20   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
154.21   Joint applications
   
154.22   Supplementary applications
   
154.23   Other obligations
   
154.24   Denial or revocation of permit
   
154.25   Installation requirements
   
154.26   Inspection
   
154.27   Work done without a permit
   
154.28   Supplementary notification
   
154.29   Revocation of permits
   
154.30   Mapping data
   
154.31   Location and relocation of facilities
   
154.32   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
154.33   Damage to other facilities
   
154.34   Right-of-way vacation
   
154.35   Indemnification and liability
   
154.36   Abandoned and unusable facilities
   
154.37   Appeal
   
154.38   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code
relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter clarifies
that no right of way permit shall be issued for the installation of private
irrigation within the right-of-way. This chapter imposes reasonable regulation
on the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within
its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended
to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this
chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear
financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this chapter provides for
recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public
rights-of-way.
   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws,
Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163,
237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and 2017 Minn. Laws, Chapter 94 Article
9, amending the Act, as they all may be amended from time to time, and the
other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-
way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules parts
7819.0050 to 7819.9950 and Minn. Rules Chapter 7560, as they all may be amended
from time to time, where possible. To the extent any provision of this chapter
cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that
interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and
case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the
regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to
M.S. § 237.163 subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not ABANDONED
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   ALTERATION. Any changes to the right-of-way, including, but not limited to,
installation of sidewalk and driveways.
   ALTERATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may make alteration in a right-of-way. An ALTERATION
PERMIT allows the holder to alterate that part of the right-of-way described in
such permit.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate, alter, or obstruct
a right-of-way.
   CITY. The City of Battle Lake, Minnesota. CITY also means the city’s elected
officials, officers, employees, and agents.
   CITY PERSONNEL. The Public Works Director, Chief of Police, and/or their
designees.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the
city or other governmental unit.
   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee’s option:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Letter of Credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; or
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be
amended from time to time, means the cost to achieve a level of restoration, as
determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the
maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minn. Rules, parts
7819.9900 to 7819.9950, as they may be amended from time to time.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established
by permit.
   DEPARTMENT. Public Works Department.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that:
      (1)   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of
property; or
      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to
restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION PERMIT
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a right-of-way user to accept service and to make
decisions for that right-of-way user regarding all matters within the scope of
this chapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless
facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-
way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct
the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits.
MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way
user for the use of the right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party
contractor used by the city including fees tied to or based on customer counts,
access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the
fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of 1997 Session Laws
Chapter 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as they all may be amended from time
to time; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and
costs related to appeals.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way. Does not
include vehicles when parked for less than a 24-hour period without moving or
vehicles are authorized by the owner or authorized users of the adjacent
property.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs.
   PATCH or PATCHING.
      (1)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A
PATCH consists of:
         (a)   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base; and
         (b)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
      (2)   A PATCH is considered full restoration only when the pavement is
included in the city’s five-year project plan.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate, or gravel.
   PERMIT. Has the meaning given RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT in M.S. § 237.162, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in which
the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements of the city. A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions
of this chapter.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified
in writing that they have been put on probation.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of State Public
Utilities Commission rules.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit,
or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.
      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. §
237.162, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that
is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a
right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes:
      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. §
216B.02, subds. 4 and 6, as they may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information;
      (3)   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in M.S.
Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by the city;
      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (6)   Water and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling, or
heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer’s premises.
Other than SERVICE LATERALS, no private services shall be located within the
right-of-way.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the SMALL WIRELESS
FACILITY provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet
in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already
been issued.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.
      (1)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or
seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way that is used or is
intended to be used for providing wireless service.
      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined
and regulated under M.S. Chapter 238, as amended from time to time, a
telecommunications system defined and regulated under M.S. Chapter 237, as
amended from time to time, and telecommunication activities related to
providing natural gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02, as amended from time to time, a municipality, a municipal
gas or power agency organized under M.S. Chapter 453 and 453A, as amended from
time to time, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S.
Chapter 308A, as amended from time to time, are not TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-
OF-WAY USERS for the purposes of this chapter, except to the extent such entity
is offering wireless service.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case, it is considered
full restoration.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision
of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver,
antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and a
small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures,
wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless
support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly
associated with a specific antenna.
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SERVICE does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 151 et seq., as amended,
including cable service.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way
designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by the city.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022)
§ 154.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.15 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in
the right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way
permit from the city to do so.
      (1)   Alter permit. An alteration permit is required by a right-of-way
user to alter that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      (2)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a right-of-
way user to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way
by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein. The installation of wires within the right of way for the
purpose of robotic mowers is an authorized justification to be granted a
permit. The installation of sprinkler systems within the right-of-way for the
purpose of watering lawns, flowers, trees, and other live plants within the
right-of-way is an authorized justification to be granted a permit.
      (3)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a right-
of-way user to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project. Normal and legal parking in the right-of-way is exempt for vehicles
parked within the right-of-way no more than 24 hours without moving. Vehicles
of the owner of adjacent property or authorized user are exempt from the 24-
hour period.
      (4)   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless facility permit is
required by a right-of-way user to erect or install a wireless support
structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a
small wireless facility in the specified portion or the right-of-way, to the
extent specified therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for
the length of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless:
      (1)   Such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-
way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and
      (2)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000 subp. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time, and notwithstanding division (B) above,
the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay
penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council resolution.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
worksite and shall be available for inspection by the city.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 154.16 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the city.
   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered
complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the following
provisions:
      (1)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities;
      (2)   A certificate of insurance listing the city as an additional
insured;
      (3)   Payment of money, where applicable, due to the city for:
         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management
costs;
         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city; and/or
         (d)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable. Payment of
disputed amounts due to the city by posting security or depositing in an escrow
account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount owing.
      (4)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.17 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including, but not limited to,
M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One-Call Excavation Notice System) and
Minn. Rules Chapter 7560, as they all may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to division (B) above,
the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation
of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless
facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the
particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications,
and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application.
      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way
shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city’s written authorization,
provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare or to protect the right-of-
way and its current use, and further provided that a right-of-way user may
replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with
a structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as
may be imposed in the applicable permit.
      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its
wireless support structure.
      (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements
between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other
facilities in and around the right-of-way.
      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless
support structure, sign, or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance, or intended purpose of such structure.
      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support
structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.
   (D)   Small wireless facility agreement.
      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a small
wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city
asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small
wireless facility collocation agreement with the city. The standard collocation
agreement may require payment of the following:
         (a)   Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure;
         (b)   Twenty-five dollars per year for maintenance associated with the
collocation; and
         (c)   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
            1.   Seventy-three dollars per radio node less than or equal to 100
maximum watts;
            2.   One-hundred-eighty-two dollars per radio node over 100 maximum
watts; or
            3.   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual costs exceed
the foregoing.
      (2)   The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not
in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however,
that the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or
franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit
does not supersede, alter, or affect any then-existing agreement between the
city and applicant.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.18 ACTION ON SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless
facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such application.
The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit
application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the
application within the review periods established in this section.
   (B)   Consolidated applications.
      (1)   An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit
application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless
facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local government unit,
provided that all small wireless facilities in the application:
         (a)   Are located within a two-mile radius;
         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support
structures.
      (2)   In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the
city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not
use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless
facilities in the application.
   (C)   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
      (1)   The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking
approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-
day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such
applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of such
extension;
      (2)   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information
and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within
30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents or
information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of
any still-missing information; and/or
      (3)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing
to toll the review period.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.19 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Alteration permit fee. The city shall impose an alteration permit fee
in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall impose an excavation permit fee
in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (C)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall impose an obstruction permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.
   (D)   Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
      (1)   Management costs; and
      (2)   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated
with collocation of small wireless facilities.
   (E)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
   (F)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach are not refundable.
   (G)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch his or her own work.
The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee’s improper backfilling, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with correcting the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
himself or herself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation
permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions
of Minn. Rules part 7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching, and the
degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching, and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee,
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do such work. In that event, the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
the permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under
the construction performance bond.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.21 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Right-of-way users may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Shared fees. Right-of-way users who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, right-of-way users must agree among themselves as to the portion each
will pay and indicate the same on their applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Right-of-way users who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint
application by two or more right-of-way users or a single application, are not
required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the
permit fee, but a permit would still be required.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.22 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must, before working in that greater
area:
      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby; and
      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.23 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses,
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable
rule, law, or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state, and federal laws, including, but not limited to, Minn. Rules
Chapter 7560, as it may be amended from time to time. A permittee shall perform
all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and
regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant
to his or her permit, regardless of who does the work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including, but not limited
to, horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Chapter 216D and Minn. Rules Chapter 7560, as they may be amended from
time to time, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing
underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the Director.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.24 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
   (B)   Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be
made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must
notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business days
of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied, the
right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and
resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of
receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be
imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30
days after submission.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.25 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching, and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
parts 7819.1100 and 7819.5000, as they may be amended from time to time, and
other applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent
with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn.
Rules Chapter 7560, as it may be amended from time to time, and these
ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those
requirements and conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits
and/or agreements.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.26 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
with Minn. Rules part 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work site available to
the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times, in accordance with §
10.20, during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of city personnel.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, city personnel may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety,
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   City personnel may issue an order to the permittee for any work
that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to city personnel that
the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within
the required time, city personnel may revoke the permit.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.27 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each right-of-way user shall immediately notify the director of any
event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The right-
of-way user may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to
the emergency. Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One-Call regarding an
emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days
after the occurrence of the emergency, the right-of-way user shall apply for
the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest
of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter
for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a right-of-way
user’s facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of
each right-of-way user affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In
any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to
the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the right-of-way user whose
facilities occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by this
code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the
right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.28 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city
of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.29 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule,
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetuation or attempt to perpetuate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the city shall
make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand
shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the
permit. A substantial breach, as stated in division (A) above, will allow the
city, at its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the
permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee’s failure to so
contact the city, or permittee’s failure to timely submit an acceptable plan,
or permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached, will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked, and
permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.30 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each right-of-way user and permittee shall
provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules
parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as amended from time to time. Within 90 days
following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall
provide the Director accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built”
location of all equipment installed, owned, and maintained by the permittee.
Such maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of
all facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city’s
electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the
Director. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this division (A)
shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder’s registration.
   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules part
7560.0150, subp. 2, as it may be amended from time to time, shall require the
permittee’s use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations
of installed service laterals and the service lateral vertical locations in
those cases where the director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their
subcontractors shall submit to the director evidence satisfactory to the
director of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this
division (B) and with applicable Gopher State One-Call law and Minn. Rules
governing service laterals installed after Dec. 31, 2005, shall be a condition
of any city approval necessary for:
      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project,
including those under M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time;
and
      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other subdivision or
site plan approval under M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to
time. The Director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of
providing such information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate
information on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of
the permit issued for the work or future permits to the offending permittee or
its subcontractors.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.31 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the
Act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules parts 7819.3100,
7819.5000, and 7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time, to the
extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   If applicable, unless otherwise agreed in a franchise or other
agreement between the applicable right-of-way user and the city, facilities in
the right-of-way must be located or relocated and maintained underground in
accordance with any relevant section of the City Code.
   (C)   (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or
any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facility
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
      (2)   Any right-of-way user who has facilities in the right-of-way in a
position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later
than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs, and hardship to the right-
of-way user.
   (D)   To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.32 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. § 216D.01 through
216D.09 (“One Call Excavation Notice System”), as amended from time to time,
before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each right-of-way user
who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the
horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any right-of-way user
whose facilities are less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface
shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the
exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.33 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move a right-of-way user’s facilities to protect it, the
city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible.
The costs associated therewith will be billed to that right-of-way user and
must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each right-of-way user
shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-
way which it or its facilities damage. Each right-of-way user shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another
right-of-way user caused during the city’s response to an emergency occasioned
by that right-of-way user’s facilities.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.34 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a right-
of-way user, the right-of-way user’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are
governed by Minn. Rules part 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.35 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By accepting a permit under this chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees
to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minn.
Rules part 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.36 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.
   Any right-of-way user who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall
remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-
of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived
by the city.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.37 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied a
permit; has had a permit revoked; believes that the fees imposed are not in
conformity with M.S. § 237.163, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to
time; or disputes a determination of the Director may have the denial,
revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by the
City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, provided the right-of-way user has submitted
its appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda item.
A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee
imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing
the reasonableness of the decision.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
§ 154.38 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(Ord. passed 9-14-2021; Ord. passed 5-24-2022; Ord. passed 11-14-2023)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISION CONTROL
Section
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Legal authority
   
155.03   Compliance
   
155.04   Savings clause
   
155.05   Exemptions
   
155.06   Definitions
   
155.07   Platting procedures
   
155.08   Platting presentation requirements
   
155.09   Plat design standards
   
155.10   Required improvements
   
155.11   Metes and bounds standards
   
155.12   Administration
   
155.13   Owner liable
   
155.14   Preliminary title opinion
   
155.15   Final title opinion
   
155.16   Minimum road standards
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   In order to integrate new subdivisions with the development objectives of
the city and to contribute to an attractive, stable, and wholesome environment,
adequate public services, and an integrated safe road and highway system, the
subdividing of land in the city shall be required.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.02 LEGAL AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.03 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No subdivision of any real property of less than two and one-half
acres shall be made except by a plat duly approved by the City Council and
properly recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
   (B)   No subdivision of any real property of less than five acres, which is
located within the shoreland area or which contains any wetland area, shall be
made except by a plat duly approved by the City Council and properly recorded
in the office of the County Recorder.
   (C)   No conveyance other than those described in divisions (A) and (B)
above, shall be recorded unless it meets the requirements of §
155.11.
   (D)   No conveyance or other document creating a subdivision of any real
property other than by a duly approved plat, shall be recorded unless
accompanied by a registered surveyor’s drawing for recording. The surveyor’s
drawing shall accurately illustrate the subdivider’s entire lot, parcel, or
tract which is subdivided by the conveyance or other document, and shall
illustrate the location of any wetlands on that property. No conveyance or
other document shall be recorded unless accompanied by this surveyor’s drawing.
   (E)   Any surveyor performing a survey in the city shall file a copy of that
survey with the County Recorder and the City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (F)   No deed or other document purporting to subdivide property shall be
recorded or certified for recording by the County Auditor, County Treasurer, or
County Recorder unless it meets the requirements set forth above.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.04 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   All plats approved under this chapter are approved for city purposes only
and shall not release the subdivider from any liability or obligation imposed
by state statutes or federal law. In the event any provision of this chapter
shall be found contrary to law by a court of competent jurisdiction from whose
final judgment no appeal has been taken, such provision shall be considered
void. All other provisions of this chapter shall continue in full force and
effect as though the voided provision had never existed.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The division of a surveyed lot, parcel, or tract for the purpose of
attachment to contiguous lots where no residual plot or lot or real property is
left unattended is exempted from the provisions of this chapter, as are
subdivisions conveying property to a public utility for such things as
substations, poles, towers, telephone booths, and the like.
   (B)   If the parcel can be described as a rectangular portion of a parcel of
the government rectangular survey system, a surveyor’s drawing will not be
required.
   (C)   Metes and bounds subdivisions of less than two and one-half acres (§
155.03(A)) or less than five acres (§
155.03(B)) that will be permanently attached to an adjacent contiguous parcel
will be exempt from the minimum size requirements provided all other conditions
of this chapter are complied with.
   (D)   Common interest communities shall be in accordance with M.S. § 515B,
as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.06 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, words in the present tense shall include future
tense and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and
the plural the singular. The word SHALL is mandatory and not discretionary. The
word MAY is permissive. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and
words are herein defined as follows.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS. The Zoning Officer and the Clerk/Treasurer of the
city or his or her assistants.
   ALLEY. Any strip of land publicly or privately owned, less than 33 feet in
width between property lines, set aside for public vehicular access to abutting
property.
   ARTERIAL ROAD or HIGHWAY (PRIMARY). A road or highway of considerable
continuity designed primarily to serve as an interconnection link between
sectors of the city and beyond (such as from within a city to outlying areas).
   BACKLOT. Residential lots without water frontage located in the shoreland
area of the city.
   BACKSLOPE. The portion of the roadway cross-section beginning at the outside
edge of the ditch bottom, sloping upward to a point where the slope intersects
the existing ground line.
   BLUFF.
      (1)   A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having
all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   Part or all of the feature is located in the shoreland area;
         (b)   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water
level;
         (c)   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25
feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or greater; and
         (d)   The slope must drain toward the water body.
      (2)   If the 50-foot segment on either side of the point at which a
feature is 25 feet above the OHWL has a slope of 30% or more, it is a BLUFF.
   COMMISSIONER. Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
   COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY (CIC) PLAT. As described in M.S. § 515B.2-101 to
515B.2-110, as it may be amended from time to time.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A road having but one end open to traffic and the other end
being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
   DEDICATED STREET. A roadway designated for public use.
   DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES. Those goals defined as part of the city’s
comprehensive planning program which indicate how the city wishes to develop
itself in line with orderly and logical direction.
   EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for the specific use of said land by
the public, generally, or to a person or persons.
   FEE SCHEDULE. A document setting forth the city’s fees for permits, appeals,
variances, and subdivision filings as determined by the City Council.
   FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider’s plan
of subdivision is presented to the City Council for approval and which, if
approved, will be submitted to the County Recorder.
   INSLOPE. The portion of the roadway cross-section beginning at the outside
edge of the roadway shoulder, sloping downward to the inside edge of the ditch
bottom.
   LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land
survey, auditor’s plat, or other accepted means and separated from other
parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, lease, or
separation.
   METES AND BOUNDS. A description of real property which identifies a parcel
of land by its shapes and boundaries, starting at a known point and describing
the bearing and distances of lines forming the boundaries of the property or
delineating a fractional portion of a section, lot, or area by described lines
or portions thereof.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and
shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoir and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary map drawing or chart indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission
and City Council for their consideration.
   PUBLIC ROAD. A particularly described and identified right-of-way, at least
33 feet in width, dedicated to public use for road or highway purposes.
   SERVICE ROAD. A public road having a traveled surface of at least 24 feet in
width lying parallel and adjacent to an arterial road or highway and which
provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
   SHORELAND AREA. Land located within the following distances from public
water: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or
flowage; and 300 feet from a river or the landward extent of a flood plain
designated by ordinance on a river, whichever is greater. The limits of
SHORELANDS may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by
topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances
and when approved by the Commissioner.
   STRUCTURE. Any building or appurtenance, including, but not limited to,
vision obstructing fences, decks, retaining walls, satellite dishes, except
aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone,
telegraph, gas lines, tower poles, and other supporting facilities.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to affect a
subdivision of land for himself or herself or for another.
   SUBDIVISION. A parcel of land which is divided.
   WETLAND. A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular #39 (1971 Edition), which is hereby
incorporated by reference, is available through the Minitex Interlibrary Loan
System and the County Land and Resource Management Office, and is not subject
to frequent change.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.07 PLATTING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Generally. The following procedures shall be followed in the
administration of this section, and no real property within the jurisdiction of
this section shall be subdivided and offered for sale or a plat recorded until
a pre-application meeting has been held, a preliminary plat has been reviewed
and approved and until a final plat has been reviewed and approved as set forth
in the procedures provided herein.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. Prior to the submission of any plat for
consideration by the Planning Commission under the provisions of this chapter,
the subdivider may meet with the Administrative Officers to introduce himself
or herself as a potential subdivider and learn the relevant requirements of the
city ordinances.
   (C)   Preliminary plat.
      (1)   Submission or plat. The subdivider shall submit to the
Administrative Officers ten copies of a preliminary plat of his or her proposed
subdivision, the requirements of which are set forth in this chapter. Any
application for a conditional-use permit to authorize road construction on the
platted property shall also be filed at the same time. They shall be filed at
least 30 days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting and
shall be accompanied by the fees set forth in the fee schedule.
      (2)   Notice procedure. Notice of the public hearing at which the
Planning Commission will consider the preliminary plat shall be made by the
Administrative Officers pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time. The owner or subdivider shall also be notified as to
the time and place of the public hearing.
      (3)   Public hearing. At the public hearing set for consideration of the
preliminary plat, the Planning Commission shall consider comments to the notice
of plat, and it shall also review the preliminary plat from the standpoint of
environmental impact, compatibility with surrounding area, suitability of area
for subdividing, public health and welfare, crowding potential, the
compatibility with the city comprehensive plan and overall city planning.
      (4)   Planning Commission action. At the conclusion of the public hearing
set forth in division (C)(3) above, the Planning Commission shall either
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the preliminary plat.
The Planning Commission may also table the preliminary plat for future
consideration. The Planning Commission shall not approve a preliminary plat
unless the presentation requirements set forth in §
155.08 have all been met. No lot on the preliminary plat shall be approved if,
in the opinion of the Planning Commission, a lot does not have dedicated road
access, an adequate building site, or sufficient area for two on-site
individual sewage treatment systems in areas where public services are not
available, meeting the requirements of all rules and regulations in this
chapter, the shoreland management ordinance and the utility code of the city.
The action of the Planning Commission shall be stated in writing setting forth
the conditions of approval, reasons for approval, or the reasons for denial.
The Planning Commission’s recommendation shall then be submitted to the City
Council.
      (5)   City Council action. The City Council shall consider the Planning
Commission’s action at their next regularly scheduled meeting and shall either
approve, approve with conditions, deny, or table for future consideration.
Approval shall mean the acceptance of the design as a basis for preparation of
the final plat, and the submission of such final plat for approval. Approval by
the City Council of all engineering proposals presented in the preliminary plat
which pertain to such things as water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage,
gas and electric service, road gradients and widths, and the surface of roads
is required prior to the approval of the final plat. The Board may, after
notifying the subdivider, employ qualified persons to check and verify each
proposal, the costs of such services shall be paid by the subdivider.
   (D)   Final plat.
      (1)   Filing of the final plat.
         (a)   The owner or subdivider shall file with the Administrative
Officers within one year of the date of the approval of the preliminary plat
the final plat which shall substantially conform to the preliminary plat as
approved. (See §
155.08(C) for filing document requirements.)
         (b)   Final plat approval shall not be granted to any plat which is
not filed within the time herein specified, unless an extension is requested in
writing and for good cause, granted by the City Council. The final plat shall
be presented to the City Council at a scheduled meeting which is at least two
weeks after the date of filing with the Administrative Officers.
      (2)   Contents. The subdivider may file a final plat limited to such
portion of the preliminary plat which he or she proposed to record and develop
at one time, provided that such portion must conform to all requirements of
this chapter. Lots which have received preliminary approval but are not
included on the final plat must be considered as a new subdivision.
      (3)   Review. The Administrative Officers shall check the final plat to
see that it is in substantial conformity with the preliminary plat as approved
by the City Council and that it meets all ordinances and regulations of the
city.
      (4)   City Council action. Final plat approval shall not be granted
unless all presentation requirements of §
155.08 have been met. The City Council shall approve, deny, or table the final
plat, and the Clerk/Treasurer shall notify the owner or subdivider of the
Board’s actions within 30 days. The final plat, if approved, shall then be
filed with the County Recorder. If any irregularity prevents recording of the
final plat, the County Auditor shall notify the owner or subdivider. Any
approval of the final plat by the City Council shall be null and void if the
plat is not recorded with the County Recorder within 90 days after the date of
approval unless application for an extension of time is made, in writing,
during said 90-day period, to the City Council and for good cause granted by
the City Council.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.08 PLATTING PRESENTATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot suitability. Each lot created through subdivision must be suitable
in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability
analysis by the local unit of government shall consider susceptibility to
flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe
limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography,
inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic
conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife
habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature of the
natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future
residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
   (B)   Preliminary plat.
      (1)   Preliminary plat must be prepared by a state registered land
surveyor.
      (2)   Scale: one inch equals 100 feet, if possible, but not smaller than
one inch equals 200 feet.
      (3)   Identification and description:
         (a)   Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or
closely resemble the name of any plat previously recorded in the city;
         (b)   Location by section, township, range, or by other identifying
description;
         (c)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor, and
designer of the plan;
         (d)   Graphic scale;
         (e)   North point; and
         (f)   Date of preparation.
      (4)   Existing conditions in tract and in surrounding area to a distance
of 300 feet:
         (a)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly outlined and
dimensioned;
         (b)   Total acreage and total water frontage (shoreland areas);
         (c)   Platted roads, rights-of-way, and utility easements;
         (d)   Boundary lines and ownership of adjoining land;
         (e)   Sewers, water mains or wells, culverts, or other underground
facilities;
         (f)   Plans for the provision of potable water, sewage disposal,
drainage, and flood control;
         (g)   Existing structures;
         (h)   Summary of soil and vegetation types (terrestrial and aquatic);
         (i)   Lakes, watercourses, and wetlands, and such other information as
soil tests, location of the ordinary high water level, and contours at vertical
intervals of not more than ten feet. All elevation data shall be mean sea level
or some other assumed, workable datum;
         (j)   Evidence that the ground water level is at least three feet
below the level of finished grades or plans for resolving any ground water
problems; and
         (k)   Structure setbacks from any lake, river, road right-of-way, lot
line, and bluff as set forth in the shoreland management or setback ordinances
of the city, must be clearly shown by dotted lines on the plat. Areas suitable
for structure location shall be clearly indicated.
      (5)   Subdivision design features.
         (a)   Layout and width of proposed road rights-of-way and utility
easements, showing road names, approximate lot dimensions, parks, and other
public areas. All roads must be identified and signed in accordance with the
provisions of the Enhanced 911 County-wide Addressing System. The road right-
of-way layout shall include all contiguous land owned or controlled by the
subdivider;
         (b)   Proposed use of all parcels, and if zoning change is
contemplated, proposed rezoning;
         (c)   Preliminary road grades and drainage plans shall be shown on a
copy of the contour map;
         (d)   Statement of proposed protective covenants;
         (e)   Statement of source of water supply;
         (f)   Statement of provisions for sewage treatment. In areas where a
public sewage treatment system is unavailable, a lot must contain sufficient
suitable area for the installation of two standard on-site sewage treatment
systems. Lots that would require use of holding tanks shall not be approved;
and
         (g)   Easement dedications must be provided over natural drainage or
ponding areas for management of storm water and significant wetlands.
Provisions for surface water drainage and flood control must be provided.
      (6)   Preliminary title opinion. The subdivider shall provide a
preliminary title opinion, prepared by an attorney of the subdivider’s
choosing, in substantial conformity with the form set forth as §
155.14.
      (7)   On-site. Within 14 days of submitting the preliminary plat, the
subdivider must clearly stake and identify the tentative proposed lot corners
and the proposed center line of the road serving the proposed subdivision.
   (C)   Final plat. The final plat shall include the following:
      (1)   Such information as was found necessary for review and requested by
the Planning Commission or City Council;
      (2)   (a)   Data requirements as set forth in M.S. Chapters 505, and 515A
and B (CIC), as they may be amended from time to time; and §§ 155.075, 155.076,
and
156.051; and
         (b)   All interior and exterior boundary lines shall be correctly
designated on the plat and shall show bearings on all straight lines, or angles
at all angle points, and central angle and radii and arc lines for all curves.
Durable iron monuments shall be set at each angle and curve point on the
interior and exterior boundary lines and at all block corners and at all
intermediate points on the block or lot lines indicating a change of direction
in the lines. The plat shall indicate that the monuments have been set.
      (3)   An identification system for all lots and blocks. All lots shall be
numbered consecutively;
      (4)   The area (in square feet) and dimensions of all lots in feet;
      (5)   The subdivider shall submit two hardshells, one transparency copy,
and six duplicate copies of the final plat;
      (6)   All signatures on the plat must be in black ink;
      (7)   Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the
plat represents a survey made by him or her and that monuments and markers
shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodesic details
are correct;
      (8)   Notarized certification by the owner and by any mortgage holder of
record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of roads and other
public areas;
      (9)   Certification showing that all taxes currently due on the property
to be subdivided have been paid in full for the calendar year in which the plat
is filed;
      (10)   Form for approval by registered land surveyor:
 
I hereby certify that I have reviewed this plat and found it to be in
compliance with the surveying requirements of the Subdivision Controls
Ordinance of the City of Battle Lake and Chapter 505 Minnesota Statutes.
 
      (11)   The subdivider shall provide the County Auditor’s office with a
final title opinion prepared by the attorney who prepared the preliminary title
opinion in substantial conformity with the form set forth as §
155.15, within 14 days of the final plat being recorded. The attorney shall
also sign the following statement on the face of the plat prior to filing:
 
I hereby certify that proper evidence of title has been presented to and
examined by me, and I hereby approve this plat as to form and execution.
 
      (12)   Form for mortgage statement:
 
I hereby attest to the fact that there are no mortgages, other than shown,
outstanding against any of the property in this subdivision.
Signed ___________________________________ Dated _____________________________.
   Subdivider
 
      (13)   Form for comparison by Administrative Officers:
 
Comparison with Preliminary Plat made this _____ day of _____________.
Signed _______________________________
   City Administrative Officer
 
      (14)   Form for approval by City Council:
 
Accepted and approved by the City Council of the City of Battle Lake,
Minnesota, this ______ day or _____________, ___________.
Signed ____________________________
   Mayor Signed
Signed ____________________________
   City Clerk/Treasurer
 
      (15)   Form for approval by County Treasurer:
 
I hereby certify that the taxes for the year__________for the lands described
within are paid.
Signed _______________________________ Dated ____________________________
   County Treasurer
 
      (16)   Form for approval by County Auditor:
 
No delinquent taxes and transfer entered. Dated__________
Signed ____________________________
   County Auditor Signed
Signed ____________________________
   Deputy Auditor
 
      (17)   Form for approval by County Recorder:
 
I hereby certify that the within instrument was filed in this office for record
on the__________day of __________, at__________o’clock_____.M., and was duly
recorded in Book of ____________________on page__________.
Signed _______________________________
   County Recorder Signed
Signed _______________________________
   Deputy Recorder
 
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.09 PLAT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Roads. The design of all roads shall be considered in relation to
existing and planned roads, to reasonable circulation of traffic, topographical
conditions, to runoff of storm waters, and to the proposed uses of the areas to
be served.
      (1)   Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of roads
in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the proper projection of roads.
When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land susceptible of being
subdivided, then the new road shall be carried to the boundaries of such
unsubdivided land. Where new roads extend existing adjoining roads, their
projections shall be at the same or greater width, but in no case, less than
the minimum required width.
      (2)   The minimum road design standards of the city, including road width
and grade standards, shall be observed by the subdivider, as set forth in §
155.16.
      (3)   Straight segments of at least 50 feet in length shall be introduced
between reverse curves on city streets and alleys.
      (4)   Insofar as practical, road intersections shall be at right angles
and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 45 degrees. It must be
evidenced that safe and efficient traffic flow is encouraged.
      (5)   Private roads shall not be approved nor shall public improvements
be approved for any previously existing private road.
      (6)   Where a proposed plat is adjacent to a highway, the City Council
may require the subdivider to provide a service road along the right-of-way.
      (7)   The road arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to
owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing
convenient access to it.
      (8)   At road intersections, curb lines shall be rounded at a radius of
not less than 15 feet.
   (B)   Easements.
      (1)   Utility easements at least ten feet wide shall be provided for
utilities where necessary. They shall be centered on rear and other lot lines
or within alley rights-of-way. They shall have continuity of alignment from
block to block. At deflection points, easements for pole line anchors shall be
provided where necessary.
      (2)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way,
channel, or road, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way substantially with the lines of such water course, together with
such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for stream
channel, but also adjoining areas that have been subject to flooding in years
of heavy runoff.
   (C)   Lots.
      (1)   Where possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
or radial to curved road lines. Each lot shall front on a public road or
highway. Lots with frontage of two parallel roads shall be permitted only under
unusual circumstances.
      (2)   Lots within shoreland areas must comply with the minimum lot sizes
specified in §
152.035. Platted lots outside of a shoreland area must comply with §
156.030.
      (3)   Lot remnants which are below the minimum lot size must be added to
adjacent or surrounding lots rather than be allowed to remain as an unusable
outlot or parcel unless the owner can show plans consistent with the purpose of
this chapter for the future use of such remnants.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.10 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   Before the City Council approves a final plat, the subdivider shall give
satisfactory assurance of the provision of the following requirements.
   (A)   Monuments. Steel monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle
points, points of curves in roads and at intermediate points as shown on the
final plat. All U.S., state, city, or other official benchmarks, monuments, or
triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position.
   (B)   Roads. All roads shall be improved in accordance with the road design
standards as specified in §
155.16.
   (C)   Water supply. Wherever connection with a community or public water
system is possible, the public water shall be used. In other case, individual
wells shall be used. Either shall be provided in accordance with state and city
regulations.
   (D)   Sanitary sewer. Wherever trunk line sanitary sewer facilities are
available, the subdivider shall be required to install sanitary sewers and
connect the same to such trunk line sewers. In other cases, individual on-site
sewage treatment systems shall be used. Either shall be provided in accordance
with state and city regulations.
   (E)   Storm water management.
      (1)   When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain storm
water runoff before discharge to public waters.
      (2)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential,
and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and
protected as soon as possible, and facilities or methods used to retain
sediment on the site.
      (3)   When development density, topographic features, and soil runoff
using natural features, and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities
such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and
ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage,
vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and human-made materials
and facilities.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.11 METES AND BOUNDS STANDARDS.
   No subdivision of real property in which the divided tract is described by
metes and bounds shall be permitted, unless all tracts meet the following
standards:
   (A)   Each lot, located in the shoreland area or containing a wetland area
must be a minimum of five acres in size; and all other lots must be a minimum
of two and one-half acres in size;
   (B)   Certification of public road access;
   (C)   All roads must be identified on the surveyor’s drawing and signed in
accordance with the provisions of the County Enhanced 911 County-wide
Addressing System;
   (D)   Sufficient suitable area for the installation of two standard on-site
sewage treatment systems;
   (E)   A registered surveyor’s drawing accompanies the document creating the
subdivision for recording, as required by §
155.03(D) above; and
   (F)   The surveyor’s drawing contains the following form for signature by
the property owner:
 
I hereby certify that the subdivided property described in this survey meets
the city requirements for public road access and sewage treatment systems.
 
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.12 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Variances from standards. In any case where, upon application of any
responsible parties to the Board of Adjustment, it appears by reason of
exceptional circumstances, that the strict enforcement of any provision of the
standards would cause unnecessary hardship under the circumstances, the Board
of Adjustment may permit a variance therefrom upon such conditions as it may
prescribe consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the intent
of this and all other applicable state and local regulation.
   (B)   Appeals. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from
and review any order, requirements, decisions, or determinations made by any
city administrative or police officer charged with enforcing any provision of
this chapter.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city
administrative or police officer.
      (2)   In the event of a violation or threatened violation of this
chapter, the City Council and/or the administrative officer or a police
officer, in addition to other remedies may institute appropriate actions or
proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or
threatened violations, and it shall be the duty of the City Attorney to
institute such action. This will include, but not be limited to, actions for
injunctive relief before a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (3)   Any taxpayer or taxpayers of the city may institute mandamus
proceedings in District Court to compel specific performance by the proper
officer or officers of any duty required by this chapter.
      (4)   Administrative officers, police officers, members of the City
Council, Planning Commission, and Board of Adjustment, in the performance of
their duties, shall have free access on all land included within the boundaries
of a proposed subdivision.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.13 OWNER LIABLE.
   In addition to any other person or persons involved in violation or
threatened violation of this chapter, the owner of record of any property
falling under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be responsible both
criminally and civilly for any construction, alteration, excavation, or any
other activity occurring upon his or her property which is contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.14 PRELIMINARY TITLE OPINION.
 
Battle Lake City Council
P.O. Box 386
Battle Lake, MN 56515-0386
RE: Plat of
________________________________________________________________________
 
Subdividers ___________________________________________________________________
Gentlemen:
Preliminary Opinion
 
I hereby certify that I have examined the above-described plat including the
signatories thereon and an abstract of title consisting of
entries__________through__________inclusive, last certified by (Abstract Co.)
to the hour of 8:00 a.m. on__________. From such examination I conclude that
good record title in fee simple absolute is in the subdividers’ so as to vest
in the public those right-of-way rights and easement rights as in the plat,
subject to the following:
1.
 
2.
 
3.
 
which shall be cured prior to the recording of the plat. I further agree to
furnish the Final Title Opinion following the recording of the plat as required
by Chapter 155 of the City of Battle Lake, Minnesota Code of Ordinances.
Sincerely,
 
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.15 FINAL TITLE OPINION.
 
Battle Lake City Council
P.O. Box 386
Battle Lake, MN 56515-0386
RE: Plat of
________________________________________________________________________
 
   Subdividers ___________________________________________________________________
Gentlemen:
Final Opinion
 
I hereby certify that I have examined all records relating to the above described
plat in the office of the County Recorder from the date of the abstract of title
to__________, the date the plat was recorded. From such examination I conclude:
 
1.   All defects cited in the Preliminary Opinion have been cured;
 
2.   As of the date of recording, good record title in fee simple absolute was in
the subdividers’; and
 
3.   The public is vested with those right-of-way rights and easement rights as in
the plat indicated.
 
Sincerely,
 
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.16 MINIMUM ROAD STANDARDS.
   All construction of roads dedicated for public use shall be in compliance
with the State Department of Transportation State Aid Design Standards for
Roads as well as the following minimum standards.
   (A)   All roads dedicated for public use or for the use of lot owners on a
plat presented for the approval shall have a permanent minimum width of 66 feet
right-of-way (during the road construction period the right-of-way width may
exceed 66 feet to provide for the appropriate backslope). Dead end roads
require a cul-de-sac which has a minimum 120-foot diameter. Alleys require a
minimum width of 20 feet right-of-way.
   (B)   All dedicated roadways have a roadbed of not less than 24 feet in
width when a permanent gravel surface is anticipated and not less than 32 feet
when a bituminous surface is anticipated. All cul-de-sacs, regardless of
surface type, shall have a minimum traveled surface diameter of 100 feet.
   (C)   When necessary for drainage, ditches along the roadbed shall not be
less than two feet deep.
   (D)   Graveling is required. Minimum gravel thickness shall be three inches
compacted or four inches loose.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor. All fines paid for violations shall be credited to the City
General Revenue Fund. Each 24-hour day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2016; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Definitions
   
156.003   Jurisdiction
   
156.004   Compliance required
   
156.005   Enforcement
   
156.006   Interpretation
   
156.007   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
156.008   Owner liable
   
156.009   City opts out of certain state regulations
Districts and Areas; Uses
   
156.020   Districts and areas established
   
156.021   Zoning map
   
156.022   District and area amendments
   
156.023   Future annexation
   
156.024   Uses in commercial district
   
156.025   Uses in residential district
   
156.026   Table of land use districts
   
156.027   General requirements
   
156.028   Non-conforming uses
   
156.029   Abandonment
   
156.030   Lot area and width standards
   
156.031   Yards
   
156.032   Parking
   
156.033   Earth-sheltered buildings
   
156.034   Manufactured homes
   
156.035   Manufactured homes outside manufactured home parks
   
156.036   Manufactured home parks and recreational camping areas
   
156.037   Additional restrictions and standards in residential district
Additional Uses
   
156.050   Twin homes
   
156.051   Planned unit development
   
156.052   Adult entertainment establishments
   
156.053   Bed and breakfast homes
   
156.054   Wind energy conversion systems
   
156.055   Wireless communication facilities
   
156.056   Short-term vacation home rentals
Administration
   
156.070   Administrator
   
156.071   Permits
   
156.072   Board of Zoning Adjustment
   
156.073   Variances
   
156.074   Conditional uses
   
156.075   Decision
   
156.076   Recording of decision
   
156.077   Judicial review
   
156.078   Amendment
   
156.079   Giving of notice
   
156.080   Violation
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the planning and zoning enabling
legislation in M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time. These
zoning regulations, including any amendments of them, may be cited as the
“Battle Lake Zoning Code.”
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of structures,
lands, waters, lot coverage, population density, and the size and location of
all structures in accordance with the city’s comprehensive plan so as to lessen
street congestion, secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers, to
promote health and general welfare, to provide adequate light and air, to
prevent overcrowding of land, to facilitate adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewer services, schools, parks, and other public
requirements, to preserve the character of the area or neighborhood, to
conserve the value of buildings, and to encourage the most appropriate use of
land throughout the city.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.002 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common
usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application. For the
purpose of this chapter, the words MUST and SHALL are mandatory and not
permissive. All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured
horizontally.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or ACCESSORY FACILITY. Any building or improvement
subordinate to a principal use which, because of the nature of its use, can
reasonably be located at greater than normal structure setbacks.
   ADULT. Persons who have attained the age of 18 years.
   ALLEY. A way, other than a street, which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
   BED AND BREAKFAST. An owner-occupied single family residence at which
lodging and meals are provided to registered guests. The BED AND BREAKFAST
facility shall comply with all the applicable state, county, and local
regulations for providing food and lodging.
   BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT. The Zoning Board of Adjustment for the city.
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water
level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
   CHILD CARE FACILITY. A state and county licensed private establishment,
which for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or more children with care,
training, supervision, rehabilitation, or developmental guidance in a dwelling.
(All CHILD CARE FACILITIES shall be licensed under the Human Services Licensing
provisions found in M.S. Chapter 245A.)
   COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease,
rental, or trade of products, goods, and services.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A document or series of documents adopted by the City
Council, setting forth polices for the future of the city.
   CONDITIONAL OR SPECIAL USE. A land use or development as defined by
ordinance that would not be appropriate generally but may be allowed with
appropriate restrictions as provided by official controls upon a finding that
certain conditions as detailed in the City Zoning Code (Chapter 156) exist, the
use or development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan of the
community, and the use is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings,
seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a
principal use or site and at any point extending more than three feet above
ground.
   DUPLEX, TRIPLEX, and QUAD. Dwelling structures on a single lot, having two,
three, and four units, respectively, being attached by common walls and each
unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and sanitation
facilities.
   DWELLING SITE. A designated location for residential use by one or more
persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational
vehicle sites.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any structure or portion of a structure, or other shelter
designed as short- or long-term living quarters for one or more persons, that
includes a kitchen, a bathroom and at least one bedroom including, but not
limited to, rental or timeshare accommodations such as cottage, house, motel,
hotel and resort rooms, cabins, and manufactured homes.
      (1)   DUPLEX. A building designed for and used exclusively for two-family
dwellings.
      (2)   FOURPLEX. A building designed for or used exclusively for four-
family dwellings.
      (3)   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A building or several buildings that
contain more than four dwellings within one complex or property.
      (4)   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A dwelling unit used by members of one
immediate family, including normal appurtenances such as a garage. Adult and
child foster homes and daycare programs are permitted SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
USE of property as provided in M.S. § 245A.14, as it may be amended from time
to time.
      (5)   TRIPLEX. A building designed for or used exclusively for three-
family dwellings.
   EARTH-SHELTERED BUILDING. A building constructed such that more than 50% of
the exterior surface area of the building, excluding garages or other accessory
buildings, is covered with earth (partially completed buildings shall not be
considered EARTH-SHELTERED).
   GLARE. The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort.
   GRADING/FILLING (LOT ALTERATION). Any change of the natural topography of
land, except for normal agricultural purpose.
   GUEST COTTAGE. A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain sleeping
spaces and kitchen and bathroom facilities in addition to those provided in the
primary dwelling unit on a lot.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance between the highest adjoining
ground level at the building or ten feet above the lowest ground level,
whichever is lower, and the highest point of a flat roof or average height of
the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or
retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the
surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to
development. Examples include, but are not limited to, decks, rooftops,
sidewalks, patios, permeable pavers, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or
gravel driveways.
   INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities,
or other wholesale items.
   INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a
contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.
   INTERIM USE PERMIT. The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses: to
allow use for a brief period of time until a permanent location is obtained or
while the permanent location is under construction; to allow use that is
presently judged acceptable by the city, but that, with anticipated development
or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the future; and to allow a use that
otherwise may not be allowed under the zoning regulations but because of its
temporary nature may be acceptable.
   LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land
survey, auditor’s plot, or other accepted means and separated from other
parcels or portions by the description for the purpose of sale, lease, or
separation.
   LOT WIDTH. The shortest distance between lot lines measured at the midpoint
of the building line.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
in the traveling mode, is eight and one-half body feet or more in width or 40
body feet or more in permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation. (This includes “park models” that meet
this definition).
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Shall mean any area whether charging a fee or free
of charge on privately or publicly owned land used on a daily, nightly, weekly,
or longer basis for the accommodation of two or more manufactured homes or
recreation units.
   NON-CONFORMITY. Any legal use, structure, or parcel of land already in
existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official controls or
amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become established
under the terms of the official controls as now written if the official
controls had been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded, or
authorized including but not limited to setbacks, impervious surface, lot size,
and use of land according to M.S. § 462.357 subd. 1e, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   OPEN SPACE. Any space or area preserved in its natural state and
specifically not used for parking, structures, and roads.
   PARKING SPACE. An off-street area for motor vehicles not less than ten feet
by 20 feet in area, having access to a public street or alley, or private
driveway. In determining the gross area required for a specified number of off-
street parking places, including driveways and aisles, 300 square feet per
space shall be used.
   PATIO. Flat area of ground that is covered with a hard material such as
bricks, concrete, or wood.
   PERMANENT SWIMMING POOL. Any swimming pool that remains on the premises on a
year-round basis.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A type of development characterized by a
unified site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a
parcel, whether for sale, rent, or lease, and also usually involving clustering
of these units or sites to provide areas of common open space, density
increases, and a mix of structure types and land uses. These DEVELOPMENTS may
be organized and operated as condominiums, timeshare condominiums,
cooperatives, full-fee ownership, commercial enterprises, or any combination of
these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling units, residential condominiums,
townhouses, apartment buildings, campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks,
resorts, hotels, motels, and conversions of structures and land uses to these
uses.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or
board duly authorized to furnish under governmental regulations to the public,
electricity, gas, steam, water, sewage disposal, or communication facilities.
   RECREATIONAL CAMPING AREA. Any area, whether privately or publicly owned,
used on a daily, weekly, nightly, or longer basis for the accommodation of two
or more recreational camping units.
   RECREATIONAL CAMPING UNIT (RCU). A relocatable single-family dwelling unit,
less than 40 feet in length, which in the traveling mode, is less than eight
and one-half body feet in width, and is less than 399 square feet when erected
on-site, including, but not limited to, tents, motor homes, and travel
trailers.
   SEMIPUBLIC USE. The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to
provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the
regular constituency of the organization.
   SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and management of areas
unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as
shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils,
steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in
need of special protection.
   SETBACK. The required distance between every structure and the lot line of
the lot on which it is located or road rights-of-way.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A septic tank and soil absorption system or other
individual or cluster type SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM as described and regulated
in §
152.041.
   SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and
all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for
conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate
disposal.
   SIGN. Any identification, description, illustration, or device, illuminated
or non-illuminated, visible from any public place or located on private
property and exposed to the public that directs attention to a product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation,
including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem,
painting, banner, pennant, placard, or temporary sign designed to advertise,
identify, or convey information with the exception of window displays and
national flags. For the purpose of this chapter, SIGNS shall also include all
sign structures.
   SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing structure, or
other property that meets the criteria for eligibility for the National
Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic
Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the
provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time to time. A HISTORIC
SITE meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it
is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the State
Archaeologist or the Director of the State Historical Society. All unplatted
cemeteries are automatically considered to be SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITES.
   STEEP SLOPE. Land where agricultural activity or development is either not
recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site’s
soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys
or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction
techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Where specific information is not available, STEEP SLOPES are
lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over horizontal distances of
50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.
   STREET. Any public or private thoroughfare or way other than a public alley,
dedicated to the use of the public and open to public travel, whether
designated as a road, avenue, highway, boulevard, drive, lane, circle, place,
court, or any other similar designation.
   STRING-LINE TEST. A method of establishing a structure setback line by using
the closest adjacent points of existing structures to a proposed structure of
like use, on the two immediately adjacent lots. In the event that there is no
structure of like use on one of the immediately adjacent lots, the point of the
building line at the nearest lot line setback shall be used.
   STRUCTURE. Any building or appurtenance, including, but not limited to,
vision obstructing fences, decks, permanent swimming pools, satellite dishes in
excess of one meter in diameter and towers (except for public utilities).
   SUBDIVISION. Land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or lease,
including planned unit development.
   TOWER. Framework or structure exceeding 35 feet in height including any wind
generating tower, telephone communications towers, and any structure required
by any other regulations to have warning lights.
   TWIN HOME. A two-family dwelling with the party wall (constructed to meet
fire ratings and sound transmission control ratings) acting as the dividing lot
line for each separate (and equal as is reasonably possible) parcel of record
(sub-division by issuance of conditional use permit).
   VARIANCE. Has the same meaning as defined or described in M.S. Chapter 462,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   WETLAND. Any land as defined in M.S. § 103G.005 subd. 19, as it may be
amended from time to time. These lands are transitional between terrestrial and
aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the
land is covered by shallow water. WETLANDS must have the following three
attributes:
      (1)   Have a predominance of hydric soils;
      (2)   Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for lien in saturated soil conditions; and
      (3)   Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of such
vegetation.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM. Any device that converts wind power to a
usable form of energy, such as electricity or mechanical energy (also referred
to by such common names as wind charger, wind turbine, and windmill).
   YARD. The area between any lot line and the nearest wall of any structure
built upon the lot.
   ZONING OFFICER. The local official responsible for administration and
implementation of the zoning regulations of the city or his or her authorized
representative.
   ZONING PERMIT. Document issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing
building, structures, or uses consistent with the terms of the zoning code and
for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.003 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the entire city, including the
shoreline management area. However, when the requirements of any other
ordinance of the city, such as
Chapter 152 Shoreland Management Regulations, are more stringent or restrictive
than the requirements set forth herein, nothing herein shall be constructed to
waive compliance with the provisions of such other ordinance.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.004 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of all property owners, architects, contractors,
builders, and other persons having charge of the erecting, altering, changing,
or replacing any building or structure, before beginning or undertaking any
such work, to see that such work does not conflict with and is not a violation
of the terms of this chapter; and any such property owner, architect, builder,
contractor, or other person doing or performing any such work of erecting,
repairing, altering, changing, or replacing and in violation of, or in conflict
with the terms of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a violation hereof in
the manner and to the same extent as the owner of the premises or the persons
for whom such buildings are erected, repaired, altered, changed, or replaced in
violation hereof and shall be held accountable for such violation.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.005 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Zoning Officer and Police Department are responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Council shall appoint a Zoning Officer, who shall enforce
this chapter and perform the following duties. Employees of the Police
Department shall also be appointed to enforce this chapter:
      (1)   Receive zoning and other permit applications and make and maintain
records as required;
      (2)   Conduct inspections of plans as they relate to the zoning and
subdivision ordinances and use of land to determine compliance with the terms
of this chapter;
      (3)   Work with the city administrative staff to ensure that the
appropriate documents are filed with the County Recorder or other officials as
required by law;
      (4)   Serve as an ex-officio non-voting member of the Planning Commission
and Board of Adjustments;
      (5)   Examine all applications for zoning permits required and find that
all proposed uses comply with the provisions of this chapter prior to issuance.
Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter
shall be null and void and of no effect whatsoever; and
      (6)   If the Zoning Officer or a police officer shall find that any of
the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall
order discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings, or structures;
removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.006 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by state statutes.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.007 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended for this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.008 OWNER LIABLE.
   In addition to any other person or persons involved in violation or
threatened violation of this chapter, the owner of record of any property
falling under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be responsible both
criminally and civilly for any construction, alteration, excavation, or any
other activity occurring upon his or her property which is contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.009 CITY OPTS OUT OF CERTAIN STATE REGULATIONS.
   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593 subd. 9, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city opts out of the requirements of M.S. §
462.3593, as it may be amended from time to time, which regulates temporary
family health care dwellings.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2016)
DISTRICTS AND AREAS; USES
§ 156.020 DISTRICTS AND AREAS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Criteria for designation. The land use districts below, and the
delineation of a land use district’s boundaries on the official zoning map,
must be consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the
comprehensive land use plan.
   (B)   Establishment. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
districts and special areas are hereby established:
      (1)   Residential district (R); and
      (2)   Commercial district (C).
   (C)   Land use district descriptions. The land use districts provided in the
table below, and the allowable land uses therein shall be properly delineated
on the official zoning map for this community.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.021 ZONING MAP.
   The location and boundaries of the special areas shall be as hereinafter set
forth. The location and boundaries of the districts shall be as set forth in a
map entitled “Battle Lake Zoning Map.” The map, with all notations, references
and data shown upon it, is hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall keep the zoning map on file with the ordinance
enacting this chapter, and shall preserve the map against any alteration of any
kind.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.022 DISTRICT AND AREA AMENDMENTS.
   The location and boundaries of the districts and special areas may be
amended by ordinance adopted in the same manner as any other ordinance amending
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.023 FUTURE ANNEXATION.
   Unless previously zoned, territory annexed to the city subsequent to the
effective date of such annexation shall become a part of the residential
district unless requested and approved otherwise. If property is zoned prior to
annexation, that zoning designation shall remain in place until duly placed in
another district in accordance with the goals, policies, and objectives of the
comprehensive land use plan. The Planning Commission shall recommend to the
City Council at the time of annexation or within a period of one year from the
date of annexation on a final zoning designation for annexed territory.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.024 USES IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses in the commercial district shall consist of all uses of
a commercial nature, such as retail, light industrial, repair or storage of
material, goods, or products, wholesale, service, office, combination
apartment/commercial use, financial, recreational, professional, and lodging
and such other as are defined below as light industrial.
   (B)   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL means the assembly, fabrication, or processing of
goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke,
fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside the building or lot
where the assembly, fabrication, or processing takes place, where the processes
are housed entirely within a building, or where the outdoor storage of goods
and materials used does not exceed 25% of the floor area of all buildings on
the lot.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.025 USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Generally. Permitted uses in the residential district shall include
single-family and multiple-family dwellings, apartment buildings, churches and
related buildings, parks, playgrounds, schools, child care facilities, home-
based child care, offices of members of recognized professions, hospitals,
clinics, and other uses normal and incidental to a residential area or as
specifically authorized by state statute, as may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Home occupations.
      (1)   The purposes of this division (B) are to allow for home occupations
that are appropriate for residential settings; protect those conducting a home
occupation from self-induced harm; and protect the property rights of
neighbors.
      (2)   A home occupation may be established and conducted only in
accordance with this chapter. A home occupation shall be permitted as an
accessory use to a residential dwelling unit. The home occupation use must be
clearly subordinate to the residential use of the property, occupying no more
than 25% of the gross floor area of all buildings on the property and must be
conducted by a person or persons who reside full-time in the dwelling.
      (3)   A home occupation must be conducted in such a manner that
activities connected with it are not noticeable from adjacent streets or
residential lots, do not draw attention to the home occupation.
      (4)   All activities related to a home occupation must be conducted
within a fully enclosed building, excluding gardening or horticultural
activities provided that plants and related materials are maintained in a clean
and orderly manner and that waste is disposed of.
      (5)   Signs are allowed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 150.035
through 150.045.
      (6)   No outside storage of products or materials or equipment connected
with the home occupation is permitted. This division (B)(6) does not prohibit
the outside parking of motor vehicles on the driveway of the premises in
accordance with division (B)(7) below.
      (7)   Outdoor parking of no more than two vehicles used identified for
business purposes is permitted, provided that the vehicle is registered to an
occupant of the home, and that such vehicle parking is not otherwise prohibited
by any sections of the city code or any other applicable district regulations.
      (8)   Parking, structural alteration, lighting, or similar facilities
which indicate a use of the dwelling for purposes other than a residential
structure are prohibited. Home occupations involving the need for more than
three outdoor parking spaces for the operators and customers shall be
prohibited. Parking facilities required to serve the home occupation shall be
provided on the premises, but no such parking facilities shall be provided
within any required front or side yard, except upon an established driveway.
      (9)   Occasional sales of products or other articles are permitted where
the dwelling serves as an office for a person regularly engaged in retail sales
outside the dwelling, or where such occasional sales are incidental to and not
the primary purpose of the home occupation.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.026 TABLE OF LAND USE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Residential district uses.
Agricultural: cropland                    P
Multi-family residential                  C
Parks and historic sites                  C
Planned unit development                  C (see §
                                          156.051)
Public, semipublic                        C
Single, duplex, triplex, quad residential P
Towers                                    N
Twin homes                                Pursuant to §
                                          156.050
Notes to table:
C -   Conditional use
N -   Not permitted
P -   Permitted use
 
   (B)   Commercial district uses.
Adult entertainment establishments        Pursuant to §
                                          156.052
Commercial/light industrial               P
Parks and historic sites                  C
Planned unit development                  C (see §
                                          156.051)
Public, semipublic                        C
Single, duplex, triplex, quad residential C
Towers                                    C
Twin homes                                C
Notes to table:
C -   Conditional use
N -   Not permitted
P -   Permitted use
 
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.027 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements shall apply equally to all districts except where
otherwise stated or where special provisions provide otherwise.
   (A)   Bulk regulations for residential districts.
      (1)   The principal structure shall have a floor area of not less than
768 square feet and the minimum dimension of the main body of the dwelling unit
shall not be less than 20 feet.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be located and installed according to the
same standards, including, but not limited to, a permanent foundation system.
PERMANENT FOUNDATIONS means the home cannot be removed and placed somewhere
else and affixes the home to the property permanently. Permanent foundations
must meet the requirements for a home to be seen as “real property.” Setbacks
and minimum square footage which would apply to a site built, single-family
dwelling on the same lot.
      (3)   Any principal building within 200 feet of a residential zoning
district, shall have a maximum height of 55 feet or less. Single-family
residence shall have a maximum height of 35 feet and all accessory structures
shall have a maximum height of 20 feet or less.
   (B)   Accessory buildings.
      (1)   In any zoning district, no accessory building or structure shall be
erected or constructed prior to the erection or construction of the principal
or main building, but may be erected simultaneously unless owner has received
an interim use permit.
      (2)   An accessory building, including carports attached to the principal
building, on a lot, shall be made structurally a part thereof and shall comply
in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the
principal building. A BREEZEWAY, for the purpose of this chapter, is an
attachment between the garage or carport and the principal building and shall
be considered a part of the principal building.
      (3)   All detached accessory buildings or structures shall have a minimum
of ten feet of separation between building eaves and walls of accessory
buildings or the accessory buildings and the principal building located on the
same lot as the accessory building or structure. Unenclosed porches and decks
shall be considered as part of the principal or accessory building(s), and
shall be required to meet the minimum requirements of this section. Such
accessory buildings or structures shall be located in the buildable area. All
storage sheds or buildings shall be permanently anchored to the ground,
including all buildings less than 120 square feet in size.
   (C)   Structures, not included in height of building. Chimneys, elevator
bulkheads, drive-in movie theater screens, stacks, water towers, pumping
towers, monuments, cupolas, steeples, radio or television towers, solar
collectors, wind energy conversion systems, and mechanical apparentness
pertaining to, and necessary to the permitted use of the district in which they
are located shall not be included in calculating the height of the principal
structure.
   (D)   Special requirements. Emissions of noise, vibration, dust, smoke, or
other particulate matter, toxic materials, odor, or glare shall not exceed the
standard set by the State Pollution Control Agency (MPCA). Storage or sale of
gas, fuel, or oil shall comply with and be approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
   (E)   Topographic alterations and storm water management. Topographic
alterations and storm water management issues are addressed in Chapter 153.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.028 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   (1)   Where the districts established by this chapter contain
structures, lots, and uses of land and structures which were lawful, or non-
conforming, before this zoning ordinance was passed or amended, but which are
prohibited under this chapter, it is the intent of this chapter to permit these
non-conformities to continue including through repair, replacement,
restoration, maintenance, or improvement but not including expansion, unless:
         (a)   The non-conformity is discontinued for a period of more than one
year; or
         (b)   Any non-conforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to
the extent of greater than 50% of its market value, and no permit has been
applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged.
      (2)   In this case, reasonable conditions may be imposed upon a zoning
permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.
   (B)   Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a
conforming use or occupancy.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.029 ABANDONMENT.
   If any use or structure authorized by this chapter is abandoned, or by lack
of use or neglect is permitted to become offensive or unsightly, either on
public or private property, it shall be restored to its original condition by
the owner or removed pursuant to order of the City Council if found to be
detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, and the costs of such
restoration or removal shall be borne by the owner of the property, and may be
assessed against the property if removed by the city. Non-use for a period of
12 months shall be presumptive evidence of abandonment, subject to rebuttal by
competent evidence.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.030 LOT AREA AND WIDTH STANDARDS.
   (A)   Single, duplex, triplex, and quad residences.
      (1)   The lot area (in square feet) and lot width standards (in feet) for
single, duplex, triplex and quad residential lots created after the publication
of this chapter are the following:
 
        Area   Width
Single  10,000 75
Duplex  17,500 135
Triplex 25,000 190
Quad    32,500 245
 
      (2)   Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding
those in the above tables can only be allowed if designed and approved as
residential planned unit developments under §
156.051.
   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings. Multiple-family dwellings require a
conditional use permit.
   (C)   Commercial and industrial dwellings.
      (1)   Such requirements as may be approved by the City Council after
submission of plat plan and/or plan of structure.
      (2)   The City Council will take the following into consideration:
         (a)   Will the use create an unreasonably excessive burden on existing
storm water management, streets snow removal, or utilities?
         (b)   Is the request in any way incompatible with surrounding areas?
         (c)   Will the intended use have an appearance that unreasonably,
adversely affect nearby properties?
         (d)   Will the intended use create an unreasonably adverse effect
because of noise, odor, glare, or general unsightliness for nearby property
owners?
         (e)   Is the intended use consistent with the city land use ordinances
and comprehensive plan?
         (f)   Will the use create environmental concerns?
         (g)   In considering the setbacks, will the request cause issues with
visibility or other concerns?
         (h)   Impervious surface calculations must be under 25% in shoreland
management and 40% outside of the shoreland management area;
         (i)   Parcel dimensions, proposed building dimensions; requested
setback; current and proposed easements; existing zoning setbacks on adjacent
parcels; landscape and storm water management plan; building opening location;
driveway and sidewalk locations; location of public infrastructure; parking;
lighting, fencing; and sign location; and
         (j)   Will there be any special conditions?
   (D)   Minimum width. The minimum width of any single-family structure shall
be 20 feet.
   (E)   Placement of structures on lots. The following structure setbacks
apply in residential districts: when more than one setback applies to a site,
structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks. Where
structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building
site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the
adjoining setbacks (string-line). Structures shall be located as follows:
 
Setback from                                                  Setback (in feet)
Interior side yard or rear yard without alley                 10
Rear yard or alley - for storage building 120 square feet or  10
less
Rear yard with alley                                          20
Right-of-way line of city road, public street, or other roads 30
or streets not classified
 
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.031 YARDS.
   The following shall not be considered as encroachments on yard setback
requirements:
   (A)   Chimneys, flues, leaders, sills, plasters, lintels, ornamental
features, cornices, eaves, gutters, and the like, provided they do not project
more than two feet into a yard;
   (B)   Steps, stoops, fire escapes, or similar features provided they do not
extend above the height of the ground floor level of the principal structure or
to a distance less than five feet from any lot line; and
   (C)   In rear yards, recreational and laundry drying equipment, arbors and
trellises, and air conditioning or heating equipment, provided they are at a
distance of five feet from the rear lot line.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.032 PARKING.
   No structure shall be erected on any lot or tract in the city unless off-
street parking is provided according to the terms of this section.
   (A)   An off-street parking area shall be located on the property. It shall
provide not less than 200 square feet for maneuvering and parking for each
parking space.
   (B)   For each use listed, not less than the following number of parking
spaces shall be provided:
      (1)   Residences and apartments: two parking spaces per dwelling unit;
      (2)   Churches: one parking space for each four seats;
      (3)   Clinics: one for each doctor, and one for each two employees, plus
five patient spaces;
      (4)   Commercial/light industrial: as required by the City Council;
      (5)   Industrial: as required by the City Council;
      (6)   Elementary schools: one parking space for each two employees;
      (7)   Secondary schools: one parking space for each two employees, and
one parking space for each ten students;
      (8)   Public hall and meeting places (no fixed seating): as required by
the City Council;
      (9)   Recreational facilities: as required by the City Council;
      (10)   Service stations and car repair establishments: five parking
spaces per stall or repair bay;
      (11)   Board/rooming house, hotels, and motels: one parking space for
each living unit. One parking space per guest room and one parking space per
employee during the largest work shift; and
      (12)   Restaurants (eating and drinking establishments): one parking
space for every four seats and one parking space for every two employees.
   (C)   Parking requirements in commercial and industrial areas may be met by
the availability of public or private parking lots in the general area.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the principal use, or
of the property, to ensure that the parking area is maintained in a safe
condition.
   (E)   When calculations for required parking spaces result in a requirement
of a fractional space, any fraction of less than one-half shall be disregarded,
and fractions of one-half or more shall require one additional parking space.
   (F)   Artificial lighting which shall be provided shall not shine directly
onto adjoining dwellings or other types of living units, and shall not be
directed towards the public use of a street.
   (G)   Parking areas, aisles, and turnaround areas shall be constructed of
gravel, paved with concrete, asphalt, or comparable surfacing on all commercial
and residential uses requiring six or more parking spaces within one year of
the date of initiation of construction on any portion of the lot, or any
approved structure.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.033 EARTH-SHELTERED BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. Earth-sheltered buildings located either below the existing
average ground level on a sloping lot or above the existing average ground
level prior to construction and covered over 50% of the building by earth,
create different development opportunities and challenges on a site-by-site
basis. Due to major differences between above-grade housing and earth-sheltered
buildings, the potential for soil erosion and slope failure and increased storm
water runoff from the development site, development of earth-sheltered building
shall be reviewed on a site-by-site basis and be required to comply with the
following standards.
   (B)   Minimum requirements.
      (1)   A landscaping plan shall be required. The purpose of landscaping
shall be to ensure maximum compatibility with adjacent above-ground housing and
to insure that no soil erosion occurs following the completion of the building.
The landscaping plan shall be a part of the zoning permit application. No
zoning permit shall be issued until a landscaping plan is submitted and
approved, or approved with conditions.
      (2)   Following the completion of all construction activities, soil
erosion shall not occur. All soil surface laid bare during construction shall
be promptly seeded and mulched to prevent erosion. Additional methods of
erosion control may be required where it is found that seeding and mulching
will not be sufficient. Where construction is completed at some time other than
during the growing season, the property owner shall protect against soil
erosion by appropriate means and shall seed all unvegetated ground at the
beginning of the next growing season.
      (3)   Where earth-sheltered buildings are developed on a naturally
occurring sloped site, the applicant shall evaluate the potential for slope
failure. Earth-sheltered buildings located on sloping sites shall not be the
cause of slope failure.
      (4)   Storm water runoff shall be controlled on-site by proper grading,
landscaping, and permanent soil cover.
      (5)   Earth-sheltered buildings shall be required to meet all minimum
setback requirements of the zoning district in which located.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.034 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   A manufactured home shall be as defined by M.S. § 327.31, subd. 6, as it may
be amended from time to time, and shall be constructed in compliance with the
Manufactured Home Building Code established by M.S. §§ 327.31 and 327.32, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.035 MANUFACTURED HOMES OUTSIDE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
      A manufactured home which meets the width requirements of a single-family
dwelling established in §
156.030 may be located outside a manufactured home park in the residential
district (R) of the city if the home is placed upon a permanent foundation
which hides any wheels or undercarriage otherwise visible (use of skirting will
not be allowed) and the home shall be subject to the lot size, setback, yard
requirements, and any square footage requirements for a single-family dwelling.
PERMANENT FOUNDATIONS means the home cannot be removed and placed somewhere
else and affixes the home to the property permanently. PERMANENT FOUNDATIONS
must meet the requirements for a home to be seen as “real property.” A person
wishing to locate a manufactured home outside a manufactured home park must
obtain a permit as provided by §
156.071.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.036 MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL CAMPING AREAS.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall locate or operate any manufactured home
park or any recreational camping area within the city unless it is duly
licensed and meets and is operated in compliance with all requirements of law,
of administrative regulation, and of ordinances of the city. A conditional-use
permit is required for the location of manufactured home parks and recreational
camping areas. All manufactured home parks and recreational camping areas shall
comply with the applicable state laws and State Health Department regulations.
   (B)   Use of RCUs. The use of RCUs are allowed with the following
provisions.
      (1)   A lot without a dwelling may contain one RCU, provided:
         (a)   The lot meets minimum requirements for size, and all
requirements of this chapter for structures are met;
         (b)   There are no water or sewer connections;
         (c)   The RCU cannot be used as a permanent dwelling;
         (d)   No RCU may be skirted or permanently placed;
         (e)   An RCU may be allowed in conjunction with a land use permit for
a permanent structure for a maximum of 12 months during the construction
period; and
         (f)   A permit is required.
      (2)   A lot containing one dwelling may contain one RCU for use, not to
exceed ten days within any 60-day period.
   (C)   Storage of an RCU. Storage of one RCU on a residential lot will be
allowed, provided:
      (1)   It is not located in the right-of-way and is placed solely on the
owner’s property;
      (2)   It will not impede city services or obstruct traffic visibility;
and
      (3)   It can only be used for storage and not for use and cannot be
hooked up to city utility services.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.037 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND STANDARDS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Construction material.
      (1)   Single-family dwelling roofs shall be shingled with asphalt, wood,
tiles, metal (with concealed fasteners), or other comparable materials.
      (2)   Building materials shall be attractive in appearance, of a durable
finish, and be of a quality that is compatible and harmonious with adjacent
structures. All buildings shall be of good aesthetic and architectural quality,
to ensure they will maintain and enhance the property values of the neighboring
properties.
      (3)   Single-family dwellings, garages, and accessory structures over 120
square feet of floor space or over 120 square feet of roof and roof overhang
shall be constructed of materials similar in quality and appearance to that of
the main dwelling structure on the lot.
      (4)   Buildings constructed of canvas, fabric, or straw shall not be
permitted.
      (5)   Building exteriors must be finished within one year of starting
construction unless a one-year extension is granted by the Zoning Official.
   (B)   Accessory structures. No more than two detached accessory structures
are permitted on a parcel occupied by a single-family detached dwelling that
are over 120 square feet.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
ADDITIONAL USES
§ 156.050 TWIN HOMES.
   (A)   Lot area, lot width, and yard requirements (for each unit).
      (1)   Front yard setback: 30 feet;
      (2)   Lot area: minimum lot area of 6,500 square feet;
      (3)   Lot width: minimum lot width of 65 feet;
      (4)   Side yard setback: not less than ten feet; and
      (5)   Rear yard setback: 20 feet from the public right-of-way or ten feet
from the lot line.
   (B)   Conditional uses. Two-family dwellings and twin homes may be divided
into single parcels of record with the party wall acting as the dividing lot
line by issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   Each of the lots created in subdividing lands on which a two-family
structure is located shall be equal as is reasonably possible and shall be
shown on a registered survey.
      (2)   Except for setbacks along the common property line, all other
setback and yard requirements shall be met.
      (3)   Separate services shall be provided to each residential unit for
sanitary sewer, water, electricity, natural gas, telephone, and other
utilities.
      (4)   The two-family units, either existing or proposed, must be
constructed in a side-by-side manner.
      (5)   To protect the safety and property of the owner and occupants of
each individual unit, no existing two family structure may be split into two
separate ownerships unless and until the common party wall fire rating is
brought up to new construction standards contained in the Uniform Building Code
(UBC). Party walls must provide sound transmission control ratings as per the
State Building Code.
      (6)   Uniformity in outside appearance. Siding and roofing need to be
made of the same product and same color.
      (7)   Party walls:
         (a)   PARTY WALL means each wall, which is built as a part of the
original construction of the living units upon the properties and placed on the
dividing line between the lots shall constitute a PARTY WALL, and, to the
extent not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the general rules
of law regarding PARTY WALLS and liability for property damage due to
negligence or willful act or omissions shall apply thereto.
         (b)   The cost of reasonable repair and maintenance of a party wall
shall be shared by the owners who make use of the wall in proportion to such
use of wall.
         (c)   If a party wall is destroyed or damaged by fire or other
casualty, any owner who has used the wall may restore it, and if the other
owner thereafter make use of the wall, they shall contribute to the cost of
restoration thereof in proportion to such use without prejudice, however, to
the right of any such owners to call for a larger contribution from the others
under any rule of law regarding liability for negligent or willful acts or
omissions.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.051 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Types of PUDs permissible. Planned unit developments (PUDs) are
allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built
sites, or conversions of existing buildings and land. The land use districts in
which they are an allowable use are identified in the land use district
descriptions in §
156.027 and the official zoning map.
   (B)   Processing of PUDs. Planned unit developments must be processed as a
conditional use. Approval cannot occur until the environmental review process
(EAW/EIS) is considered.
   (C)   Application for PUDs. The applicant for a PUD must submit the
following documents prior to final action being taken on the application
request:
      (1)   A site plan and/or a plat for the project showing locations of
property boundaries, existing and proposed structures and other facilities,
land alterations, sewage treatment and water supply systems (where public
systems will not be provided), and topographic contours at ten-foot intervals
or less. When a PUD is a combined commercial and residential development, the
site plan and/or plat must indicate and distinguish which buildings and
portions of the project are residential, commercial, or a combination of the
two;
      (2)   A property owners’ association agreement (for residential PUDs)
with mandatory membership, and all in accordance with the requirements of M.S.
§§ 515A and 515B CIC (common interest communities) requirements, as they may be
amended from time to time;
      (3)   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, or other
instruments that:
         (a)   Properly address future vegetative and topographic alterations,
construction of additional buildings, and construction of commercial buildings
in residential PUDs; and
         (b)   Ensure the long-term preservation and maintenance of open space
in accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in § 150.085. These
criteria shall also apply in nonshoreland areas.
      (4)   When necessary, a master plan/drawing describing the project and
the floor plan for all commercial structures to be occupied; and
      (5)   Those additional documents, as requested by the Planning
Commission, necessary to explain how the PUD will be designed and will
function.
   (D)   Site “suitable area” evaluation. Proposed new PUDs or expansions to
existing PUDs must be evaluated using the following procedures and standards to
determine the suitable area for the dwelling unit/dwelling site density
evaluation. The suitable area is determined by excluding any wetlands, bluff
areas, or any area below the elevation of 1,339.38 feet as identified in
Chapter 153 (Storm Water Management).
   (E)   PUD density evaluation. Density evaluation is determined by the
limiting factors of the required 50% open space, 40% impervious surface
coverage, and the parking requirements found in § 155.031.
   (F)   Maintenance and design criteria.
      (1)   Maintenance and administration requirements. Before final approval
of a planned unit development, adequate provisions must be developed for
preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued
existence and functioning of the development.
      (2)   Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent
easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and
permanent means must be provided to ensure long-term preservation and
maintenance of open space. The instruments must include all of the following
protections:
         (a)   Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PUDs);
         (b)   Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine
maintenance prohibited; and
         (c)   Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and
other materials prohibited.
      (3)   Development organization and functioning. Unless an equally
effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable, all
residential planned unit developments must use an owners’ association with the
following features.
         (a)   Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site
purchaser and any successive purchasers.
         (b)   Each member must pay a pro rata share of the association’s
expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites.
         (c)   Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate changing
conditions.
         (d)   The association must be responsible for insurance, taxes, and
maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.
      (4)   Open space requirements. Planned unit developments must contain
open space meeting all of the following criteria.
         (a)   At least 50% of the total project area must be preserved as open
space.
         (b)   Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way, or land covered by
road surfaces, parking areas, or structures are developed areas and shall not
be included in the computation of minimum open space.
         (c)   Open space must include areas with physical characteristics
unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing
significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries.
         (d)   Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use
by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling
units or sites, and by the general public.
         (e)   Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment systems if
the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems.
         (f)   Open space must not include commercial facilities or uses.
         (g)   The appearance of open space areas, including topography,
vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of restrictive deed
covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other
equally effective and permanent means.
      (5)   Erosion control and storm water management. Erosion control and
storm water management plans must be developed and the PUD must:
         (a)   Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the
likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction.
This goal must be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of
bare ground exposure. Erosion control plans approved by a soil and water
conservation district may be required if project size and site physical
characteristics warrant; and
         (b)   Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably
expected quantities and qualities of storm water runoff. Impervious surface
coverage within any tier must not exceed 40% of the tier area.
      (6)   Centralization and design of facilities. Centralization and design
of facilities and structures must be done according to the following standards.
         (a)   A planned unit development must be connected to publicly owned
water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and sewage
treatment systems must be centralized and designed and installed to meet or
exceed applicable standards or rules of the county. On-site sewage-treatment
systems must be located on the most suitable areas of the development, and
sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors must be provided for a
replacement soil treatment system for each sewage system.
         (b)   Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one or more
groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be designed
and located to meet or exceed the setbacks in accordance with §
156.030.
         (c)   Accessory structures and facilities must meet the required
principal structure setback and must be centralized.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.052 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   Studies conducted by the State Attorney General, the American
Planning Association, and cities such as St. Paul; Indianapolis; Alexandria,
Minnesota; Rochester, Minnesota; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California;
Seattle, Washington; have studied the impacts that adult establishments have in
those communities. These studies have concluded that adult establishments have
an adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhoods. Those impacts include
increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency,
neighborhood blight and potential health risks. Based on these studies and
findings, the City Council concludes the following.
         (a)   Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types
set forth above.
         (b)   The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to
diminish if adult establishments are governed by locational requirements,
licensing requirements, and health requirements.
         (c)   It is not the intent of the City Council to prohibit adult
establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the city.
         (d)   M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time, allows
the city to adopt regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals, and
general welfare.
         (e)   The public health, safety, morals, and general welfare will be
promoted by the city adopting regulations governing adult establishments.
         (f)   Sexually oriented businesses can contribute to an increase in
criminal activity in the area in which such businesses are located, taxing city
crime-prevention programs and law enforcement services.
         (g)   Sexually oriented businesses can be used as fronts for
prostitution and other criminal activity. The experience of other cities
indicates that the proper management and operation of such businesses can,
however, minimize this risk, provided the owners and operators of such
facilities are regulated by licensing or other procedures.
         (h)   Sexually oriented businesses can increase the risk of exposure
to communicable diseases including, but not limited to, Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) for which currently there is no cure. Experiences of
other cities indicate that such businesses can facilitate the spread of
communicable diseases by virtue of the design and use of the premises, thereby
endangering not only the patrons of such establishments but also the general
public.
         (i)   Sexually oriented businesses can cause or contribute to public
health problems by the presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with
food and/or drink and alcohol use on the same premises.
         (j)   The risk of criminal activity and/or public health problems can
be minimized through a licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed herein.
      (2)   It is the purpose of this section to regulate adult-oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to:
         (a)   Prevent additional criminal activity within the city;
         (b)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent
adverse effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood;
         (c)   To locate adult oriented businesses away from residential areas,
schools, churches, and parks and playgrounds; and
         (d)   Prevent concentration of adult-oriented businesses within
certain areas of the city.
      (3)   The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including adult oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the
intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to adult
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by
distributors and exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended
market.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADULT BOOK AND/OR MEDIA STORE. An establishment which excludes minors and
which has a substantial portion of its stock in trade or stock on display
books, magazines, films, videotape, or other media, which are characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT CABARET. An establishment which provides dancing or other live
entertainment, if such establishment excludes minors by virtue of age from all
or part of the establishment and if such dancing or other live entertainment in
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the performance, depiction, or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. Any business which offers its patrons services,
entertainment, or the sale of merchandise characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussion, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Specifically included in the
term, but without limitation, are adult book and media stores, adult cabarets,
adult hotels or motels, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult modeling
studios, adult motion picture arcades, adult motion picture theaters, adult
novelty businesses, and other establishments.
      ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are specifically
excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing,
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.
         (a)   A theater in an enclosed building, from which minors are
excluded from all or part of the establishment, with a capacity for less than
50 persons used for presenting motion pictures, including but not limited to
film and videotape, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
         (b)   Any business which presents motion pictures, from which minors
are excluded from all or part of the establishment, including films and
videotapes, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, for viewing on the premises,
including, but not limited to, private booths, viewing by means of coin
operated or other mechanical devices, and the viewing of excerpts of motion
pictures offered for sale or rent.
      ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment, which excludes minors from all
or part of the establishment, whose major business is the provision, to
customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing
sexual stimulation to sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in
specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or
otherwise depicted by such customers.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place which excludes minors from all or
part of the establishment wherein coin or token operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A theater in an enclosed building, from
which minors are excluded from all or part of the establishment, with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting live
entertainment or motion pictures, including but no limited to film and
videotapes, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
      ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business, from which minors are excluded from
all or part of the establishment, which sells, offers to sell, or displays
devices which simulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual
stimulation.
      ADULT USE. Any of the activities and businesses described in this
division (B) constitute ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES which are subject to the
regulation of this section.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
            1.   Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;
            2.   Buttock or anus; and
            3.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, completely
and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following conditions:
         (a)   An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being and an
animal;
         (b)   SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE, meaning flagellation or torture by or
upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or
the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on
the part of one so clothed;
         (c)   Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any
explicit, close-up representation of a human genital organ, clothed or
unclothed; and/or
         (d)   Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed
or unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts
of a female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or
between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   Except as in this section specifically provided, no structure shall
be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or altered, and no structure or
land shall be used, for any purpose nor in any manner, which is not in
conformity with this section.
      (2)   No adult-oriented business shall engage in any activity or conduct
or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the
establishment which is prohibited by any ordinance of the city, the laws of the
state, or the United States of America. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as authorizing or permitting conduct which is prohibited or regulated
by other statutes or ordinances, including but not limited to statutes or
ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale, or distribution of obscene
material generally, or the exhibition, sale, or distribution of specified
materials to minors.
   (D)   Location. During the term of this section, no adult-oriented
businesses shall be located less than 1,000 feet from any residential zoning
district boundary or site used for residential purposes, and less than 1,000
feet from any church site, from any school site, from any day care facility, or
from any park which is adjacent to property zoned residential. In addition, no
adult-oriented business may be located within 1,000 feet of another adult-
oriented business. For purposes of this section, this distance shall be a
horizontal measurement from the nearest existing residential district boundary
or site used for residential purposes, church site, school site, day care site,
park site, or another adult-oriented business site to the nearest boundary of
the proposed adult-oriented site.
   (E)   Hours of operation. No adult-oriented business site shall be open to
the public from the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
   (F)   Alcoholic beverages. No alcoholic beverages shall be possessed, used,
sold, or provided by or to any person at any adult-oriented business premises.
   (G)   Operation.
      (1)   An establishment operating as an adult-oriented business shall
prevent off-site viewing of its merchandise, which if viewed by a minor, would
be in violation of M.S. Chapter 617, as it may be amended from time to time, or
other applicable federal or state statutes or local ordinances.
      (2)   All entrances to the business, with the exception of emergency fire
exits, which are not useable by patrons to enter the business, shall be visible
from a public right-of-way.
      (3)   The layout of the display areas shall be designed so that the
management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside the
store can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise offered
for sale or viewing including but not limited to books, magazines, photographs,
video tapes, or any other material.
      (4)   Illumination of the premises exterior shall be adequate to observe
the location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.
      (5)   Signs for adult-oriented businesses shall comply with the city’s
ordinance for signs, and in addition signs for adult-oriented businesses shall
not contain representational depiction of an adult nature or graphic
descriptions of the adult theme of the operation.
   (H)   Licenses.
      (1)   All establishments, including any business operating at the time
this section becomes effective, operating or intending to operate an adult
oriented business, shall apply for and obtain a license from the city. A person
is in violation of the City Code if he or she operates an adult-oriented
business without a valid license issued by the city.
      (2)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
city.
         (a)   The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram
showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor
space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
         (b)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this section and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with the appropriate state, county, and local law and codes by the health
official, Fire Marshal, and building official.
         (c)   Application for license shall contain the address and legal
description of the property to be used; the names, addresses, phone numbers,
dates of birth, of the owner, lessee, if any, the operator or manager, and all
employees; the name, address, and phone number of two persons, who shall be
residents of the state, and who may be called upon to attest to the
applicant’s, manager’s, or operator’s character; whether the applicant,
manager, or operator has ever been convicted of a crime or offense other than a
traffic offense and, if so, complete and accurate information the disposition
thereof; the names and addresses of all creditors of the applicant, owner,
lessee, or manager insofar as the regarding credit which has been extended for
the purposes of constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, or furnishing
or acquiring the premises, personal effects, equipment, or anything incident to
the establishment, maintenance, and operation of the business.
         (d)   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, joint
business venture, partnership, or any legally constituted business association,
it shall submit along with its application, accurate and complete business
records showing the names, addresses, and dates of birth of all individuals
having an interest in the business, including partners, officers, owners, and
creditors furnishing credit for the establishment, acquisition, maintenance,
and furnishings of said business and, in the case of a corporation, the names,
addresses, and dates of birth of all officers, general managers, members of the
board of directors, as well as any creditors who have extended credit for the
acquisition, maintenance, operation, or furnishing of the establishment
including the purchase or acquisition of any items of personal property for use
in said operation.
         (e)   All applicants shall furnish to the city, along with their
applications, complete and accurate documentation establishing the interest of
the applicant and any other person having an interest in the premises upon
which the building is proposed to be located or the furnishings thereof,
personal property thereof, or the operation or maintenance thereof.
Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed, contract for deed,
mortgage deed, mortgage credit arrangement, loan agreements, security
agreements, and any other documents establishing the interest of the applicant
or any other person in the operation, acquisition, or maintenance of the
enterprise.
         (f)   All establishments, including any business operating at the time
this section becomes effective, operating or intending to operate an adult
oriented business shall be prohibited if the license fee required by this
section has not been paid.
         (g)   All establishments, including any business operating at the time
this section becomes effective, operating or intending to operate an adult
oriented business shall be prohibited if an applicant has been convicted of a
crime involving any of the following offenses:
            1.   Any sex crimes as defined by any ordinance or statute in
conformity therewith;
            2.   Any obscenity crime as defined by M.S. §§ 617.23 through
617.299 inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, or as defined by
any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith; for which:
               a.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
               b.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
               c.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-month period.
            3.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on disqualification of the applicant’s spouse.
      (3)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address
of the adult-oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the adult-oriented business so that it may be
easily read at any time.
      (4)   The City Council shall act to approve or disapprove the license
application within 120 days from the date the application was submitted,
provided that the application contains all of the information required by this
section. If the application is deficient, the City Council shall act on the
application within 120 days from the date that the deficiency has been
corrected.
      (5)   Within 90 days after the decision by the City Council, the
applicant may appeal to the District Court by serving a notice upon the Mayor
or Clerk/Treasurer of the municipality.
   (I)   Fees. Fees to obtain a license to operate an adult-oriented business
shall be set at $2,500 per year.
   (J)   Inspection.
      (1)   An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, and Building
Inspection Division, to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or
open for business, in accordance with §
10.20.
      (2)   A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her
agent or employee commits an offense if she or he refuses to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises by health officials, representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Department, and Building Inspection Division at any time it is
occupied or open for business. Refusal to permit inspections may result in the
suspension of the license as provided in division (L) below.
      (3)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult
motel, which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation.
   (K)   Expiration and renewal.
      (1)   Each license shall expire at the end of the calendar year and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in division (G)(1) above.
Application for renewal must be made at least 60 days before the expiration
date, and when made less that 60 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected.
      (2)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90
days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
   (L)   Suspension.
      (1)   The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days
if it determines that licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
         (a)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
chapter;
         (b)   Engaged in the possession, use, sale, or provision of alcoholic
beverages while on the adult-oriented business premises;
         (c)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult-oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
         (d)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult-oriented
business premises; or
         (e)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage an adult oriented
business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers.
      (2)   A suspension by the city shall be proceeded by written notice to
the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least ten days’
notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the
charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee
personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed business premises with the
person in charge thereof.
   (M)   Revocation.
      (1)   The city may revoke a license if a cause for suspension in division
(L) above occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
      (2)   The city shall revoke a license if it determines that:
         (a)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the city during the application process;
         (b)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use,
or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;
         (c)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on
the premises;
         (d)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult-oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
         (e)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense, for which the time
period required, has not elapsed;
         (f)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or
persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a
crime for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were
employees of the adult-oriented business at the time the offenses were
committed; or
         (g)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation to occur in or on
the licensed premises.
      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the revocation of the license.
      (4)   Division (M)(2)(g) above does not apply to adult motels as a ground
for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the
act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual
contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
      (5)   When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult-oriented business
license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent
to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days
have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was
revoked under division (M)(2)(e) above, an applicant may not be granted another
license until the appropriate number of years required, has elapsed.
      (6)   A revocation by the city shall be proceeded by written notice to
the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least ten days’
notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the
charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee
personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed premises with the person in
charge thereof.
   (N)   Transfer of license. A licensee shall not transfer this license to
another, nor shall a licensee operate an adult-oriented business under the
authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the
application.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.053 BED AND BREAKFAST HOMES.
   B&B homes may be allowed by conditional use, subject to the following
standards.
   (A)   The owner shall reside in the B&B and manage the premises.
   (B)   The establishment shall comply with state and county health and
building code requirements.
   (C)   Meals shall be served to B&B guests only.
   (D)   No cooking or cooking facilities shall be allowed or provided in the
guest rooms.
   (E)   The establishment shall be limited to four guest rooms or a maximum
guest capacity of eight.
   (F)   Each guest shall be limited to staying not more than seven days within
any 30-day period.
   (G)   The owner shall maintain a guest register showing the name, address,
motor vehicle license number, and inclusive dates of visits of all guests.
   (H)   A minimum of one off-street parking space for each guest room and two
off-street parking spaces for the resident owner shall be provided, in
accordance with parking standards set forth in this chapter.
   (I)   Signage shall follow regulations in §§ 150.035 through 150.045.
   (J)   There shall be no external vending machines.
   (K)   All trash and refuse must be contained, and all refuse receptacles
shall be enclosed in opaque fencing at least six feet in height. Screening, in
the form of shrubbery, trees, or a fence to a height of at least five feet, may
be required along any property line abutting a residential use.
   (L)   Each property shall maintain an exterior residential appearance and
character, meaning an exterior facade that is compatible with the surrounding
single-family or duplex houses and is of an appearance that would be found in a
structure designed for and occupied by a family as detached single- or two-
family residence.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.054 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS.
   The location, design, and maintenance of WECS shall be governed as follows.
   (A)   Applicants requesting a conditional use permit for a WECS shall
furnish such scale drawings and information as the city deems necessary. This
information shall include, but is not limited to the following: a site plan of
the premises involved showing lot lines, the accurate location of all buildings
or structures on the premises and on each adjacent lot, and the location of
proposed tower and all guy wires, poles or anchors, and a sketch elevation of
the premises accurately depicting the proposed tower and its relationship to
structures on adjacent lots.
   (B)   (1)   The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be determined in
one of two ways:
         (a)   A ratio of one to one between the distance from the closest
property line to any part of the WECS tower to the height of the tower; or
         (b)   A maximum of 100 feet in the agriculture and manufacturing
districts, and 50 feet in residential and commercial/business districts.
      (2)   The shortest height of the two above-mentioned methods shall be
used in determining maximum height. Height shall be measured from the
surrounding grade to the rotor hub or top of the tower, whichever is higher.
   (C)   No part of the WECS shall be located within or above any required
front, side, or rear yard.
   (D)   No part of the WECS shall be located such that it could potentially
affect or come into contact with any telephone, TV, cable, or electrical lines
on the same adjacent properties.
   (E)   All WECS shall be designed to meet the following minimum standards.
      (1)   The tower and tower footing be engineered to withstand wind and
icing loads for this geographic area.
      (2)   The WECS shall have an automatic braking device capable of halting
operation in conditions of imbalance or excessive wind speeds (40 mph or
greater).
      (3)   The WECS shall be designed, constructed, and operated so as to not
cause radio and television interference.
      (4)   The WECS blade design and materials shall be adequate to ensure
safe operations in an urban area.
      (5)   The wind turbine and the tower shall be compatible.
      (6)   The WECS shall be operated and maintained in a condition which will
not exceed the noise level prescribed by State Regulation NPC 1 and 2 Noise
Standards, Minn. Administrative Rules Chapter 7030, and any amendments thereto.
      (7)   The WECS shall be guarded against unauthorized climbing. The first
12 feet of the tower shall be unclimbable by unauthorized person by design or
be enclosed by a six foot high, non-climbable fence with a secured access.
      (8)   The WECS shall be designed and installed to withstand natural
lightning strikes.
      (9)   The WECS electrical equipment and connections shall adhere to all
state and local government, as well as power company regulations and standards.
   (F)   Any WECS not in operation for 12 consecutive months shall be
dismantled.
   (G)   The city shall require liability insurance to be maintained on the
WECS by its owner.
   (H)   In order to ensure adequate wind access, the city does encourage the
use of private easements and restrictive covenants as a means to protect wind
access.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.055 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Purpose. Establish regulations that protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the community, for the siting, construction, and
maintenance of wireless communication towers (WCT) and similar facilities
within the city. This does not pertain to amateur radio, or receive only
antennas or structures.
   (B)   Objectives. The regulations of this section are intended to:
      (1)   Maximize the use of existing approved structures for siting new
antennas in order to reduce the number of new towers needed to serve the
community;
      (2)   Provide for the appropriate location and development of antennas
and towers within the city;
      (3)   Minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communication towers
through siting standards; and
      (4)   Utilize standard structural and setback requirements to avoid
potential damage to adjacent properties from antenna and tower failure.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ANTENNA. Any device or equipment used for the transmission or reception
of electromagnetic waves, which may include omni-directional antenna,
directional antenna, or parabolic antenna.
      CO-LOCATION. The location of more than one antenna or set of antennas on
the same wireless communication tower or structure.
      ENGINEER. Any person practicing as a professional engineer shall be duly
licensed and certified under the guidelines stipulated in M.S. Chapter 326, as
it may be amended from time to time, for their particular field.
      FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
      FCC. Federal Communication Commission.
      HEIGHT. The distance measured from the ground level at the base of the
tower or structure to the highest point on a tower or structure.
      TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, such as monopoles and similar
structures.
      TOWER ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Any structure located at the base of a tower
for housing receiving or transmitting equipment.
      WIRELESS COMMUNICATION. Any personal wireless services as defined in the
Federal Communications Act of 1996, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 151 et seq., including
FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services such as cellular,
personal communication services (PCS), paging, and similar services that
currently exist or may be developed.
   (D)   Conditional use. Wireless communication towers and similar facilities
are a conditional use within all zoning districts subject to the following
performance standards.
      (1)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, place, replace, or structurally repair any
wireless communication tower or adjoining/accessory buildings without first
making application to the Zoning Administrator and securing appropriate permit
approval. Building permits are not required for adjustment or replacement of
the elements of an antenna array affixed to a tower or antenna. All
applications shall be accompanied by a coverage/interference and capacity
analysis, including a technical evaluation of existing and proposed
transmissions indicating all potential interference problems including, but not
limited to, residential broadcast reception and public safety communications.
All applications must demonstrate compliance with existing FCC, FAA, the State
Building Code, and other pertinent regulations. As regulations change, wireless
communication operators must demonstrate continued compliance at their expense.
All subsequent co-locators must apply for individual building and conditional
use permits in conformance to this chapter.
      (2)   Permitted locations. No wireless communication tower shall be
erected in the city unless the applicant demonstrates that the equipment
planned for the purpose of the proposed wireless communication cannot be
accommodated on the existing or approved tower, building, or structure within a
one-mile search radius of the proposed tower due to one or more of the
following reasons.
         (a)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved structure, as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer; and the existing or approved structure cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost.
         (b)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or
building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
         (c)   Existing or approved wireless communication towers and buildings
within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height
necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer.
         (d)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it impossible to locate the
planned equipment upon an existing or approved structure.
   (E)   Design standards. All applications must meet the following minimum
requirements.
      (1)   All towers and antennas shall comply with all FCC and FAA rules and
regulations. Wireless communication towers attached to a building or existing
structure shall comply with the setbacks of the zoning district and shall not
exceed 20 feet in height beyond the top of the primary structure. Free-standing
towers shall be set back one foot from any property line or building for each
one foot of structural height. Free-standing towers shall not be located in a
front yard, nor shall any part of the antenna or tower extend across or over
any part of the public right-of-way, street, highway, or sidewalk. The base of
any free-standing tower or antenna shall occupy not more than 500 square feet
and the top of the tower shall be no larger than the base.
      (2)   Towers and antennae shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment,
except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities
such as the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
      (3)   Towers shall be without the use of wires, cables, beams, or other,
the design shall utilize a monopole configuration that is designed to collapse
in on itself in the event of structural damage. Design and installation of
towers and antennas shall comply with all applicable federal and state
standards, including FCC and FAA standards and the current State Building Code,
and shall be approved and stamped by a licensed professional structural
engineer. The City Council may allow an alternative tower design if it would
better blend into the surrounding neighborhood.
      (4)   Towers shall be designed to allow the future co-location of
equipment at varying heights. Tower operators are required to accept co-
location of communication equipment if reasonable and necessary and shall not
make such co-location economically prohibitive. Towers over 150 feet in height
shall be designed for co-location of at least three additional antennas. Towers
of 125 feet to less than 150 feet shall be designed for co-location of at least
two additional antennas. Towers of 100 feet to less than 125 feet shall be
designed for co-location of at least one additional antenna. Subsequent co-
locators are subject to the same provisions and procedures as the primary
conditional use applicant.
      (5)   Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means unless such
light is required by federal (FAA) or state regulations; towers may be used to
illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas and for crime
preventative measures.
      (6)   The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than required
warning or equipment information is prohibited. All mechanical and utility
equipment shall be enclosed in an approved structure or cabinet; all buildings
and structures shall meet the minimum performance standards in that zoning
district.
      (7)   The ground level perimeter may be required to be screened with pre-
approved landscaping and/or fencing at the operator’s expense. The tower shall
be reasonably protected against unauthorized access and vandalism.
      (8)   All construction, installation, wiring, and maintenance of towers
shall not create a safety hazard or damage to the property of others, nor
interfere with public safety communications.
      (9)   Operators shall remove abandoned, unused towers and similar
structures within 12 months of the cessation of operations and restore the area
to its original condition. Failure to abide by this condition will result in
the city removing the structure and assessing costs to the property or
operator.
      (10)   All wireless communication facilities that are in existence as of
the date of this chapter may continue to operate, but may not be replaced or
structurally altered without complying in all respects to this code. This does
not include routine adjustment or replacement of the primary or co-location
antennae.
      (11)   When the property’s use no longer conforms to this chapter, any
existing tower shall be removed prior to preliminary plat approval or building
permit issuance, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.056 SHORT-TERM VACATION HOME RENTALS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose is to provide rules governing the issuance of
permits and the establishment of operational restrictions for short-term
rentals of dwellings within the city. The intent of this chapter is to ensure
that the operation of short-term rentals is consistent with existing local,
state, or federal laws, statutes, rules, or regulations. For the purposes of
this chapter, SHORT-TERM RENTAL means any single-family dwelling or accessory
dwelling unit located in a residential or commercial zone that is rented in
whole or in part on a short-term basis. A SHORT-TERM BASIS is 30 calendar days
or less to the same person. This term does not include bed and breakfasts,
motels, hotels, or resort rooms.
   (B)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to advertise, maintain,
or operate a short-term rental of a dwelling in the city without a permit
required by this chapter. Permits are required for any unit. UNITS are
considered any single-family home, apartment, and/or cabin.
   (C)   Term and scope of permit. A short-term rental permit expires on
December 31 of each year. The permit authorizes the permittee to conduct only
such services as is described in the permit and in accordance with the terms
and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for a permittee or other
responsible person to violate the terms and conditions of the short-term rental
permit.
   (D)   Application and renewal of short-term rentals.
      (1)   A property owner may apply for a short-term rental permit by filing
an application with the Clerk/Treasurer. Applications are subject to limits
described in division (F) below. Prior to filing an application with the city,
the property owner must first file and receive their license from the county.
The application must be on a form approved by the city and may require any
information or documentation consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
Such application shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a)   Name, address, and telephone number of permittee;
         (b)   Name, address, and 24-hour telephone number(s) of permittee and
secondary point of contact, if permittee is not located on-site;
         (c)   Floor plan, parking location(s), copy of county license, and
proof of insurance; and
         (d)   Any supplemental information that the city finds reasonably
necessary to determine whether to approve a short-term rental permit.
      (2)   To renew a short-term rental permit, the permittee shall file an
application with the city that complies with this division (D). The application
must be submitted no later than 30 calendar days prior to the short-term rental
permit expiration date.
      (3)   Knowingly making a false statement of fact or knowingly omitting
any information that is required in an application for a short-term rental
permit shall be grounds for denial of a permit.
   (E)   Permit fee. Every permit application shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable short-term rental permit application fee as established by
resolution of the City Council, as may be amended from time to time. This
application fee shall be in addition to any other license, permit fee, or
penalty fee imposed by local, state, or federal laws, statutes, rules, or
regulations.
   (F)   Limitation of number of short-term rentals per property parcel.
      (1)   While each unit must be permitted, short-term rental limitations
will be determined by property parcels. PROPERTY PARCEL means any contiguous
quantity of land in the possession of, owned by, or recorded as the property of
the same claimant or person.
      (2)   The number of property parcels will be limited to 3% of the city’s
total housing units as recorded by the 2020 census report plus any additional
number of units built since the census report.
      (3)   No more than two property parcels can be owned by one person for
use as a short-term rental. Ownership includes anyone with a financial interest
in the property.
      (4)   Although they would still need a permit, not counted in the total
number of property parcels will be property owners that are primary residents
of the property and it will be rented for less than 30 days in a calendar year.
If there are multi-units on the property, all units are combined for the
determination of days rented. PRIMARY RESIDENT means the dwelling unit within
which a person lives for six months plus a day during a calendar year and the
resident is classified as residential homestead in the county property tax
system.
   (G)   Registry required. Every permittee within the city shall keep a
register containing the following information for each person who stays at the
short-term rental and shall maintain such register for a period of 18 months.
The owner or registered agent shall make the list available to city staff and/
or law enforcement upon request.
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Address;
      (3)   Vehicle year, make, model, color;
      (4)   License plate;
      (5)   State in which the vehicle is registered;
      (6)   Date of arrival;
      (7)   Date of departure;
      (8)   Number of guests; and
      (9)   Pets must be on a leash unless yard is fenced in.
   (H)   Performance standards.
      (1)   The main rental contact/person renting from the permittee must be a
minimum of 21 years of age.
      (2)   The occupancy limit will be determined through the county
application for short-term vacation rentals, but the maximum allowed on any
property parcel within the city will be 15 overnight guests even if the county
license allows more.
      (3)   Unregistered guests are allowed on a limited basis and must leave
the property by 10:00 p.m. any night of the week.
      (4)   The total number of guests, registered or unregistered, cannot
exceed double the occupancy limit the property is licensed for through the
city.
      (5)   Prior to the issuance of a short-term rental permit, the permittee
shall notify all owners of property within 350 feet of the permitted short-term
rental involved in the application. This notice shall be in writing and contain
the location of the short-term rental the contact information for the permittee
and the permittee’s designated secondary contact.
      (6)   The permittee or designated secondary contact must be able to be
on-site and respond to any complaints within 30 minutes of notification,
regardless of the time of day.
      (7)   Permittee shall post the following:
         (a)   An aerial view of the property, clearly showing the property
boundaries, parking areas, shore recreational facilities, garbage receptacles,
and the like;
         (b)   City and county regulations regarding noise, parking, pets, and/
or lakes along with the county/city regulations related to parking, number of
guests, unregistered guests, and the like;
         (c)   The full name and phone number of the local contact person or
local management agent;
         (d)   Local emergency contact information (police, fire, ambulance);
and
         (e)   The county and city permit and license occupancy limits.
      (8)   Garbage, refuse, or recycling shall be stored completely enclosed
within designated containers. The owner or operator of the rental unit shall
provide sufficient trash storage containers and services to accommodate the
demand of the occupants.
      (9)   The licensee must provide proof of sufficient and suitable property
insurance with the license application and must be able to confirm that the
coverage remains in place within 24 hours of a request by the city.
      (10)   No fireworks.
      (11)   There shall be no change in the exterior appearance of the home or
premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of a short-term home rental,
except that additional on-site city code compliant parking may be provided.
      (12)   Outdoor signage must follow regulations set forth in §§
150.35 through
150.45; and
      (13)   All short-term rentals shall comply with any and all federal,
state, and/or local laws, including, without limitation, all zoning
requirements.
   (I)   License non-transferable.
      (1)   A license is non-transferable and non-refundable.
      (2)   The discontinuation of an operation by the licensee at the address
covered by the license voids the license.
      (3)   A voided license shall be surrendered to the city immediately by
anyone in possession of it.
      (4)   Change of ownership requires a new application. The city shall be
notified in writing within five business days of any change of property owner
or rental agent.
   (J)   Parking. All tenants and guests must comply with city parking
regulations, including seasonal on-street and off-street parking regulations
along with county regulations for short-term rentals.
   (K)   Noise standards. For short-term rentals, outdoor amplified sound that
can readily be heard by surrounding property owners shall be prohibited between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (L)   Posted notice. Owner shall post within the dwelling unit notice of all
use restrictions as set forth in this section.
   (M)   Disorderly conduct prohibited. Disorderly conduct is prohibited on all
permitted premises. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to ensure that
all tenants occupying the permitted premises and their guests conduct
themselves in such a manner as not to cause the permitted premises to be
disorderly. For purposes of this section, DISORDERLY CONDUCT refers to any
disorderly conduct violation under state statutes or this code.
   (N)   Permit revocation. Every short-term rental permit is subject to
revocation for violations of this section or any other provision of state
statutes or this code.
   (O)   Violations. Violations of this section shall be reported to the City
Clerk/Treasurer and/or Police Department who shall review the violation and
provide written notice to the permit holder of the violation and any necessary
remedial actions.
   (P)   Revocation. If a permit holder fails to correct a violation or
receives three violations within any 12-month period, the Police Department
shall revoke the permit. The City Clerk/Treasurer and/or Police Department
shall provide written notice to the owner and any registered agent of the
revocation. The notice shall inform the owner and agent of the right to appeal
the decision to the City Council.
   (Q)   Appeal. A permit holder aggrieved by the revocation of a short-term
rental permit may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing with the City Clerk/Treasurer within ten days after date of issuance of
the written revocation notice, a written statement requesting a hearing before
the City Council and setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. A hearing
shall be held within 30 days of receipt of the request. Notice of the hearing
shall be given by the City Clerk/Treasurer in writing, setting forth the time
and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
permit holder at his or her last known address at least five days prior to the
date set for hearing.
   (R)   Effect of revocation. If a short-term rental permit is revoked, it
shall be unlawful for anyone to thereafter allow any new short-term rental
occupancies of the dwelling unit until such time as a valid short-term rental
permit is issued by the city. No person who has had a permit revoked under this
section shall be issued a short-term rental permit for one year from the date
of revocation.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.070 ADMINISTRATOR.
   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Clerk/Treasurer, the
City Zoning Officer, under the direction of the City Council. Police Officers
shall also have the right to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.071 PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   Before any structure, including a portable storage shed, is
erected, altered, or moved, or a manufactured home is placed on any lot outside
of a manufactured home park, a permit shall be obtained from the Clerk/
Treasurer. Permits are required for additions, new structures, storage
buildings, any alteration that will change the height and/or footprint of the
structure including demolition, and for any structure that will be moved onto
the property. The provisions of this chapter shall be complied with before a
permit may be issued. Permits will not be required for maintenance or updates
to a building such as siding, roofing, remodeling interior, replacing decks,
replacing steps, replacing windows, and the like. MAINTENANCE is considered any
change within the current size of the structure including replacement of the
structure.
      (2)   The City Council shall, by ordinance, establish a permit fee. A
permit shall not be issued until the City Zoning Officer is satisfied that all
of the provisions of the Zoning Code will be followed by the person requesting
the permit. The City Zoning Officer shall not issue a permit to any person who
is required to be a licensed residential contractor under the provisions of
M.S. § 326B.85, as it may be amended from time to time, unless the person has a
license. The City Zoning Officer shall report an unlicensed person applying for
the permit to the State Commissioner of Commerce.
   (B)   All applications for zoning permits shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer on a zoning permit application form, along with any additional
information reasonably requested by the Zoning Officer. Following review of the
application, the Zoning Officer shall determine whether it is complete prior to
making a site visit. Should the application indicate a need for a variance or
conditional use permit, the Zoning Officer will follow the appropriate
procedures set out in this chapter. If the Zoning Officer determines the permit
request is compliant with all sections of this ordinance, he or she shall
authorize issuance of the permit by signing the application form as indicated.
The Clerk/Treasurer or Zoning Officer shall issue said permit within ten days
upon receipt of the zoning permit fee set by the City Council by ordinance.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.072 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   In accordance with the requirements of law for a Board of Zoning
Adjustment and the authority granted by law for the City Council to serve in
that capacity, the City Council shall constitute a Board of Zoning Adjustment.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall act upon all questions as they may arise
in the administration of this chapter, including the interpretation of zoning
maps, and it shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by such an administrative official
charged with enforcing the chapter. Such appeal may be made by any person,
firm, corporation aggrieved or by any officer, department, or commission of the
city. The Board of Adjustment shall decide the same within a reasonable time.
   (C)   Such appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment through the
Zoning Officer in writing accompanied by reasons and supporting facts. Within a
reasonable time after receipt by the Zoning Officer of filing of a request for
an appeal from an administrative order or determination, the Planning
Commission shall review the appeal and report to the Board of Zoning
Adjustment.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the appeal and
shall hear such persons as wish to be heard, either in person or by agent or
attorney. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the person or persons who
filed the appeal or request. The Board of Adjustment may, so long as such
action is in conformity with the terms of the chapter, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that
end shall have all the powers of the Zoning Officer from whom the appeal was
taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The concurring vote of
a majority of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Officer, or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under
this chapter, or to effect any variation in the application of this chapter.
The reason for the Board’s decision shall be stated in written findings. Any
aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to the District Court for the
county.
   (E)   The Board of Adjustment shall have power to vary or adapt the strict
application of any of the requirements of this chapter in the case of
exceptionally irregular, narrow, or shallow lots, or other exceptional physical
conditions, whereby such strict application would result in practical that
would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land or building involved,
but in no other cases except as specifically described in §
156.073.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.073 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Criteria for granting variances may only be in accordance with M.S.
Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time, as applicable. A variance
to the provision of the zoning ordinance may be issued to provide relief to the
landowner in those zones where the chapter imposes. A landowner must meet the
following requirements in order to be granted a variance.
      (1)   The property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if used
under conditions allowed by the official controls.
      (2)   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the
property not created by the landowner.
      (3)   The deviation from this chapter, with any attached conditions, will
still be in keeping with the spirit and intent of the chapter.
      (4)   The variance will not create a land use not permitted in the zone.
      (5)   The variance will not alter the essential character of the city/
locality.
      (6)   The variance is not for economic reasons alone.
   (B)   The person applying for a variance shall fill out and submit to the
Zoning Officer a completed variance application form, any additional
information reasonably requested by the Planning Commission or the Zoning
Officer and a fee to be set by the City Council by ordinance. If the work will
not be completed in one year, the applicant shall submit a time schedule for
completion of the work. The Zoning Officer shall determine if the application
is complete prior to referring the application to the Planning Commission along
with a staff report. The Planning Commission shall review the application; make
findings of fact and recommendations. The Commission’s recommendation shall be
presented to the City Council, acting in its capacity as the Board of
Adjustment.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the proposal
after notification of the date, time, and place of the hearing is published in
the city’s official newspaper at least ten days before the hearing. In
addition, persons who own property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of
the affected parcel or parcels shall receive similar, individual notifications
by mail. The petitioner or his or her representative shall appear before the
Board of Adjustment in order to answer questions concerning the proposed
variance. The Board of Adjustment shall make findings of fact and approve or
deny a request for a variance within 60 days after receipt of the complete
application. A variance of this chapter shall be made by simple majority vote.
If it grants the variance, the City Council, acting in its capacity as the
Board of Adjustment, may impose conditions (including time limits) it considers
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and such
conditions may include a time limit for the use to exist or operate. No
variance shall be granted which would allow any use that is prohibited in the
zoning district in which the subject property is located.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.074 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   A CONDITIONAL USE is a use that is permitted within the applicable
zoning district but which may be, or could become, incompatible under certain
conditions with adjacent uses or generally with other uses within the
applicable zoning district. As a result, a public review shall be required
before the land may be used for the specified purpose. Review of the proposed
site design, and conditions on the use of the property or lot under
consideration, may be added before approval is granted.
   (B)   The applicant shall complete and submit to the Zoning Officer a
conditional use permit application form, any additional information reasonably
requested by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Officer, and a fee to be set
by the City Council by ordinance. The Zoning Officer shall determine if the
application is complete prior to setting a hearing date and time and referring
the application to the Planning Commission. The Board of Adjustments shall hold
a public hearing on the proposal after notification of the date, time, and
place of the hearing is published in the city’s official newspaper at least ten
days before the hearing. In addition, persons who own property situated wholly
or partly within 350 feet of the affected parcel or parcels shall receive
similar, individual notifications by mail. The petitioner or his or her
representative shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer
questions concerning the proposed conditional use permit. The Commission’s
recommendation shall be presented to the City Council. The City Council shall
make findings of fact and approve or deny a request for a conditional use
permit within 60 days after receipt of the complete application. If it grants
the permit, the City Council impose conditions it considers necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and such conditions may include
a time limit for the use to exist or operate.
   (C)   An accurate property description and a site design plan showing
existing or proposed buildings, streets, access parking spaces, signs, and
landscaping screening plans shall be required to be submitted along with the
application form.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall recommend a conditional use permit and
the City Council order the issuance of such permit only if it finds that such
use at the proposed location:
      (1)   Will be harmonious with the comprehensive plan of the city and this
chapter;
      (2)   Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the surrounding area and will not change the essential character
of that area;
      (3)   Will not be hazardous, unhealthy, or unsafe to existing or future
neighboring uses;
      (4)   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services, including streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
refuse disposal, water and sewer systems, and schools;
      (5)   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost
for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
      (6)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment,
and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property,
or the general welfare because of excessive production of or offensive traffic,
noise, smoke, fumes, dust, glare, vibrations, odors, or other pollutants;
      (7)   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which are so
designed as not to create traffic congestion or an interference with traffic on
surrounding public thoroughfares;
      (8)   Will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural,
scenic, or historic feature of major importance; and
      (9)   Will be compatible with surrounding buildings, circulation, open
space, landscaping, parking, and compatible with existing natural topography,
natural water courses, vegetation, exposure to sunlight and wind, and views.
   (E)   In recommending or approving any conditional use permit, the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the City Council may impose conditions which it
considers necessary to meet the standards of this chapter and to protect the
best interests of the surrounding area or the city as a whole. Such conditions
as are imposed shall bind any successors and shall not be affected by any
subsequent transfer of ownership. Violation of any such condition is a
violation of this chapter. These conditions may include, but are not limited
to, the following:
      (1)   Ingress and egress modifications to the property and proposed
structures thereon with particular reference to vehicle and pedestrian safety
and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or other
catastrophe;
      (2)   Changes to off-street parking and loading areas where required with
particular attention to the related noise, glare, or odor effects on nearby
property;
      (3)   Changes to refuse and service with particular attention to ingress
and egress;
      (4)   Modification in utility plans with reference to location,
availability, and compatibility;
      (5)   The addition of fencing, screening, landscaping, or other
facilities to protect or buffer abutting or adjacent property;
      (6)   Modification to proposed signs, if any, and proposed exterior
lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, and compatibility and harmony
with properties in the district;
      (7)   Changes in required yards and other open space; and/or
      (8)   Controls on the hours of operation of all or portions of a
particular use.
   (F)   (1)   Application for changes in the conditions or site design plan of
an approved conditional use permit shall be required. The City Council may
approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions, the application. Approval of
the changes by the City Council shall be granted before on-site changes or
developments are permitted. A public hearing before the City Council shall be
held where a public hearing was required for approval of the original proposal
and application. Changes in the approved site plan, submitted as part of the
conditional use permit application, involving minor changes in the following
may be authorized by the Zoning Officer for good cause shown:
         (a)   The location and alignment of buildings not to exceed ten feet
and that meet all other ordinance requirements;
         (b)   Other minor revisions in the shape of structures and still
meeting all other ordinance requirements; or
         (c)   Adding accessory structures not exceeding 5% of the total floor
area of all structures on the property and meeting all other ordinance
requirements.
      (2)   The Zoning Officer, however, may refer such proposed changes to the
site plan to the Planning Commission for review if the proposed changes do not
appear to fit clearly into one of the above three options, or where proposed
changes appear to change or compromise conditions placed on the applicant at
the time of approval of the conditional use and site plan by the City Council.
   (G)   If the Planning Commission recommends denial of a conditional use
permit, or the City Council orders such denial, it shall include in its
recommendations or determination findings as to the ways in which the proposed
use does not comply with the standards required by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.075 DECISION.
   The City Council or the City Council acting as the Board of Zoning
Adjustment shall make a record of its proceedings upon each application. This
shall include the minutes of its meetings, its findings, and the action taken
on each application heard by it, including the final order. The Clerk/Treasurer
shall mail a copy of the order deciding the matter on the applicant by mail.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall also serve a copy, either certified or uncertified,
of the order upon any other person who has filed with the Clerk/Treasurer a
demand for notice of the order.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.076 RECORDING OF DECISION.
   If the order grants a conditional use permit or a variance, the city shall
file the certified copy of the order with the County Recorder. Recording costs
shall be included in the application fee. As a condition of granting the
conditional use permit or variance, the City Council may restrict the period of
time within which the use must begin.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.077 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved by any ordinance or amendment, rule, regulation,
decision, or order of the City Council with respect to this chapter shall have
the right provided by law to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction.
Except to the extent that different procedures may be specified and required by
law, the appellant shall file a written notice of the appeal with the Clerk/
Treasurer and with the Court Administrator within 15 days following the mailing
of the order appealed, or within 15 days following any other action appealed
and by filing with the notice of appeal a bond conditioned to pay the costs of
the appeal not to exceed $250 in case judgment is entered in favor of the city.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.078 AMENDMENT.
   An amendment to this chapter may be initiated by the City Council, by the
Planning Commission, or by petition of affected property owners. Any property
owner or owners may make written application to the City Zoning Officer for an
amendment, stating the proposed amendment in full. An application by affected
property owners shall be accompanied by a zoning change fee to be set by the
City Council by ordinance. An amendment not initiated by the Planning
Commission shall be referred to it for study and report and may not be acted
upon by the City Council until the City Council has received the recommendation
of the Planning Commission on the proposed amendment or until a reasonable time
has elapsed from the date of reference of the amendment without a report by the
Planning Commission. No amendment shall be adopted until a public hearing has
been held upon it by the City Council. The City Council shall set a date for
hearing on the amendment. The Clerk/Treasurer shall cause notice of the date,
time, place, and purpose of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to the day of the hearing. When
an amendment involves changes in district boundaries affecting an area of five
acres or less, a similar notice shall be mailed by the Clerk/Treasurer at least
ten days before the day of the hearing to each owner of affected property and
to each owner of property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the
property to which the amendment relates. All interested persons shall have an
opportunity to be heard at the hearing. After the hearing, the City Council may
proceed with its consideration of the proposed amendment. The City Council may
reject the proposed amendment, or it may, by ordinance, adopt the proposed
amendment, with or without change. This chapter may be amended by a majority
vote of all of the members of the City Council. The adoption of an amendment
which changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district
from residential to either commercial or industrial requires a two-thirds
majority vote of all members of the City Council.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.079 GIVING OF NOTICE.
   For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the City Zoning Officer may use
current tax or assessment records, or any other appropriate records to
determine the names and addresses of owners. The City Zoning Officer may
require, as a part of any application for which mailed notice must be given,
that the applicant list the name and address of the affected property owners. A
copy of the notice and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice
was sent shall be attested to by the Clerk/Treasurer and shall be made a part
of the records of the proceedings, with a copy of any published notice given.
The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in
the notice, shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided that a bona fide
attempt to give notice has been made.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
§ 156.080 VIOLATION.
   Any building or structure being erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, or converted, or any building, structure or sign hereafter
erected, or land use made or permitted in violation of this chapter is hereby
declared unlawful. In the event of a violation or threatened violation of this
chapter or other official control adopted under M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.364, as
they may be amended from time to time, in addition to other remedies, the City
Council or its designee may institute proceedings in any court of competent
jurisdiction to restrain the action, or it may enforce the requirements of this
chapter by mandamus, injunction, or any other appropriate remedy in any court
of competent jurisdiction, or exercise any other remedy not prohibited by law.
This shall not limit the right of any resident of the city to institute legal
proceedings with respect to the violation or threatened violation.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply
with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants and variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. Violations
of this chapter can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for
a regulated activity pursuant to §
156.071. Administrative citations may also be issued when appropriate. Each 24-
hour day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who undertakes or allows any violation of §
156.056 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person, firm, corporation, or entity who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
and be shall be given a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more
than $1,000, or both. Administrative citations may also be issued when
appropriate. Each 24-hour day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. The imposition of any fine or sentence shall not exempt the
offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and the city
may pursue, by appropriate actions or proceedings, any or all additional
remedies.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2020; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2021; Ord.
passed 8-16-2022; Ord. passed 10-11-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
83-2011  - -         Granting a cable communications franchise to Arvig
                     Communication Systems.
                     Granting an electric franchise to Otter Tail Power
97       10-12-1999  Company.
                     (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
61       11-12-2019  Granting an electric franchise to Otter Tail Power
                     Company.
                    
 
TABLE II: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
     7-31-  Changing Lot one, Block two Moen’s 2nd addition from residential to
73   1990   commercial classification.
            (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
     12-12- Changing a certain area in the South Battle Lake Addition from
80   1995   residential to commercial classification.
            (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
            Changed reserved commercial area to commercial and changed industrial
-    7-9-   area to commercial; approved addition of light industrial activities
     2002   in commercial areas.
            (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cite Code Section
M.S. Cite                                 Code Section
Chapter 12                                32.075
12.25                                     33.01
12.37                                     33.05
Chapter 13                                31.04
Chapter 15                                150.39
15.73, subd. 3                            154.03
16B.25                                    73.20
18.79                                     92.10
18.83                                     92.10
Chapter 103F                              152.001
103G.005, subd. 15                        152.008
103G.005, subd. 18                        152.008
103G.005, subd. 19                        156.002
103G.245                                  152.008;
                                          152.037
105.485                                   152.058
120A.05                                   115.04
120A.24                                   115.04
144.391                                   112.01
145A.05                                   133.03
                                          114.01;
152.0263, subd. 5                         114.03 ;
                                          115.02
Chapter 169                               73.35
169.011, subd. 40(a)                      73.35
169.045                                   73.35
169.045, subd. 1(3)                       73.35
169.045, subd.7                           73.35
169.68                                    93.02
169.70                                    73.35
169.999                                   10.45
203B.121                                  30.03
211.045                                   150.40
211B.045                                  150.44
216B.02                                   154.03
216B.02, subd. 4                          154.03
216B.02, subd. 6                          154.03
216B.097                                  50.041;
                                          54.53
Chapter 216D                              154.23
216D.01 through 216D.09                   154.17;
                                          154.32
216D.04, subd. 3                          154.03
Chapter 237                               154.03
237.16                                    154.01
                                          154.01;
237.162                                   154.03;
                                          154.25
237.162, subd. 4                          154.03
                                          154.01;
237.163                                   154.03;
                                          154.25
237.163, subd. 2(b)                       154.02
237.163, subd. 6                          154.37
237.79                                    154.01
237.81                                    154.01
Chapter 238                               154.03
238.086                                   154.01
243.166                                   133.17
243.167                                   133.17
244.052                                   133.16
245.462, subd. 23                         115.04
245A                                      156.002
245A.14                                   152.002;
                                          152.008
Chapter 299F                              32.074
307.08                                    152.008;
                                          156.002
Chapter 308A                              154.03
Chapter 326                               156.055
326B.85                                   156.071
326B.31 et seq.                           150.44
326B.41 et seq.                           52.21
326B.101 et seq.                          150.38
326B.801                                  50.077
327.31                                    156.034
327.31, subd. 6                           156.034
327.32                                    156.034
Chapter 329                               111.02
                                          110.01—
Chapter 340A                              110.03;
                                          110.24
340A.101                                  110.20
340A.101, subd. 25                        110.02
340A.285                                  110.20
340A.301, subd. 6, clause (c), (i) or (j) 110.20
340A.404, subd. 5(a)                      110.20
340A.404, subd. 5(c)                      110.20
340A.409                                  110.20
340A.411                                  110.08
340A.412, subd. 14                        110.55
340A.413                                  110.21
340A.414                                  133.03
340A.504, subd. 3                         110.20
340A.601                                  110.21
340A.801                                  110.31
340A.802                                  110.25
Chapter 342                               115.01;
                                          115.21
342.01                                    115.04
342.01, subd. 50                          115.04
342.11                                    115.22
342.13                                    115.22
342.13(c)                                 115.02
342.17                                    115.04
342.22                                    115.02;
                                          115.22
342.22, subd. 5(e)                        115.24
342.39, subd. 2                           115.51
342.09, subd. 1(2)                        114.03
342.09, subd. 1(7)(b)(9)                  114.03
342.09, subd. 1(7)(iii)                   114.03
Chapter 346B                              52.21
347.51                                    90.15
347.515                                   90.15
347.52                                    90.15
347.52, paragraphs (a) and (c)            90.15
                                          130.01;
Chapter 349                               130.02;
                                          130.11
349.11 through 349.21                     130.99
349.11 through 349.23                     130.05;
                                          130.06
349.12                                    130.03
349.12, subd. 25                          130.10
349.16                                    130.10
349.213                                   130.02
360.038, subd. 6                          95.01
364.06                                    31.04
364.09                                    31.04
Chapter 378 § 2                          130.04
Chapter 412                               30.01
412.591, subd. 2                          31.01
415.11                                    31.02
Chapter 429                               154.30
429.061                                   92.33
429.101                                   92.33
Chapter 453                               154.03
Chapter 453A                              154.03
461.12                                    112.99
                                          152.001;
                                          152.008;
                                          152.092;
Chapter 462                               154.30;
                                          156.001;
                                          156.002;
                                          156.073
462.351 to 462.364                        156.080
462.357                                   156.052 ;
                                          115.02
462.357, subd. 1e                         156.002
462.357, subd. 3                          155.07
462.358                                   155.02
462.3593                                  156.009
462.3593, subd. 9                         156.009
Chapter 505                               155.08
Chapter 515A                              155.08
515A                                      156.051
515B                                      155.05;
                                          156.051
Chapter 515B                              155.08
515B.1 through 106                        152.076
515B.2-101 to 515B.2-110                  155.06
609.02, subd. 8                           90.15
609.75 through 609.763                    130.05;
                                          130.99
Chapter 617                               156.052
617.23 through 617.299                    156.052
617.241                                   150.41
626.862                                   10.20
631.48                                    10.99
                                          
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section Code Section
30.01              30.01
30.02              30.02
30.03              30.03
30.04              30.04
30.05              30.05
31.01              31.01
31.02              31.02
31.03              31.03
31.15              31.15
31.16              31.16
31.17              31.17
31.18              31.18
31.19              31.19
32.045             32.001
32.046             32.002
32.047             32.003
32.048             32.004
32.049             32.005
32.050             32.006
32.051             32.007
32.052             32.008
32.053             32.009
32.054             32.010
32.070             32.025
32.071             32.026
32.072             32.027
32.085             32.040
32.086             32.041
32.100             32.055
50.00              50.001
50.01              50.020
50.02              50.021
50.03              50.022
50.04              50.023
50.05              50.024
50.06              50.025
50.15              50.040
50.16              50.041
50.17              50.042
50.25              50.055
50.26              50.056
50.27              50.057
50.28              50.058
50.29              50.059
50.30              50.060
50.31              50.061
50.32              50.062
50.33              50.063
50.45              50.075
50.46              50.076
50.47              50.077
50.48              50.078
50.49              50.079
50.50              50.080
50.51              50.081
50.60              50.002
50.61              50.003
50.62              50.004
50.63              50.005
50.64              50.006
50.70              50.095
50.71              50.096
50.72              50.097
50.73              50.098
50.72              50.999
50.99              50.999
51.01              51.01
51.02              51.02
51.03              51.03
51.04              51.04
51.05              51.05
51.06              51.06
51.07              51.07
51.20              51.20
51.21              51.21
51.22              51.22
51.23              51.23
51.24              51.24
51.25              51.25
51.26              51.26
51.27              51.27
51.28              51.28
52.10              52.01
52.11              52.02
52.12              52.03
52.13              52.04
52.14              52.05
52.15              52.06
52.16              52.07
52.17              52.08
52.18              52.09
52.30              52.20
52.31              52.21
52.40              52.35
52.41              52.36
52.99              52.99
53.01              53.01
53.02              53.02
53.03              53.03
53.04              53.04
53.05              53.05
53.06              53.06
53.07              53.07
53.08              53.08
70.01              70.01
70.02              70.02
70.03              70.03
70.99              70.99
71.01              71.01
71.02              71.02
71.03              71.03
94.02              150.20
131.01             132.01
131.02             132.02
131.03             132.03
131.04             132.04
133.01             131.01
133.02             131.02
TSO Table I        TSO Table I
TSO Table II       TSO Table II
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
83-2011  - -         TSO Table I
72       3-13-1990   30.03
73       7-31-1990   TSO Table II
76       12-29-1992  110.21
80       12-12-1995  TSO Table II
87       4-28-1998   31.02
                     152.001—
                     152.008;
                     152.021;
                     152.036—
                     152.038;
                     152.040;
                     152.042;
-        3-23-1999   152.055;
                     152.055;
                     152.056;
                     152.058;
                     152.070—
                     152.075;
                     152.090—
                     152.093;
                     152.999
                     90.01—
94       8-10-1999   90.11;
                     90.14
                     93.01—
96       9-14-1999   93.12;
                     93.14;
                     93.99
97       10-12-1999  TSO Table I
98       5-23-2000   92.01—
                     92.09
100      11-28-2000  110.20
-        5-1-2002    153.01;
                     153.05
-        7-9-2002    TSO Table II
-        11-14-2006  31.04
                     32.070—
-        5-10-2011   32.081;
                     32.999
136      11-26-2013  92.25
-        8-23-2016   156.009
                     152.001—
                     152.009;
                     152.020;
                     152.021;
                     152.035—
                     152.042;
-        9-13-2016   152.055;
                     152.056;
                     152.058;
                     152.070—
                     152.076;
                     152.090—
                     152.093;
                     152.999
                     155.01—
-        9-13-2016   155.16;
                     155.99
                     54.01—
                     54.03;
                     54.15—
-        12-13-2016  54.38;
                     54.50—
                     54.54;
                     54.99
-        12-27-2016  10.35—
                     10.44
-        12-27-2016  133.15—
                     133.18
                     152.001—
                     152.009;
                     152.020;
                     152.021;
                     152.035—
                     152.042;
-        5-9-2017    152.055;
                     152.056;
                     152.058;
                     152.070—
                     152.076;
                     152.090—
                     152.093;
                     152.999
-        5-9-2017    153.01—
                     153.05
                     72.01—
-        10-10-2017  72.07;
                     72.99
-        1-9-2018    94.01
                     94.15—
-        5-8-2018    94.18;
                     94.99
                     90.01—
-        12-11-2018  90.16;
                     90.99
                     92.01;
-        1-8-2019    92.03—
                     92.11
-        1-8-2019    92.02
                     111.01—
-        1-8-2019    111.07;
                     111.99
                     112.01—
-        1-8-2019    112.13;
                     112.99
61       11-12-2019  TSO Table I
                     152.001—
                     152.009;
                     152.020;
                     152.021;
                     152.035—
                     152.042;
-        6-9-2020    152.055—
                     152.058;
                     152.070—
                     152.076;
                     152.090—
                     152.093;
                     152.999
                     156.001—
                     156.008;
                     156.020—
                     156.037;
-        6-9-2020    156.050—
                     156.056;
                     156.070—
                     156.080;
                     156.999
                     72.01—
-        4-13-2021   72.07;
                     72.99
                     111.01—
-        4-13-2021   111.07;
                     111.99
-        4-13-2021   150.35—
                     150.52
                     152.001—
                     152.009;
                     152.020;
                     152.021;
                     152.035—
                     152.042;
-        4-13-2021   152.055—
                     152.058;
                     152.070—
                     152.076;
                     152.090—
                     152.093;
                     152.999
-        4-13-2021   153.01—
                     153.05
                     156.001—
                     156.008;
                     156.020—
                     156.037;
-        4-13-2021   156.050—
                     156.056;
                     156.070—
                     156.080;
                     156.999
74       4-13-2021   73.35—
                     73.38
-        5-11-2021   31.04
                     155.01—
-        7-13-2021   155.16;
                     155.99
                     156.001—
                     156.008;
                     156.021—
                     156.037;
-        7-13-2021   156.050—
                     156.056;
                     156.070—
                     156.080;
                     156.999
                     32.070—
-        9-14-2021   32.081;
                     32.999
                     72.01—
-        9-14-2021   72.07;
                     72.99
                     154.01—
-        9-14-2021   154.04;
                     154.15—
                     154.38
                     92.25—
                     92.30;
98       9-14-2021   92.32;
                     92.33;
                     92.99
                     154.01—
-        5-24-2022   154.04;
                     154.15—
                     154.38
                     152.001—
                     152.009;
                     152.020;
                     152.021;
                     152.035—
                     152.042;
-        8-16-2022   152.055—
                     152.058;
                     152.070—
                     152.076;
                     152.090—
                     152.093;
                     152.999
-        8-16-2022   153.01—
                     153.05
                     156.001—
                     156.008;
                     156.020—
                     156.037;
-        8-16-2022   156.050—
                     156.056;
                     156.070—
                     156.080;
                     156.999
                     156.001—
                     156.008;
                     156.020—
                     156.037;
-        10-11-2022  156.050—
                     156.056;
                     156.070—
                     156.080;
                     156.999
2023     12-19-2022  34.01
                     93.01—
-        3-15-2023   93.14;
                     93.99
                     113.01—
-        3-15-2023   113.10;
                     113.99
-        4-8-2023    73.35—
                     73.38
                     110.01—
                     110.08;
                     110.20—
-        6-13-2023   110.41;
                     110.55—
                     110.66;
                     110.99
                     113.01—
-        6-13-2023   113.10;
                     113.99
                     90.01—
-        8-8-2023    90.16;
                     90.99
-        8-8-2023    114.01—
                     114.03
74       8-8-2023    73.35—
                     73.38
                     154.01—
-        11-14-2023  154.04;
                     154.15—
                     154.38
                     92.25–
-        11-14-2023  92.33;
                     92.99
                     110.01—
                     110.08;
                     110.20—
-        11-14-2023  110.41;
                     110.55—
                     110.66;
                     110.99
2024     12-12-2023  34.01
                     152.008,
-        3-14-2024   152.035,
                     152.043
                     96.01—
-        6-11-2024   96.05,
                     96.99
-        10-8-2024   73.15—
                     73.18
-        - -2024     92.31
-        8-14-2024   154.15
2025     11-12-2024  34.01
                     115.01—
                     115.04;
                     115.20—
                     115.25;
2024-01  12-10-2024  115.35—
                     115.38;
                     115.50;
                     115.51;
                     115.60
-        10-28-2025  152.072
                    
 
 
