BROOKLYN PARK, MN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-97 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through October 13, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE #2000-930B
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK,
MINNESOTA, AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING
CERTAIN ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE
OF ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
   WHEREAS Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021, and the Brooklyn
Park City Charter Section 3.11 authorize the city to cause its ordinances to be
codified and printed in a book,
   NOW THEREFORE the City Council of the City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota, does
ordain:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the City as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for the
violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota."
This Code of Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statutes and
administrative rules of the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of
Ordinances. It is intended that any future amendments to a statute or
administrative rule of the State of Minnesota, and any federal law, rule or
regulation be included in the Code of Ordinances as if the amended statute,
law, rule or regulation had been in existence at the time the code was adopted.
Section 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles:
Title I: General Provisions
Title III: Administration
Title VII: Traffic Code
Title IX: General Regulations
Title XI: Business Regulations
Title XIII: General Offenses
Title XV: Land Usage
Table of Special Ordinances
Appendix: Fee Resolution
Parallel References
Section 3. All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in the Code
of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in part
in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of Ordinances.
All fees established in prior ordinances codified in this Code shall remain in
effect unless amended in this code or until an ordinance or resolution adopting
a fee schedule is adopted or amended.
Section 4. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a sufficient
publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously published in the
City's official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause a substantial
quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general distribution to
the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the Code of Ordinances to
the County Law Library or its designated depository. The official copy of this
Code of Ordinances shall be marked and kept in the office of the City Clerk.
Section 5. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of the
law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.
Section 6. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect 30 days after publication of this
ordinance in the City's official newspaper.
___________________________
GRACE ARBOGAST, MAYOR
ATTEST:
___________________________
JOAN SCHMIDT, CITY CLERK
Approved as to Form by City Attorney
Passed on First Reading 08-14-00
Passed on Second Reading 08-28-00
Published in Official Newspaper 09-06-00 and 09-13-00
   This book publication is correct and this book so published shall be
received in evidence in all courts for the purpose of providing the ordinances
therein contained, the same as though the original ordinances were produced in
court.
___________________________
GRACE ARBOGAST, MAYOR
ATTEST:
___________________________
JOAN SCHMIDT, CITY CLERK
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Captions
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.05   Severability
   
10.06   Reference to other sections or laws
   
10.07   Reference to offices
   
10.08   Errors and omissions
   
10.09   Official time
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Ordinances repealed
   
10.12   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.13   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.14   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.15   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.16   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.17   Chapter, section and subdivision headings
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption by reference
   
10.20   City Council Districts
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Brooklyn Park,
Minnesota is designated as the Brooklyn Park City Code and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application must
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this municipality must be by the following rules, unless such construction
is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance:
      (1)    AND or OR. Either conjunction includes the other as if written
“and/or,” if the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender are deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases may be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law must be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Brooklyn Park,
Minnesota.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COUNTY. Hennepin County, Minnesota.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   MUST. The act referred to is mandatory.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   PENAL OFFENSE. The violation of an ordinance, code, or other legislative
action of the Council for which fines or imprisonment are prescribed and shall
have the meanings set forth in §
10.99 and
Chapter 70 of this code. PENAL OFFENSES, even though the word misdemeanor is
erroneously used, shall be distinguished from violations of state law called
misdemeanors which are defined in state law as crimes.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PETTY OFFENSE. The violation of an ordinance, code, or other legislative
action of the Council for which a sentence of a fine of not more than $200 may
be imposed and no sentence of imprisonment may be imposed and shall have the
meanings set forth in §
10.99 and
Chapter 70 of this code. PETTY OFFENSE, even though the word misdemeanor or
term petty misdemeanor may be erroneously used, shall be distinguished from
violations of state law called misdemeanors which are defined in state law as
crimes, and further distinguished from violations of state law called petty
misdemeanors which are described in state law as not constituting a crime.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Minnesota.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
('72 Code, § 1400:00)
§ 10.05 SEVERABILITY.
   Every section, provision or part of the code is declared separable from
every other section, provision or part, and if any section, provision of part
of the code shall be held invalid, it shall not affect another section,
provision or part thereof.
(‘72 Code, § 1200:00)
§ 10.06 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS OR LAWS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. Whenever a
provision in this code adopts the provisions of another portion of this code,
state or federal law or state or federal regulations by reference it also
adopts by reference any subsequent amendments of such code provision, law, or
regulation, except where there is a clearly stated intention to the contrary.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.08 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.09 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, must
be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice is deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance
of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, is
computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day is
a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.13 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances are effective in accordance with Section 3.08 of the City
Charter.
§ 10.14 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   If any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or modified by a
subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or
modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance
repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.16 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
   Example:   (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. passed
1-1-80; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
   Example:   (M.S. § 609.034) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-
85)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information.
   Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see M.S.
§§ 138.163 et seq.
§ 10.17 CHAPTER, SECTION AND SUBDIVISION HEADINGS.
   All chapter, section, subsection and subdivision headings of this code are
to be construed as not part of the subject mater of the code, but are intended
for convenience only and not as comprehensive titles.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   Copies of this code are kept in the office of the City Clerk for public
inspection and sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   Statutes or administrative rules or regulations of the State of Minnesota,
codes and ordinances adopted by reference in this code are adopted pursuant to
authority granted by M.S. § 471.62. At least one copy of any item so adopted,
but not less than the number of copies required by law, must be kept in the
office of the City Clerk for use by the public.
§ 10.20 CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   West District. That part of Brooklyn Park west of a line described as
follows: commencing at the point of intersection of the Brooklyn Park-Champlin
corporate limits and the west line of School District #11; thence south and
east along the west line of School District #11 to the centerline of Douglas
Drive (CSAH 14); thence south along the centerline of Douglas Drive (CSAH 14)
to the centerline of Zane Avenue (CSAH 14); thence south along the centerline
of Zane Avenue (CSAH 14) to the centerline of 93rd Avenue (CSAH 30); thence
west along the centerline of 93rd Avenue (CSAH 30) to the centerline of West
Broadway (CSAH 103); thence south along the centerline of West Broadway (CSAH
103) to the centerline of Shingle Creek; thence east along the centerline of
Shingle Creek to the centerline of Candlewood Drive; thence east along the
centerline of Candlewood Drive to the centerline of Zane Avenue (CSAH 14);
thence south along the centerline of Zane Avenue (CSAH 14) to the centerline of
73rd Avenue; thence east along the centerline of 73rd Avenue to the centerline
of Unity Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Unity Avenue to the
Brooklyn Park-Brooklyn Center corporate limits; thence west and south along the
Brooklyn Park-Brooklyn Center corporate limits to the Brooklyn Park-Brooklyn
Center-Crystal corporate limits.
   (B)   Central District. That part of Brooklyn Park described as follows:
commencing at the point of intersection of the centerline of Douglas Drive
(CSAH 14) and the west line of School District #11; thence east and south along
the west line of School District #11 to the centerline of Xerxes Avenue; thence
south along the centerline of Xerxes Avenue to the centerline of Brookdale
Drive; thence west along the centerline of Brookdale Drive to the centerline of
Zane Ave (CSAH 14); thence north along the centerline of Zane Avenue (CSAH 14)
to the centerline of Candlewood Drive; thence west along the centerline of
Candlewood Drive to the centerline of Shingle Creek; thence west along the
centerline of Shingle Creek to the centerline of West Broadway (CSAH 103);
thence north along the centerline of West Broadway (CSAH 103) to the centerline
of 93rd Avenue (CSAH 30); thence east along the centerline of 93rd Avenue (CSAH
30) to the centerline of Zane Avenue (CSAH 14); thence north along the
centerline of Zane Avenue (CSAH 14) to the centerline of Douglas Drive (CSAH
14); thence north along the centerline of Douglas Drive (CSAH 14) to the point
of beginning and there terminating.
   (C)   East District. That part of Brooklyn Park east of a line described as
follows: commencing at the point of intersection of the Brooklyn Park-Champlin
corporate limits and the west line of School District #11; thence southeast and
south along the west line of School District #11 to the centerline of Xerxes
Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Xerxes Avenue to the centerline of
Brookdale Drive; thence west along the centerline of Brookdale Drive to the
centerline of Zane Ave (CSAH 14); thence south along the centerline of Zane
Avenue (CSAH 14) to the centerline of 73rd Avenue; thence east along the
centerline of 73rd Avenue to the centerline of Unity Avenue; thence south along
the centerline of Unity Avenue to the Brooklyn Park-Brooklyn Center corporate
limits.
(Ord. 2003-994, passed 3-24-03; Am. Ord. 2012-1137, passed 4-2- 12; Am. Ord.
2022-1273, passed 3-28-22)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
Cross-reference:
   Administrative penalties, see
Ch. 37
   Definitions for penal offense and petty offense, see §
10.04
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see M.S. §§ 412.231 and 609.034
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   CITY COUNCIL
         
31.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
         
32.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
         
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
         
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
         
35.   ELECTIONS
         
36.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
         
37.   ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
         
38.   CITY POLICIES
         
39.   DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
         
40.   OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT
         
41.   BACKGROUND CHECKS
         
42.   PREVAILING WAGE REQUIRED
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Salary of Mayor and Council members
Rules and Procedures
   
30.15   Meetings
   
30.16   Mayor to preside
   
30.17   Agenda
   
30.18   Mayor duties and rights
   
30.19   Speaking
   
30.20   In writing
   
30.21   Question under debate
   
30.22   Voting
   
30.23   Boards and commissions
   
30.24   Ordinances
   
30.25   Ordinance book
   
30.26   Petitions, papers and agenda
   
30.27   Limitation to public
   
30.28   Robert's Rules of Order
   
30.29   Compliance
   
30.30   Special meetings
   
30.31   Minutes
   
30.32   Council vacancy application and appointment procedure
   
30.39   Appointment of boards and commissions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 SALARY OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   The monthly salary of each Council member shall be $988.00 per month
until January 1, 2023, at which time it shall be $1,017.64 per month until
January 1, 2024, at which time it shall be $1,048.17 per month, and the monthly
salary for the Mayor shall be $1,483.00 per month until January 1, 2023, at
which time it shall be $1,779.60 per month until January 1, 2024, at which time
it shall be $1,832.99 per month.
   (B)   The salary schedule referred to in division (A) of this section is
established on the basis that the offices of Mayor and Council member in this
city are part-time positions. The Mayor and/or Council members are sometimes
required to attend municipal functions or to take time from their regular
employment to perform services beneficial to the city. Additional compensation
is paid to the Mayor or Council members in those cases subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The activity and number of days for which a Council member is to be
engaged must be approved by the City Council prior to member’s participation.
      (2)   The Mayor and Council member will be paid $50 per day as
supplemental compensation for each day approved and for which the member is in
attendance at the approved activity.
   (C)   The City Manager shall biennially prepare a compensation report that
contains an analysis of the compensation paid to elected officials of the
Minneapolis-St. Paul area metropolitan cities similar to the City of Brooklyn
Park. The report shall be provided to the City Council for review.
('72 Code, § 115:00) (Am. Ord. 1996-817, passed 5-13-96; Am. Ord. 1998-880,
passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 2000-923, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. 2002-976, passed 6-
10-02; Am. Ord. 2006-1054, passed 1-23-06; Am. Ord. 2018-1233, passed 7-9-18;
Am. Ord. 2022-1283, passed 10-24-22)
RULES AND PROCEDURES
§ 30.15 MEETINGS.
   The Council has regular meetings on the first, second and fourth Mondays of
each month commencing at 6:00 p.m. If any of the Mondays falls on a holiday,
the Council will have its regular meeting on the following day and adjourned
special meetings at any other time the Council may deem proper. All meetings
are held in the City Hall or elsewhere as designated by the Council.
('72 Code, § 100:00) (Am. Ord. 1978-265(A), passed 5-22-78; Am. Ord. 1988-588
(A), passed 1-25-88; Am. Ord. 1998-878, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2003-988,
passed 2-3-03; Am. Ord. 2005-1031, passed 1-18-05; Am. Ord. 2015-1187, passed
2-17-15; Am. Ord. 2022-1271, passed 1-24-22)
§ 30.16 MAYOR TO PRESIDE.
   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council. In the absence of
the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem must preside. In the absence of both, the Council
members must elect one of their number as a temporary Chair. The Mayor Pro Tem
and temporary Chair, when occupying the place of the Mayor, have the same
privileges as other members.
('72 Code, § 100:03)
§ 30.17 AGENDA.
   At the hour appointed for meetings, the members shall be called to order by
the Mayor and in the absence of the Mayor by the Mayor Pro Tem, and in the
absence of both by the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall call the roll, note the
absentees and announce whether a quorum is present. In the absence of the City
Clerk, the Mayor shall appoint a Secretary Pro Tem. Upon the appearance of a
quorum, the Council must proceed to business which shall be conducted as
established by the City Council by resolution.
('72 Code, § 100:09) (Am. Ord. 1998-878, passed 4-13-98)
§ 30.18 MAYOR DUTIES AND RIGHTS.
   The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide questions of
order subject to appeal to the Council. The Mayor may make motions, second
motions or speak on any question, provided however, that in order to do so upon
demand of any one Council member, the Mayor may vacate the Chair and designate
the Mayor Pro Tem, if the Mayor Pro Tem is present, or if the Mayor Pro Tem is
not present, a Council member to preside temporarily. The Mayor may vote on any
matter before the Council.
('72 Code, § 100:12)
§ 30.19 SPEAKING.
   A member may not speak more than twice on any question, nor more than five
minutes each time, without the consent of a majority of the Council.
('72 Code, § 100:15)
§ 30.20 IN WRITING.
   Resolutions and motions, except a motion to adjourn, postpone, reconsider,
commit, lay on the table, or for the previous question, must be in writing, if
the Mayor or any member so requests; when made and seconded it shall be stated
by the Mayor, or being written, shall be read by the City Clerk, and may be
withdrawn before decision or amendment or any disposition thereof has been made
or a vote taken thereon.
('72 Code, § 100:21)
§ 30.21 QUESTION UNDER DEBATE.
   When a question is under debate no motion shall be entertained unless to
adjourn, to lay on the table, to act on the previous question, to postpone, to
commit or to amend, which several motions shall have precedence in the order in
which they are named and the first three shall be decided without debate.
('72 Code, § 100:24)
§ 30.22 VOTING.
   (A)   When a question is put by the Mayor, every member present must vote
unless excused by the Council, but if interested the member shall not vote. In
doubtful cases, the Mayor may direct or any member call for a division. It is
assumed that every vote is unanimous and it must be recorded accordingly unless
a poll of the members is called upon a requisition of the Mayor or any member,
in which case the names of the members voting are required to be recorded in
the minutes and whether each has voted yea or nay.
   (B)   Votes of the members on any business coming before the Council may be
by voice vote, standing vote, or in such other manner of voting as may signify
the intention of the members.
('72 Code, § 100:30)
§ 30.23 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   Boards and commissions are appointed by the Council.
('72 Code, § 100:33) (Am. Ord. 2018-1228, passed 2-5-18)
§ 30.24 ORDINANCES.
   An ordinance except an emergency ordinance must receive two readings by the
City Clerk before the Council previous to its passage unless the reading is
dispensed with by unanimous consent, but may not be read twice at the same
meeting. An ordinance introduced or considered must be recorded in the minutes
by title.
('72 Code, § 100:42)
§ 30.25 ORDINANCE BOOK.
   Ordinances must be signed by the Mayor and deposited with the City Clerk,
who must attest, seal, number, file and record, or place the same permanently
in the ordinance book. The affidavit of publication of the ordinance must be
permanently inserted in the ordinance book after each ordinance.
('72 Code, § 100:51)
§ 30.26 PETITIONS, PAPERS AND AGENDA.
   Petitions and other papers addressed to the Council must be in writing and
filed with the City Clerk not later than 3:00 p.m. the Wednesday prior to any
regular meeting at which it will be presented. At the time of the meeting, such
papers must be read by the City Clerk unless the reading is dispensed by
unanimous consent of the Council. All matters heard by the Council must be
according to a written agenda prepared prior to the meeting. The City Clerk
must be notified by 3:00 p.m. the Wednesday prior to the regular meetings of
all matters to be placed on the agenda, except that matters carried over from a
previous meeting may be placed on the agenda without further notice.
('72 Code, § 100:54)
§ 30.27 LIMITATION TO PUBLIC.
   Only the Mayor and other members of the Council and city officials are
admitted within the bar of the Council. Persons other than Council members may
not address the Council except by a vote of a majority of the members present.
Persons addressing the Council may speak for no more than ten minutes, unless
additional time is granted by the Mayor.
('72 Code, § 100:57)
§ 30.28 ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER.
   Matters not covered by the City Charter and by these rules are governed in
its procedure by Robert's Rules of Order, Latest Revised Edition.
('72 Code, § 100:69)
§ 30.29 COMPLIANCE.
   The rules in this chapter are adopted to facilitate the transaction of
Council business and functions. Informal compliance and substantial performance
are sufficient under the foregoing rules in the absence of objection seasonably
taken by a Council member. Objection is hereby declared not to have been
seasonably taken as to procedural matters provided for herein if a Council
member present at a meeting fails to object during the meeting in compliance
with these rules, and such objection is not seasonably taken if taken by an
absent member later than the next regular meeting after the proceedings to
which objection is made.
('72 Code, § 100:72)
§ 30.30 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or any three members of
the Council upon at least 72 hours notice is given to each member of the
Council. The notice must be delivered personally to each member or left at the
member's usual place of residence with some responsible person.
   (B)   Special meetings may be held without notice when all members are
present and take part in the meeting or consent in writing to hold such special
meeting without other notice. The written consent must be filed with the City
Clerk prior to the commencement of the meeting. A special meeting attended by
all members is a regular meeting for the transaction of any business that may
come before it.
('72 Code, § 100:78)
§ 30.31 MINUTES.
   (A)   Minutes of meetings must be kept by the City Clerk. Minutes must be
signed by the City Clerk, and constitute an official record of the Council
proceedings. Upon approval of the minutes at a subsequent meeting of the
Council, the Mayor must sign the minutes. Lack of such Mayor's signature or
Council approval does not invalidate the minutes as official records.
   (B)   In the event the City Clerk fails or declines to amend or change the
minutes, upon informal request, at the time they are submitted for approval,
the Council may by motion carried by majority vote amend the minutes. The
amending motion becomes a part of the minutes of the subsequent meeting.
('72 Code, § 100:81)
§ 30.32 COUNCIL VACANCY APPLICATION AND APPOINTMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish an application
and appointment procedure as required by Section 2.06 of the City Charter for
filling a vacancy in the office of Mayor or City Council member.
   (B)   Procedure. In those situations where Section 2.06 of the City Charter
requires the City Council to appoint an eligible person to fill a vacancy in
the office of Mayor or City Council member, the following procedure will be
followed:
      (1)   Announcement of the vacancy must be published in the city's
official newspaper and posted on the city's website as soon as possible after
the City Council has declared the vacancy to exist. The announcement must
advise interested persons of the process for applying for the vacancy and the
procedure that the City Council will follow in filling the vacancy.
      (2)   Eligible persons desiring to fill the vacancy must submit an
application to the City Clerk within the time frame established by the City
Council.
      (3)   If there are multiple applicants, the City Council must select at
least two of them to be interviewed by the City Council. The interviews must
take place at a regular or special Council meeting. If there is only one
applicant, the recruitment period shall be extended provided that the deadline
established in Section 2.06 of the City Charter for making an appointment is
not jeopardized.
      (4)   At the first Council meeting after all of the interviews have been
completed, the City Council must vote on filling the vacancy in the manner set
forth in Section 2.06 of the City Charter.
   (C)   Exception. If the declaration date of the vacancy occurs 60 days or
less before the next regular city election, the City Council may, without going
through the process set forth in this section, fill the vacancy by appointing
the person who is elected at that election to serve the new four-year term of
office for the vacated Council seat.
(Ord. 2017-1224, passed 11-27-17)
§ 30.39 APPOINTMENT TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   Notwithstanding any provisions of this Code to the contrary, if there are no
applicants for an appointment to a board or commission residing in the district
from which the appointment is required to be made, an applicant residing in any
district of the city may be appointed to such board or commission. An
individual who is serving on a board or commission and who does not reside in
the appropriate district is eligible for reappointment to the same seat even if
other individuals who reside in the appropriate district apply for the seat.
(Ord. 2000-932, passed 9-11-00; Am. Ord. 2018-1228, passed 2-5-18)
CHAPTER 31: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Recreation and Park Department
   
31.01   Establishment
   
31.02   Duties
Board of Appeals and Adjustments
   
31.15   Establishment of Board
   
31.16   Advisory board
   
31.17   Duties of Board
   
31.18   Notice of hearing
   
31.19   Reports
Health Officer; Board of Health
   
31.30   Health Officer; appointment and duties
   
31.31   Board of Health
   
31.32   Enforcement provisions
Recreation and Parks Advisory Commission
   
31.45   Establishment
   
31.46   Compensation
   
31.47   Duties
   
31.48   Reports
   
31.49   Reports to be advisory
Planning Commission
   
31.60   Establishment; composition
   
31.61   Duties
   
31.62   Preparation and maintenance of comprehensive plan
Human Rights Commission
   
31.75   Establishment
   
31.76   Composition and representation
   
31.77   Initial appointments
   
31.78   Organization
   
31.79   Duties
The Budget Advisory Commission
   
31.90   Establishment
   
31.91   Duties
   
31.92   Composition and representation
   
31.93   Desired qualifications
Cross-reference:
   Department of Community Development, see Chapter 39
   Department of Engineering and Building Inspections, see Chapter 40
   Fire Department, see
Chapter 32
   Police Department, see
Chapter 33
RECREATION AND PARK DEPARTMENT
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby continued as heretofore created a Recreation and Park
Department. The Department and all its employees operate under the jurisdiction
and control of the City Manager and the Department Director.
('72 Code, § 240:00) (Am. Ord. 1997-863, passed 11-24-97)
§ 31.02 DUTIES.
   The Recreation and Park Department, supervised by the Department Director,
responsible to the City Manager, is responsible for all programs relating to
parks and public recreation and is responsible for planning improvements and
operation of all public parks, playgrounds and public recreation programs of
the city.
('72 Code, § 240:05) (Am. Ord. 1997-863, passed 11-24-97)
BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS
§ 31.15 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.
   There is hereby created within the City of Brooklyn Park a Board of Appeals
and Adjustments as required by state statutes. The Board consists of the City
Planning Commission. All members serve without compensation, but are entitled
to reimbursement for expenses incurred by performing their duties. The Chair of
the Planning Commission serves as Chair of the Board of Appeals and Adjustments
and must appoint a Secretary, who may be but need not be a member of the Board.
Staff services are furnished by the City Manager or designee.
('72 Code, § 205:00)
§ 31.16 ADVISORY BOARD.
   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments is advisory to the Council and all
decisions made by the Board must be transmitted to the Council in writing in
the form of recommendations. The Council makes the final determination on all
appeals.
('72 Code, § 205:05)
§ 31.17 DUTIES OF BOARD.
   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments is charged with the following duties:
   (A)   To hear and make recommendations with respect to appeals from any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative
officer of the city in the enforcement of the zoning code.
   (B)   To hear requests for variances from the literal provisions of the
zoning code in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue
hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration and to recommend such variances only when it is demonstrated that
such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of the zoning code.
Provided, however, that neither the Board nor the Council may permit as a
variance any use which is prohibited under the zoning ordinance for property in
the zones where the affected persons' land is located. The Board or Council, as
the case may be, may impose conditions in the granting of variances to insure
compliance and to protect adjacent properties.
('72 Code, § 205:10)
§ 31.18 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   No matter may be heard by the Board unless and until the applicant has been
given ten days notice in writing of the date and place of the hearing. Notice
is deemed to have been given when deposited in the United States mail,
addressed to the appellant at the appellant’s last known address.
('72 Code, § 205:15)
§ 31.19 REPORTS.
   All recommendations to the Council must be reduced to writing and a copy
thereof must be mailed to appellant. The mailing of the minutes of the meetings
of the Board is sufficient to satisfy this requirement.
('72 Code, § 205:20)
HEALTH OFFICER; BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 31.30 HEALTH OFFICER; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Health Officer is appointed by the City Manager, with the approval
of the Council.
('72 Code, § 230:00) (Am. Ord. 1977-245(A), passed - - )
   (B)   The Health Officer serves in an advisory capacity to the Council and
the Board of Health. The Health Officer must see that all health laws and
regulations are obeyed. The Health Officer must take such legal steps as are
necessary to control communicable disease, and must advise the City Council and
the Board of Health of any health regulations or directions of the State Board
of Health that are not being carried out. The Health Officer must advise the
Council and Board of Health in a medical way as to diagnosis for the purpose of
quarantine, release of quarantine, details of necessary control methods, and
other technical preventive measures. The Health Officer is responsible for the
duties placed upon local health officers by the statutes of the State of
Minnesota.
('72 Code, § 230:05)
§ 31.31 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   Policy. The Board of Health, the Health Officer, or their duly
authorized representatives have and must exercise all powers to make such
investigations and reports and to obey such directions concerning communicable
diseases as the State Board of Health may require or give; and, under the
general supervision of the State Board of Health, must cause all statutes of
the State of Minnesota, Regulations of the Board of Health, and ordinances of
the City to be obeyed and enforced. The actual enforcement of these laws,
regulations, and ordinances is the duty and responsibility of the City Manager
or the City Manager’s duly authorized representative.
   (B)   Membership. The Board of Health for the city consists of eight
members. Seven members must be the members of the City Council. One member must
be a physician, licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota, who must be the
City Health Officer appointed pursuant to §
31.30(A) and who must also be the executive officer of the Board of Health. The
Health Officer must serve until his resignation or until a successor is
appointed.
   (C)   Duties of Board. The duties of the Board of Health and the Health
Officer are as defined in the statutes of the State of Minnesota and the
regulations of the State Board of Health. The Board of Health serves in an
advisory capacity to the Health Officer and the City Manager in making
recommendations concerning the general health program within the city.
   (D)   Meetings of the Board. The Board of Health meets at such times as it
may deem necessary. A majority of the members constitutes a quorum. The Board
must make such regulations as they deem necessary for their meetings and for
the conduct of their business.
   (E)   Administration. The City Manager, or his duly authorized
representative, must make investigations and reports, and obey directions
concerning communicable diseases as the Board of Health may require or give;
and, under the general supervision of the Board of Health, they must cause all
statutes of the State of Minnesota, regulations of the State Board of Health,
ordinances of the city relating to public health, and all lawful orders of the
City Council to be obeyed and enforced.
   (F)   Right of entry. For the purposes of performing their official duties,
all members, officers, and employees of the Board of Health, the Health Officer
and their duly authorized representatives have the right to enter any building,
conveyance or place where contagion, infection, filth, nuisance, or source or
cause of preventable disease exists or is reasonably suspected.
('72 Code, § 230:10)
§ 31.32 ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
   The City Manager may employ an Environmental Health Specialist and Assistant
Environmental Health Specialist or other health officials who must enforce all
statutes, ordinances and codes relating to public health and sanitation, and
may achieve compliance through the issuance of notices, warning tickets,
citations and abatement in lieu of arrest or detention.
('72 Code, § 230:15) (Ord. 1987-570(A), passed 8-24-87)
RECREATION AND PARKS ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 31.45 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby continued as heretofore created a Recreation and Parks
Advisory Commission. All 14 members must be lawful residents of the City of
Brooklyn Park. Members are appointed by the Council for terms of three years,
excepting the ex-officio members and young adult members, who serve a one-year
term. Vacancies are to be filled for the remainder of the original term of
office in the same manner as provided for original appointments. One member who
is an ex-officio member must be a member of the Council, and there must be one
member who is an ex-officio member who must be a member of the Planning
Commission. The young adult members may serve up to three one-year terms. The
young adult members must have reached the age of 18 by the date of appointment
to that young adult member's first term and must not have reached the age of 25
by the appointment date of any term.
   (B)   The Mayor may also appoint up to two youth liaisons. Youth liaisons
are non-voting members of the Commission who serve one-year terms and may be
appointed for a total of three one-year terms. Youth liaisons must have reached
the age of 14 by the date of appointment for their first term and must not have
reached the age of 18 by the date of appointment for any term.
('72 Code, § 245:00) (Am. Ord. 1973-139(A), passed 2-26-73; Am. Ord. 1008-1086,
passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 2018-1228, passed 2-5-18; Am. Ord. 2021-1268, passed
12-6-21)
§ 31.46 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Commission serve without pay but may be reimbursed for
actual expenses if funds therefor are provided in the adopted budgets of the
Recreation and Park Department Fund.
('72 Code, § 245:05)
§ 31.47 DUTIES.
   It is the duty of the Commission to hold meetings of its members at least
once a month on a regular scheduled meeting date, and to meet from time to time
with the City Manager, the Council, and the Director of Recreation and Park to
consider such matters pertaining to parks and public recreation programs in the
city as are referred to the Commission by the Council, the City Manager, the
Director of Recreation and Park, or as the members of the Commission deem
proper.
('72 Code, § 245:10)
§ 31.48 REPORTS.
   The Commission must make an annual report to the City Manager and the
Council containing such details as the Council requires, concerning its
estimate of financial needs and its recommendations for the ensuing year. The
Commission must report quarterly on its activities to the Council.
('72 Code, § 245:15)
§ 31.49 REPORTS TO BE ADVISORY.
   The Commission's reports, conclusions and recommendations must be made to
the Council, City Manager and the Director of Recreation and Park as may be
requested, or to any or all of them as the Commission deems appropriate in the
light of the matter under consideration. Its reports, conclusions and
recommendations are purely advisory, and the final determination and
responsibility is with the Council. It shall be aided and assisted in every way
possible by the Director of Recreation and Park, who is appointed by the City
Manager.
('72 Code, § 245:20)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 31.60 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby continued as heretofore created a Planning Commission for
the City of Brooklyn Park to have all the powers provided by state law and as
set forth in this subchapter.
   (A)   There are 11 members of the Commission to be appointed by the Council
in the manner hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   All members of the Commission must be lawful residents of the City of
Brooklyn Park.
   (C)   The 11 members are appointed to serve for terms of three years each,
except that young adult members are appointed to terms of one year each, and
that any vacancy occurring among the members of the Planning Commission during
an unexpired term must be filled for the rest of the term by vote of the
Council. Any members of said Commission may be removed for cause by the Council
upon notice, written charges, and after a public hearing. Appointments must be
made as soon after the first of each year as practicable.
   (D)   The members of the Commission must take the usual oath of office and
the Commission must appoint its own Chair and Secretary and may provide its own
rules of procedure. It must determine regular dates and times of meetings,
which are to be held at least once a month, and it must call public hearings
when appropriate. No member of the Commission shall pass or vote upon any
question in which the member is directly or indirectly interested.
   (E)   The Commission must prepare all reports as the Council shall request.
   (F)   Two of the 11 members of the Planning Commission shall be young adult
members. The young adult members may serve up to three one-year terms. The
young adult members must have reached the age of 18 by the date of appointment
to that young adult member's first term and must not have reached the age of 25
by the date of appointment for any term.
('72 Code, § 250:00) (Am. Ord. 1973-154(A), passed 2-26-73; Am. Ord. 2008-1086,
passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 2021-1268, passed 12-6-21)
§ 31.61 DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission must hear and review all petitions to amend the
zoning classifications of this code or to obtain a special permit. The Planning
Commission must then report its recommendations to the Council for action.
('72 Code, § 250:10)
§ 31.62 PREPARATION AND MAINTENANCE OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Planning Commission must prepare and maintain comprehensive plans and
maps for the future development of the city and make recommendations from time
to time of such changes or amendments it deems necessary. Public notice and
hearings must be as required by this code and applicable ordinances and laws.
Nothing herein prevents the Council from initiating any proposal concerning
comprehensive planning, zoning, platting, changes in streets and other matters
of general planning nature, provided, however, that any proposal must first be
referred to the Planning Commission for any hearings required by law and for
their recommendations.
('72 Code, § 250:15)
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
§ 31.75 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Human Rights Commission comprised of 11 members is established for the
purpose of securing for all residents equal opportunity in employment, housing,
public accommodations, public services, education, and full participation in
the affairs of the city by assisting the Minnesota Department of Human Rights
in implementing state laws against discrimination and by advising the City
Council in long-range programs to ensure human service needs are met.
('72 Code, § 290:00) (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 2007- 1078,
passed 10-15-07; Am. Ord. 2018-1228, passed 2-5-18; Am. Ord. 2021-1268, passed
12-6-21)
§ 31.76 COMPOSITION AND REPRESENTATION.
   All 11 members of the Commission must be lawful residents of the city. All
members are appointed by the Council and serve staggered three-year terms,
except for young adult members who shall serve one-year terms. Any vacancy
occurring during an unexpired term must be filled for the rest of term by vote
of the Council. Members of the Commission may be removed for cause by the
Council upon notice and written charges and after a public hearing. Members of
the Commission serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed personal
expenses in the performance of their duties. The young adult members may serve
up to three one-year terms. The young adult members must have reached the age
of 18 by the date of appointment to that young adult member's first term and
must not have reached the age of 25 by the date of appointment for any term.
('72 Code, § 290:05) (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 1998-870, passed
3-23-98; Am. Ord. 2008-1086, passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 2021-1268, passed 12-6-21)
§ 31.77 INITIAL APPOINTMENTS.
   One member from each district must serve a one-year term; one member from
each district must serve a two-year term; and one member from each district
must serve a three-year term.
('72 Code, § 290:10) (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93)
§ 31.78 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Commission must elect from its membership a Chair, and a Vice
Chair, each of whom must serve for a period of not more than three years. The
Chair must preside at all meetings of the Commission. In the absence of the
Chair, the Vice Chair must preside.
   (B)   The Commission must appoint a Secretary from its membership or at its
election request that a staff secretary be furnished by the city.
   (C)   All meetings of the Commission must be open to the public, be governed
by Roberts Rules of Order and otherwise held pursuant to the by-laws adopted by
the Commission. It is the duty of the Secretary of the Commission to record the
minutes of all meetings and transmit a copy thereof to each member of the
Commission, City Council and City Manager.
('72 Code, § 290:15) (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 2018-1228, passed
2-5-18)
§ 31.79 DUTIES.
   Duties of the Human Rights Commission are to:
   (A)   Adopt by-laws for the conduct of its affairs.
   (B)   Receive complaints and determine if the complaint is to be forwarded
to the State Department of Human Rights for the purpose of investigation, or to
North Hennepin Mediation Services for alternative dispute resolution.
   (C)   Improve the home, family, and human relations climate in the
community.
   (D)   Enlist the cooperation of the Minnesota League of Human Rights
Commission and other agencies, organizations and individuals in the community
in an active program directed to create equal opportunity and to educate the
community in order to eliminate discrimination and inequalities.
   (E)   Advise the Mayor, the Council and other city agencies on human
relations and civil rights issues and problems. Act in an advisory capacity to
the city on issues of civil and human rights. Recommend the adoption of
specific policies or actions as are needed to ensure equal opportunity in the
community.
   (F)   Assist in the development, formulation, and implementation of a
comprehensive plan to serve as a guideline to ensure that the human relations
needs of the community are defined and met.
('72 Code, § 290:20) (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 2007-1078, passed
10-15-07)
THE BUDGET ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 31.90 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Budget Advisory Commission is an ongoing, resident-led commission called
to design and propose budgetary suggestions to the City Council reflecting the
input and priorities of residents in the City of Brooklyn Park. The Commission
will make use of previous budget information, review current and projected city
service levels, analyze priorities from citizen input, consider long and short-
term anticipated capital and operating expenditures, and identify revenue
sources with consideration to projected expenditures. The Commission may also
be asked to perform specific studies or present recommendations based on City
Council requests.
(Ord. 2003-992, passed 3-17-03; Am. Ord. 2021-1268, passed 12-6-21)
§ 31.91 DUTIES.
   Duties of The Budget Advisory Commission are to:
   (A)   Review all budgets of the city, such as city, EDA and the like, and
long range plans, such as CIP/CEP and the like.
   (B)   Review results of previous resident surveys, City Council goals and
prioritization of city services.
   (C)   Recommend any necessary or reasonable survey or information gathering
process to gain current resident preferences.
   (D)   Review historical and future trends of revenues and expenditures, both
capital and operating.
   (E)   Review budget challenges and recommend solutions.
   (F)   Formulate suggestions to the City Council on prioritized budget
programs and choices between competing demands with resident input.
   (G)   By May 31, the Commission shall present a recommendation for future
funding along with comments on the city’s overall trends and provide
suggestions for any specific requests made by the City Council.
   (H)   Through objective measures of department performance, determine if the
city is efficiently managing and allocating the community’s resources.
   (I)   Complete a self-evaluation of the commission and make recommendations
to the City Council on how to improve the process.
(Ord. 2003-992, passed 3-17-03; Am. Ord. 2021-1268, passed 12-6-21)
§ 31.92 COMPOSITION AND REPRESENTATION.
   (A)   Residents shall be appointed to the Budget Advisory Commission by the
Council.
   (B)   Membership shall consist of 11 lawful residents, including two young
adult members.
   (C)   Members shall serve staggered terms of three years, except young adult
members who shall serve one-year terms. No member shall serve more than two
consecutive three-year terms, except that young adult members may serve up to
three one-year terms.
   (D)   The Mayor shall initially appoint members with the following staggered
term length: three members shall be appointed for one year; three members shall
be appointed for two years; and three members shall be appointed for three
years. Thereafter, all appointments or re-appointments shall be for a three-
year term, except for the young adult members who shall be appointed for a one-
year term.
   (E)   Terms shall expire on the first of April of the last year of their
appointed term.
   (F)   A Chairperson is to be chosen from among the appointed Commission
members.
   (G)   A non-voting representative of the Finance Department shall staff the
Budget Advisory Commission. The Commission shall be provided with any requested
information, data, or materials and shall be able to discuss any matters with
the appropriate staff. Staff members may also have the ability to address the
Commission as a whole with matters of concern.
   (H)   There shall be a non-voting representative of the City Council
assigned to act as liaison to the Budget Advisory Commission.
   (I)   The young adult members may serve up to three one-year terms. The
young adult members must have reached the age of 18 by the date of appointment
to that young adult member's first term and must not have reached the age of 25
by the date of appointment for any term.
(Ord. 2003-992, passed 3-17-03; Am. Ord. 2008-1086, passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord.
2018-1228, passed 2-5-18; Am. Ord. 2021-1268, passed 12-6-21)
§ 31.93 DESIRED QUALIFICATIONS.
   Members of the Budget Advisory Commission must have the ability to translate
survey data to priorities and outcomes; evaluate financial information; have
familiarity with the needs and challenges of Brooklyn Park; and the willingness
to commit to weekend and/or evening meetings.
(Ord. 2003-992, passed 3-17-03)
CHAPTER 32: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
32.01   Department established
   
32.02   Fire Chief; duties
   
32.03   Appointment of Assistant/Deputy Fire Chiefs
   
32.04   Fire Marshal
   
32.05   Equipment and reports
   
32.06   Discipline
   
32.07   Record of fires
   
32.08   Authority of Assistant/Deputy Fire Chiefs
   
32.09   Qualifications of personnel
   
32.10   Rules and regulations
   
32.11   Board of Officers
   
32.12   Absence
   
32.13   Relief Association
§ 32.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is continued, as established in the city, a Fire Department consisting
of a full-time Chief, a minimum of two Assistant/Deputy Fire Chiefs, and no
less than 30 firefighters.
('72 Code, § 225:00) (Am. Ord. 1995-784, passed 7-10-95)
§ 32.02 FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES.
   The Chief is the executive head of the Fire Department and serves as Fire
Marshal for the city. The Chief is appointed by the City Manager subject to the
approval of the City Council. The Fire Chief is also the head of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention of the city and has full authority to execute all laws,
ordinances and rules relating to fire prevention, fire fighting and the Fire
Department of the city. The Chief is responsible for the training and
discipline of members of the department and for the organization thereof as an
effective firefighting unit; the Chief keeps records of all fires and fire
calls, determines the cause of all fires and reports the same monthly in
writing to the City Manager; the Chief is responsible for compliance by the
Fire Department and members thereof with all the laws, ordinances and rules
established by the City Council and for directions received from the City
Manager relating to the Fire Department. The Fire Chief must be selected based
on training, experience, executive and administrative qualifications and
overall merit and fitness.
('72 Code, § 225:05) (Am. Ord. 1972-120(A), passed - -; Am. Ord. 1982-395(A),
passed 7-26-82; Am. Ord. 1999-894, passed 2-22-99)
§ 32.03 APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANT/DEPUTY FIRE CHIEFS.
   The positions of Assistant/Deputy Fire Chiefs are appointed by the Fire
Chief based on merit and fitness and approved by the City Manager.
('72 Code, § 225:10) (Am. Ord. 1985-505(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1995-784,
passed 7-10-95)
§ 32.04 FIRE MARSHAL.
   The office of the Fire Marshal is held by the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief may
appoint investigators/inspectors to assist and carry out the functions or
responsibilities of the position under the direction of the Fire Marshal. The
Fire Marshal is charged with the enforcement of all ordinances aimed at fire
prevention and has full authority to inspect all premises and cause the removal
or abatement of all fire and life safety hazards.
('72 Code, § 225:15) (Am. Ord. 1985-505(A), passed 12-2-85)
§ 32.05 EQUIPMENT AND REPORTS.
   The Fire Chief has control over all of the firefighting apparatus and is
responsible for its care and condition. The Fire Chief must make a report
annually to the City Manager as to the condition of the equipment and as to the
needs of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief may submit additional reports and
recommendations to the City Manager as the Fire Chief deems necessary.
('72 Code, § 225:20) (Am. Ord. 1982-395(A), passed 7-26-82)
§ 32.06 DISCIPLINE.
   The Fire Chief shall have the authority to suspend any member for refusal to
obey orders or for neglect in the member’s duties or for cause and the
suspensions shall be made with the approval of the City Manager.
('72 Code, § 225:25)
§ 32.07 RECORD OF FIRES.
   The Chief must keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires. The
record must include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of fire (if
known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for which occupied,
value of building and contents, members of the department responding to the
alarm and such other information as the Fire Chief may deem advisable or as may
be required from time to time by the Council or State Insurance Department.
('72 Code, § 225:30)
§ 32.08 AUTHORITY OF ASSISTANT/DEPUTY FIRE CHIEFS.
   In the absence or disability of the Fire Chief, the Senior Assistant/Deputy
Fire Chief must perform all the functions and exercise all of the authority of
the Fire Chief.
('72 Code, § 225:40) (Am. Ord. 1985-505(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1995-784,
passed 7-10-95)
§ 32.09 QUALIFICATIONS OF PERSONNEL.
   Each firefighter must be not less than 18 years of age and able-bodied. They
become members of the Fire Department only after a one year probationary period
and meeting Fire Department requirements. The Council must require that each
candidate, before becoming a probational firefighter, complete and pass an
ability test, physical examination, and criminal background check. All
firefighters are selected by the Board of Officers with approval by the Fire
Chief and their appointment made by the City Manager in accordance with the
provisions of applicable ordinances of the city.
('72 Code, § 225:45) (Am. Ord. 1982-395(A), passed 7-26-82; Am. Ord. 1985-505
(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1995-784, passed 7-10- 95)
§ 32.10 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Officers must promulgate policies, procedures, rules and
regulations for its members and for the operations of the Fire Department in
accordance with the provisions of applicable ordinances of the city. The Fire
Chief and the Board of Officers have authority to execute these policies,
procedures, rules, and regulations.
('72 Code, § 225:46) (Am. Ord. 1995-784, passed 7-10-95)
§ 32.11 BOARD OF OFFICERS.
   The Board of Officers is comprised of the Fire Chief, Assistant/Deputy Fire
Chiefs, the Station/District Officers, and the Fire Marshal.
('72 Code, § 225:47) (Am. Ord. 1995-784, passed 7-10-95)
§ 32.12 ABSENCE.
   Firefighters absent from drills, meetings or calls as required by the
department rules and regulations, unless excused by the Chief, shall be subject
to disciplinary action including suspension or forfeiture of membership as
specified in department rules and regulations.
('72 Code, § 225:50) (Am. Ord. 1982-395(A), passed 7-26-82)
§ 32.13 RELIEF ASSOCIATION.
   The members and officers of the Fire Department shall organize themselves
into a Firefighter's Relief Association.
('72 Code, § 225:55)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   [Reserved]
   
33.02   Service of process
   
33.03   Enforcement
Police Reserve Force
   
33.15   Composition
   
33.16   Duties of Police Chief
   
33.17   Command
   
33.18   Duties of special police officers
   
33.19   Expenses and disbursements
   
33.20   Uniforms
   
33.21   Civil defense duties
Cross-reference:
   Disposition of unclaimed property, see §§
38.15 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 [RESERVED].
§ 33.02 SERVICE OF PROCESS.
   The Chief of Police of the city and any police officers are designated as
the officers of the city for the service of process.
('72 Code, § 265:00)
§ 33.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Manager may employ community service officers or youth resource
specialists to work at the direction of the Chief of Police in the enforcement
of statutes, codes and city ordinances pertaining to animals, parking, junk
vehicles, youth related matters, and park regulations, who may achieve
compliance by issuing notices, warning tickets and citations in lieu of arrest
or detention.
('72 Code, § 265:05) (Am. Ord. 1987-570(A), passed 8-24-87)
POLICE RESERVE FORCE
§ 33.15 COMPOSITION.
   The Police Reserve Force consists of the Chief of Police and as many other
police reserve officers as the Council may from time to time authorize. The
police reserve officers are chosen by the City Manager based on merit and
fitness and upon recommendation of the Chief of Police.
('72 Code, § 270:00)
§ 33.16 DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Chief of Police shall:
   (A)   Train and equip the police reserve officers in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Police Department.
   (B)   Assign the duties of the police reserve officers.
   (C)   Make periodic inspections to see that the duties of the police reserve
officers are carried out properly.
   (D)   Appoint a full-time police officer of the city to the position of
Reserve Coordinator to assist in training and to oversee the activities of the
police reserve officers.
('72 Code, § 270:05)
§ 33.17 COMMAND.
   The Chief of Police is the commander of the Police Reserve Force. The Police
Reserve Force is subject to this command and control at all times when on duty.
('72 Code, § 270:10)
§ 33.18 DUTIES OF SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   When, and only when, assigned duties by the City Manager or the Chief of
Police or their designee, each police reserve officer shall perform duties as
assigned.
('72 Code, § 270:15)
§ 33.19 EXPENSES AND DISBURSEMENTS.
   The police reserve officers may be assigned to perform the duties of the
Police Department or may be assigned to do special duty at a fixed place at the
expense of the person for whom the duty is performed. The funds so collected
become part of the Police Reserve Fund which must be used and disbursed in
accordance with the usual requirements for the receipt, custody, and
disbursement of funds of the city by the City Manager and the Council, as the
City Manager and Council determine from time to time.
('72 Code, § 270:20)
§ 33.20 UNIFORMS.
   The police reserve officers wear a special police badge and uniform or other
insignia to identify them as police reserve officers.
('72 Code, § 270:25)
§ 33.21 CIVIL DEFENSE DUTIES.
   In event of nuclear attack or natural disaster the police reserve officers
may be assigned by the Emergency Management Director and will be under this
jurisdiction and control until the situation is under control, at which time
they revert back to the jurisdiction and control of the Police Department.
('72 Code, § 270:30)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
Heritage Infrastructure Fund
   
34.01   History and purpose
   
34.02   Fund created
   
34.03   Fund purposes
   
34.04   Investment of Heritage Infrastructure Fund monies
   
34.05   Expenditure limitation
   
34.06   Planning capital projects
   
34.07   Fund allocations
   
34.08   Administrative expenditures
   
34.09   Amendments
Lodging Tax
   
34.20   Purpose
   
34.21   Definitions
   
34.22   Imposition of tax
   
34.23   Collections
   
34.24   Exceptions and exemptions
   
34.25   Advertising no tax
   
34.26   Payment and returns
   
34.27   Examination of return adjustments, notices and demands
   
34.28   Refunds
   
34.29   Failure to file a return
   
34.30   Delinquent taxes
   
34.31   Administration of tax
   
34.32   Examine records
   
34.33   Contract with state
   
34.34   Violations
   
34.35   Use of proceeds
   
34.36   Appeals
Local Housing Trust Fund
   
34.45   Establishment
   
34.46   Funding sources
   
34.47   Use of funds
   
34.48   Administration of Local Housing Trust Fund
HERITAGE INFRASTRUCTURE FUND
§ 34.01 HISTORY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City of Brooklyn Park has been a rapidly developing and growing
community which growth has required extensive public improvements. The Heritage
Fund was created in 1991 from surplus special assessment funds and such funds
continue to be deposited in the fund.
   (B)   The City Council believes that these funds should be preserved and
managed for the benefit of all our citizens. The purpose of this subchapter is
to establish and continue a special fund to be called the Heritage
Infrastructure Fund which is to be administered to preserve the principal and
continue additional growth of the fund. This subchapter establishes a program
which will benefit current and future citizens and is intended to assist future
generations as well. It is the intent of this section that the Heritage
Infrastructure Fund be preserved and maintained for future generations.
('72 Code, § 130:00) (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord. 1999-901,
passed 6-28-99)
§ 34.02 FUND CREATED.
   There is created and continued a separate fund designated as the Heritage
Infrastructure Fund. The fund is to be maintained in the official city records
and administered by the Finance Director in accordance with the provisions of
this section and state law. Into the fund are to be deposited:
   (A)   The collections of special assessments and taxes levied for the
payment of the costs of an assessable public improvement that are received
after the improvement costs including debt service on bonds issued for the
improvement have been fully paid.
   (B)   Investment earnings generated by the monies in the Fund.
   (C)   Other monies appropriated by the Council or donated for the purposes
of the fund.
   (D)   Monies in the Debt Service Fund after all debt obligations for the
improvement have matured and been paid.
('72 Code, § 130:05) (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord. 1999-901,
passed 6-28-99)
§ 34.03 FUND PURPOSES.
   The fund is to be used solely to pay the capital costs of projects of
general benefit to the city except as modified by this section.
('72 Code, § 130:10) (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord. 1999-901,
passed 6-28-99)
§ 34.04 INVESTMENT OF HERITAGE INFRASTRUCTURE FUND MONIES.
   Investment of monies must be made in accordance with the official investment
policy adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 1999-901, passed 6-28-99)
§ 34.05 EXPENDITURE LIMITATION.
   No more than 15% of the investment earnings of the fund may be spent in any
calendar year for current operations or current programs that are funded by the
general fund and included in the budget.
('72 Code, § 130:15) (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord. 1999-901,
passed 6-28-99)
§ 34.06 PLANNING CAPITAL PROJECTS.
   (A)   Capital improvement projects must be included in the adopted Long-
Range Infrastructure Plan (Plan) in order to receive funding from the fund.
   (B)   A capital project that is to be funded by the Fund must be shown on
the City's Five Year Capital Improvement Plan for a minimum of two successive
years prior to being funded. Exceptions to this requirement may be made by the
City Council in the following circumstances:
      (1)   The City Council may determine that an emergency project is needed
immediately to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and general
welfare, or
      (2)   Two-thirds of the City Council may after a public hearing determine
that (i) no other funding source is available or (ii) that other funding
sources for the project are more costly and the Heritage Infrastructure Fund
resources are necessary to provide the most efficient method of funding the
capital project.
      (3)   The Plan shall be updated at least every two years.
('72 Code, § 130:25) (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord. 1999-901,
passed 6-28-99)
§ 34.07 FUND ALLOCATIONS.
   Decisions for expenditures of Heritage Infrastructure Fund must be made
during the city's annual budget process. The Heritage Infrastructure Fund must
be included in budget resolutions as a funding source. Annual fund allocations
must be considered as a part of the public hearing on the annual budget.
   (A)   Reports. The City Manager must annually submit, prior to July 1, a
report to the Council which must show such detail about the fund as may be
requested by the Council.
   (B)   Temporary borrowing. The Council may by resolution authorize loans
from the fund for any capital purpose. The term of such a loan may not exceed
three years and it must bear interest payable to the fund at a rate of interest
not less than the average annual percentage yield on all investments of the
fund for the fiscal year in which the loan is made.
('72 Code, § 130:30) (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord. 1999-901,
passed 6-28-99)
§ 34.08 ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURES.
   Reasonable expenses necessary for the administration of the Heritage
Infrastructure Fund are to be paid from the fund.
('72 Code, § 130:35) (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord. 1999-901,
passed 6-28-99)
§ 34.09 AMENDMENTS.
   An amendment to this section must be adopted by affirmative vote of at least
six members of the City Council after a public hearing preceded by ten days
published notice.
('72 Code, § 130:40) (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord. 1999-901,
passed 6-28-99)
LODGING TAX
§ 34.20 PURPOSE.
   The State Legislature has authorized the imposition of a tax upon lodging at
a hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court or other use of space by a
transient; and, the imposition of such a tax would provide funding for a
convention and tourism bureau to promote the city as a tourist and convention
center.
('72 Code, § 285:00) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word MUST is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
   CITY. The City of Brooklyn Park.
   DIRECTOR. The Finance Director of the city.
   LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   LODGING. The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel or
rooming house except where the lodging is for a continuous period of 30 days or
more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms by religious, educational
or non-profit organizations must not constitute LODGING for purposes of this
subchapter.
   OPERATOR. A person who provides lodging to others or any officer, agent or
employee of the person.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate, or any other
combination of individuals. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any provision
of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a
corporation, association or partnership, means the officers, or partners
thereof as the case may be.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether
paid in money or otherwise, but does not include any charges for services
rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge
itself.
('72 Code, § 285:00) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.22 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person on and after August 1, 1986. The tax must be
stated and charged separately and must be collected by the operator from the
lodger. The tax collected by the operator is a debt owed by the operator to the
city and is extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall the tax
imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the
operator is authorized and required by this chapter to collect from a lodger.
('72 Code, § 285:05) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.23 COLLECTIONS.
   Each operator must collect the tax imposed by this subchapter at the time
the rent is paid. The tax collections are deemed to be held in trust by the
operator for the city. The amount of tax must be separately stated from the
rent charged for the lodging.
('72 Code, § 285:10) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.24 EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exceptions. No tax is to be imposed on rent for lodging paid by any
officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express
provisions of federal law or international treaty.
   (B)   Exemptions. An exemption is granted to any person as to whom or whose
occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption is to be
granted except upon a claim therefore made at the time the rent is collected
and such a claim must be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on forms
provided by the city. All such claims must be forwarded to the city when the
returns and collections are submitted as required by this subchapter.
('72 Code, § 285:15) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.25 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
   It is unlawful for an operator to advertise or hold out or state to the
public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than one cent are
considered an additional cent.
('72 Code, § 285:20) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 34.26 PAYMENT AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this subchapter must be paid by the operator to
the city monthly not later than 25 days after the end of the month in which the
taxes were collected. At the time of payment the operator must submit a return
upon such forms and containing such information as the director may require.
The return must contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return.
      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of the agent
duly authorized in writing.
      (4)   The period covered by the return.
      (5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging
tax.
   (B)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this subchapter previously
paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for which became
uncollectible during such reporting period, but only in proportion to the
portion of such consideration which became uncollectible.
('72 Code, § 285:25) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.27 EXAMINATION OF RETURN ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.
   The Director may rely upon the Minnesota sales tax return filed by the
operator with the State of Minnesota in determining the accuracy of a return
filed under this subchapter. The Director may after a return is filed, examine
the same and make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts
of the person making the return deemed necessary for determining its
correctness. The tax computed on the basis of such examination is the tax to be
paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, such excess must be
paid to the city within ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either
personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If
the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess must be
refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city within ten days after
determination of such refund.
('72 Code, § 285:30) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.28 REFUNDS.
   The person may apply to the Director for a refund of taxes paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided
that no application for refund will be considered unless filed within one year
after such tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return,
whichever period is the longer. The Director must examine the claim and make
and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in
part and must mail a notice thereof by registered mail to the person at the
address stated upon the return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in part,
the Director must credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due
under this subchapter from the claimant and the balance of the allowance, if
any, must be paid by the Director to the claimant.
('72 Code, § 285:35) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.29 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   If an operator required by this subchapter to file a return fails to
do so within the time prescribed, or makes, willfully or otherwise, an
incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator must, upon written notice
and demand, file the return or corrected return within five days of receipt of
written notice and must at the same time pay any tax due on the basis thereof.
If the person fails to file a return or corrected return, the Director must
make a return or corrected return, for the person from the knowledge and
information as the Director can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof,
which tax (less any payments theretofore make on account of the tax for the
taxable period covered by such return) must be paid upon within five days of
the receipt of written notice and demand for such payment. Any such return or
assessment made by the Director must be prima facie correct and valid, and the
person has the burden of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any
action or proceeding in respect thereto.
   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this subchapter, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid,
the City Attorney may institute such legal action as may be necessary to
recover the amount due plus interest, penalties, the costs and disbursements of
any action.
   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the Director may grant an operator one
30 day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of
taxes as required by this subchapter provided that interest during such period
of extension must be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per annum.
('72 Code, § 285:40) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.30 DELINQUENT TAXES.
   (A)   If any tax imposed by this subchapter is not paid within the time
herein specified for the payment, or any extension thereof, there is to be
added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.
   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by this subchapter, unless it is shown that such failure is not due
to willful neglect, there is to be added to the tax in addition to the 10%
specific penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the failure is for not
more than 30 days with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction
thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding 25% in the
aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of
$10 must be assessed. The amount so added to any tax must be collected at the
same time and the same manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been
paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added
must be collected in the same manner as the tax.
   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment
required by this subchapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such a tax or payment
thereof, there must also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any
tax (less any amounts paid on the basis of such false or fraudulent return)
found due for the period to which such return related. The penalty imposed by
this division must be collected as part of the tax, and is in addition to any
other penalties provided by this subchapter.
   (D)   All payments received must be credited first to penalties, next to
interest, and then to the tax due.
   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided
by this section, bears interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the time such
tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest and penalty must be added to
the tax and be collected as part thereof.
('72 Code, § 285:45) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.31 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   The Director administers and enforces the assessment and collection of the
taxes imposed by this subchapter. The Director shall cause to be prepared blank
forms for the returns and other documents required by this subchapter and must
distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them on application, but
failure to receive or secure them does not relieve a person from any obligation
required of the person under this subchapter unless it can be established that
the required forms were not available from the city.
('72 Code, § 285:50) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.32 EXAMINE RECORDS.
   The Director and those persons acting on behalf of the Director authorized
in writing by the Director may examine the books, papers and records of any
operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this subchapter. Every such
operator is directed and required to give to the Director or to the Director’s
duly authorized agent or employee the means, facilities and opportunity for
such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
('72 Code, § 285:55) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.33 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   The City Manager is authorized to confer with the Minnesota Commissioner of
Taxation to the end that an agreement between the city and the Commissioner of
Taxation may be entered into for the purpose of providing for the
administration and collection of the taxes imposed by this subchapter. Such an
agreement shall not become effective until presented to the Council for its
approval and when so approved the tax imposed by this subchapter shall be
collected and administered pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
('72 Code, § 285:60) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.34 VIOLATIONS.
   A person who willfully fails to make a return required by this subchapter;
or who fails to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or who fails to
remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this subchapter
after written demand for such payment or who refuses to permit the Director or
any duly authorized agents or employees to examine the books, records and
papers under the person’s control, or who willfully makes any incomplete, false
or fraudulent return is guilty of a misdemeanor.
('72 Code, § 285:65) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 34.35 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   The 95% proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this
subchapter must be used in accordance with M.S. § 477A.018 as the same may be
amended from time to time to fund a local convention or tourism bureau for the
purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or convention center.
('72 Code, § 285:70) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
§ 34.36 APPEALS.
   (A)   An operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by
the Director under this subchapter may file a petition for review of such
notice, order or determination detailing the operator's reasons for contesting
the notice, order or determination. The petition must contain the name of the
petitioner, the petitioner's address and the location of the lodging subject to
the order, notice or determination.
   (B)   The petition for review must be filed with the City Clerk within ten
days after the notice, order or determination for which review is sought has
been mailed or served upon the person requesting review.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition the City Manager, or the City Manager’s
designee, must set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least five
days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing.
   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner must be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn.
The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner's choosing at
petitioner's own expense.
   (E)   The hearing must be conducted by the City Manager or the City
Manager’s designee, provided only that the person conducting the hearing must
not have participated in the drafting of the order, notice or determination for
which review is sought.
   (F)   The person conducting the hearing must make written findings of fact
and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this chapter and evidence
presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse or modify the
notice, order or determination made by the director.
   (G)   Any decision rendered by the City Manager pursuant to this section may
be appealed to the City Council. A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision must
file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days after the
decision has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed
on the Council agenda as soon as is practical. The Council must then review the
findings of fact and conclusions to determine whether they were correct. Upon a
determination by the Council that findings and conclusions were incorrect, the
Council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the City Manager or the
City Manager’s designee upon the same standards as set forth in division (F) of
this section.
('72 Code, § 285:75) (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)
LOCAL HOUSING TRUST FUND
§ 34.45 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under M.S. § 462C.16, a Local
Housing Trust Fund is established to support the development, rehabilitation,
or financing of housing, support housing projects, to provide down payment
assistance, rental assistance, and home buyer counseling services, and for any
other purposes authorized by law.
(Ord. 2024-1300, passed 4-22-24)
§ 34.46 FUNDING SOURCES.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 462C.16, Subd. 4, and as determined by the City Council,
the Local Housing Trust Fund may be funded from multiple sources, which may
include, but are not limited to the following:
   (A)   Budgeted allocation of funds from the city’s Economic Development
Authority (EDA) or Housing and Redevelopment Authority levy as approved by the
Economic Development Authority and the City Council.
   (B)   Private cash donations from individuals, organizations, and businesses
designated for the Local Housing Trust Fund.
   (C)   Grants and loans from a federal, state, or local government or other
private sources.
   (D)   Bond proceeds.
   (E)   Payments in lieu of participation in current or future affordable
housing programs.
   (F)   Matching funds from a federal or state Local Housing Trust Fund; or a
state program designated to fund a Local Housing Trust Fund.
   (G)   Principal and interest from Local Housing Trust Fund loan repayments
and all other income from Local Housing Trust Fund activities, including but
not limited to investment earnings.
   (H)   The sale of real and personal property as approved and as designated
by the City Council.
   (I)   Local government appropriations, development fees and other funds as
designated from time to time by the City Council.
   (J)   Tax Increment Finance (TIF) pooled funds.
   (K)   Other sources of funding approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 2024-1300, passed 4-22-24)
§ 34.47 USE OF FUNDS.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 462C.16, Subd. 3, funds in the Local Housing Trust Fund
may only be used for the following:
   (A)   Making grants, loans, and loan guaruntees for the development,
rehabilitation, or financing of housing.
   (B)   Matching other funds from federal, state, or private resources for
housing projects.
   (C)   Providing down payment assistance, rental assistance, and home buyer
counseling services.
   (D)   Payment of administrative expenses of the Local Housing Trust Fund in
the maximum amount of 10% of the balance of the Local Housing Trust Fund.
   (E)   Financing the acquisition, demolition, and disposition of property for
housing projects.
   (F)   Financing construction of public improvements and utilities to aid
proposed residential developments.
   (G)   Financing the rehabilitation, remodeling, or new construction of
housing.
   (H)   Interim financing of public costs for housing projects in anticipation
of a permanent financing source (i.e., construction financing, bond sale, etc.)
   (I)   Other uses as permitted by law and approved by City Council.
(Ord. 2024-1300, passed 4-22-24)
§ 34.48 ADMINISTRATION OF LOCAL HOUSING TRUST FUND.
   (A)   The Economic Development Authority in and for the city (the “EDA”)
shall administer the Local Housing Trust Fund on behalf of the city.
   (B)   Terms and conditions of repayment. The EDA shall determine the terms
and conditions of repayment of loans and grants from the Local Housing Trust
Fund, including but not limited to, the appropriate security and interest, if
any, should repayment be required. Interest on loans and grants shall be as
established by the EDA from time to time or at the time of approval of a
specific project or program.
   (C)   Annual report. The EDA shall report annually to the city on the use of
the Local Housing Trust Fund, including the number of loans and grants made,
the number and types of residential units assisted, and the number of
households provided rental assistance and down payment assistance.
(Ord. 2024-1300, passed 4-22-24)
CHAPTER 35: ELECTIONS
Section
   
35.01   Date of regular elections
   
35.02   Notice of election
§ 35.01 DATE OF REGULAR ELECTIONS.
   The regular city election is held on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November of each even-numbered year.
('72 Code, § 110:00)
§ 35.02 NOTICE OF ELECTION.
   The City Clerk must cause at least 15 days notice of the annual city
election by posting a notice thereof in at least one public place in each
precinct and by publishing a notice thereof at least once in the official
newspaper of the city specifying the time and place thereof, the offices to be
filled, and the questions, if any, to be determined by vote.
('72 Code, § 110:05)
CHAPTER 36: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
36.01   Emergency Management Act adopted
   
36.02   Definitions
   
36.03   Establishment of an Emergency Management Division
   
36.04   Local emergencies
   
36.05   Powers and duties of Emergency Management Director
   
36.06   Appointment of coordinator
§ 36.01 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ACT ADOPTED.
   The “Minnesota Emergency Management Act,” M.S. Chapter 12, as amended,
insofar as it relates to cities, is hereby adopted by reference as part of this
chapter, as fully as if set forth explicitly herein. One copy of the code as
adopted is to be marked as the “Official Copy” and is on file in the City
Clerk's Office for use and examination by the public.
('72 Code, § 215:00) (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1991-677
(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)
§ 36.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an actual or immediate and serious
threat to the health and safety of any person, or a situation that has resulted
or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property or the environment, and
for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area
are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for
immediate action to prevent a disaster from developing or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters.
('72 Code, § 215:05) (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1991-677
(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)
§ 36.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF AN EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIVISION.
   There is created within the City of Brooklyn Park an Emergency Management
Division, which is under the supervision of the City Manager. The City Manager
appoints a Director of Emergency Management. The Director of Emergency
Management has direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operations of the Emergency Management Division, as outlined by Brooklyn Park's
Emergency Operations Plan as approved by the Brooklyn Park City Council.
('72 Code, § 215:10) (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1991-677
(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)
§ 36.04 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or designated legal
successor. Such an emergency is not to be continued for a period in excess of
three days except by or with the consent of the City Council.
('72 Code, § 215:15) (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1991-677
(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)
§ 36.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR.
   (A)   General operations. The Emergency Management Director directs and
coordinates the general operation of all local efforts and the provision of all
local emergency services during an emergency, in conformity with controlling
regulations and instructions of state authorities from the Division of
Emergency Management.
   (B)   Intergovernmental arrangements. The Emergency Management Director
represents the city on any regional or state organization on emergency
preparedness. The Director also may develop proposed mutual aid agreements with
other political subdivisions for reciprocal aid and assistance in an emergency
too great to be dealt with unassisted, which agreements must be presented to
the City Council for approval.
   (C)   Plans and reports. The Emergency Management Director prepares
emergency operation plans for the city and such reports of activities as deemed
appropriate or as are requested by the City Council.
   (D)   Use of city personnel. In an emergency the Emergency Management
Director utilizes the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities
of existing departments, and agencies of the city to the maximum extent
practicable.
('72 Code, § 215:20) (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1991-677
(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)
§ 36.06 APPOINTMENT OF COORDINATOR.
   The Emergency Management Director is to appoint deputy directors to assist
in carrying out the functions and responsibilities of the Emergency Management
Division.
('72 Code, § 215:25) (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1991-677
(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)
CHAPTER 37: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
Section
   
37.01   Purpose
   
37.02   Administrative citations and civil penalties
   
37.03   Administrative offenses; schedule of fines and fees
   
37.04   Administrative citation
   
37.05   Administrative hearing - automatic stay
   
37.06   Administrative review
   
37.07   Judicial review
   
37.08   Recovery of civil penalties
   
37.09   Criminal penalties
   
37.10   Applicable laws
§ 37.01 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcing the city code. While criminal fines and penalties have been the most
frequent enforcement mechanisms, there are certain negative consequences for
both the city and the public. The delay inherent in that system does not ensure
prompt resolution. Citizens resent being labeled criminals for violations of
administrative regulations. The higher burden of proof and the potential of
incarceration do not appear appropriate for most administrative violations. The
criminal process does not always regard city code violations as important.
Accordingly, the City Council finds that the use of administrative citations
and the imposition of civil penalties is a legitimate and necessary alternative
method of enforcement. This method of enforcement is in addition to any other
legal remedy which may be pursued for city code violations.
('72 Code, § 903:10) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)
§ 37.02 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND CIVIL PENALTIES.
   This chapter governs administrative citations and civil penalties for
violations of the city code.
('72 Code, § 903:20) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)
§ 37.03 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES; SCHEDULE OF FINES AND FEES.
   (A)   A violation of any provision of the city code is an administrative
offense, which may be subject to an administrative citation and civil penalties
pursuant to this subchapter. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate
offense.
   (B)   An administrative offense may be subject to a civil penalty not
exceeding $2,000.
   (C)   The City Council must adopt by resolution a schedule of recommended
fines for offenses initiated by administration citation. The City Council is
not bound by that schedule when a matter is appealed to it for administrative
review.
   (D)   The City Council may adopt a schedule of fees to be paid to
administrative hearing officers.
   (E)   The City Manager must adopt written procedures for administering the
administrative citation program.
('72 Code, § 903:40) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)
§ 37.04 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (A)   A person authorized to enforce provisions of the city code may issue
an administrative citation upon belief that a code violation has occurred. The
citation must be issued in person or by first class mail to the person
responsible for the violation or attached to the motor vehicle in the case of a
vehicular offense. The citation must state the date, time, and nature of the
offense, the identity of the person issuing the citation, the amount of the
scheduled fine, and the manner for paying the fine or appealing the citation.
   (B)   The person responsible for the violation must either pay the scheduled
fine or request a hearing within 14 days after issuance of the citation. A
hearing must be conducted within 30 days after a request or within 30 days
after a responsible person fails to return the automatic stay agreement
pursuant to §
37.05(F)(8). Hearings exceeding 30 days may be granted by the Administrative
Enforcement Program Coordinator for good cause. Payment of the fine constitutes
admission of the violation. A late payment fee of 10% of the scheduled fine
amount will be imposed in accordance with §
37.08.
('72 Code, § 903:50) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98; Am. Ord. 2012-1136, passed
3-26-12)
§ 37.05 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING - AUTOMATIC STAY.
   (A)   The City Council must periodically approve a list of persons, from
which the City Manager or designated agent will randomly select a hearing
officer to hear and determine a matter for which a hearing is requested. A
person who has been issued a citation has the right to request, no later than
five days before the date of the hearing, that the assigned hearing officer be
removed from the case. One such request for each case will be granted
automatically by the City Manager or designated agent. A subsequent request
must be directed to the assigned hearing officer who will decide whether the
hearing officer can fairly and objectively review the case. The person issuing
the citation may request the removal of a hearing officer only if the hearing
officer cannot fairly and objectively review the case. If such a finding is
made, the officer must remove that officer from the case, and the City Manager
or designated agent must assign another hearing officer. The hearing officer is
not a judicial officer but is a public officer as defined by M.S. § 609.415.
The hearing officer must not be an employee of the city. The City Manager or
designated agent must establish a procedure for evaluating the competency of
the hearing officers, including comments from citizens and city staff. These
reports must be provided to the City Council.
   (B)   Upon the hearing officer’s own initiative or upon written request of
an interested party demonstrating the need, the officer may issue a subpoena
for the attendance of a witness or the production of books, papers, records or
other documents that are material to the matter being heard. The party
requesting the subpoena is responsible for serving the subpoena in the manner
provided for civil actions and for paying the fees and expenses of any witness.
A person served with a subpoena may file an objection with the hearing officer
promptly but no later than the time specified in the subpoena for compliance.
The officer may cancel or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable or
oppressive. A person who, without just cause, fails or refuses to attend and
testify or to produce the required documents in obedience to a subpoena is
guilty of a misdemeanor. Alternatively, the party requesting the subpoena may
seek an order from district court directing compliance.
   (C)   Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by mail on the
person responsible for the violation at least ten days in advance, unless a
shorter time is accepted by all parties. At the hearing, the parties will have
the opportunity to present testimony and question any witnesses, but strict
rules of evidence do not apply. The hearing officer must record the hearing and
receive testimony and exhibits. The officer must receive and give weight to
evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence, which possesses probative value
commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their
affairs.
   (D)   The hearing officer has the authority to determine that a violation
occurred, to dismiss a citation, to impose the scheduled fine, and to reduce,
stay, or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon compliance with
appropriate conditions. When imposing a penalty for a violation, the hearing
officer may consider any or all of the following factors:
      (1)   The duration of the violation;
      (2)   The frequency or recurrence of the violation;
      (3)   The seriousness of the violation;
      (4)   The history of the violation;
      (5)   The violator’s conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;
      (6)   The good faith effort by the violator to comply;
      (7)   The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;
      (8)   The impact of the violation upon the community; and
      (9)   Any other factors appropriate to a just result.
   (E)   The hearing officer may exercise discretion to impose a fine for more
than one day of a continuing violation, but only upon a finding that the
violation caused a serious threat of harm to the public health, safety, or
welfare or that the accused intentionally and the unreasonably refused to
comply with the code requirement. The hearing officer’s decision and supporting
reasons must be in writing.
      (1)   The failure to pay the fine or request a hearing within seven days
after the citation, or the failure to attend the hearing, constitutes a waiver
of the violator’s rights to an administrative hearing and is an admission of
the violation. A hearing officer may waive this result upon good cause shown.
Examples of “good cause”: death or incapacitating illness of the accused; a
court order requiring the accused to appear for another hearing at the same
time; and lack of proper service of the citation or notice of the hearing.
“Good cause” does not include: forgetfulness and intentional delay.
      (2)   The decision of the hearing officer is final without any further
right of administrative appeal, except for matters subject to administrative
review under §
37.06. In a matter subject to administrative review under §
37.06, the hearing officer’s decision may be appealed to the City Council by
submitting a request in writing to the City Manager or designated agent within
seven days after the hearing officer’s decision.
   (F)   If a person who receives an administrative citation requests an
administrative hearing, the Administrative Enforcement Program Coordinator will
grant an automatic stay of the fine for one year if the following conditions
are met:
      (1)   No same or similar code violations have occurred at the property
within the previous 24 months.
      (2)   No code violations currently exist at the property as determined by
city staff.
      (3)   The code violation does not constitute an immediate health or
safety hazard.
      (4)   The responsible party agrees to allow city staff to enter all areas
of the property for which the administrative citation was issued for purposes
of inspecting the property to ensure compliance.
      (5)   The responsible party admits that the code violation(s) existed and
agrees to have the administrative citation fine stayed for a period of one year
from the date issued.
      (6)   If there are no same or similar code violations within one year,
the Administrative Enforcement Program Coordinator will dismiss the
administrative fine.
      (7)   If there are same or similar code violations within one year as
determined by city staff, the stayed administrative citation fine will be re-
imposed and the amount will be due and payable within 14 days.
      (8)   The responsible party must complete and return to City Hall the
approved automatic stay agreement form within 14 days after receiving it from
the Administrative Enforcement Program Coordinator. A responsible party who
fails to return the signed agreement within the 14-day period will no longer be
eligible to participate in the automatic stay process and an administrative
hearing will then be scheduled.
      (9)   If the property for which the administrative citation was issued is
sold to a new owner during the period of the automatic stay, all stayed fines
will be dismissed.
      (10)   Automatic stays will not be granted for tobacco and alcohol
compliance, false alarm or ruptured gas line citations.
('72 Code, § 903:60) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98; Am. Ord. 2012-1136, passed
3-26-12)
§ 37.06 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   (A)   The hearing officer’s decision in any of the following matters may be
appealed by a party to the City Council for administrative review:
      (1)   An alleged failure to obtain a permit, license, or other approval
from the City Council as required by an ordinance;
      (2)   An alleged violation of a permit, license, other approval, or the
conditions attached to the permit, license, or approval, which was granted by
the City Council; and
      (3)   An alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity,
who has received a license granted by the City Council.
   (B)   The appeal must be heard by the City Council after notice served in
person or by registered mail at least ten days in advance. The parties to the
hearing must have an opportunity to present oral or written arguments regarding
the hearing officer’s decision.
   (C)   The City Council must consider the record, the hearing officer’s
decision, and any additional arguments before making a determination. The
Council is not bound by the hearing officer’s decision, but may adopt all or
part of the officer’s decision. The Council’s decision must be in writing.
   (D)   If the Council makes a finding of a violation, it may impose a civil
penalty not exceeding $2,000 per day per violation, and may consider any or all
of the factors contained in §
37.05(D). The Council may also reduce, stay, or waive a fine unconditionally or
based on reasonable and appropriate conditions.
   (E)   In addition to imposing a civil penalty, the Council may suspend or
revoke any city issued license, permit, or other approval associated with the
violation, if the procedures in the city code have been followed. Any hearing
required in the city code for such suspension or revocation is deemed satisfied
by the hearing before the hearing officer with the right of appeal to the City
Council.
('72 Code, § 903:70) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)
§ 37.07 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the hearing
officer or the City Council in accordance with state law.
('72 Code, § 903:80) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)
§ 37.08 RECOVERY OF CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it
constitutes:
      (1)   A personal obligation of the violator; and
      (2)   A lien upon the real property upon which the violation occurred if
the property or improvements on the property were the subject of the violation
and the property owner was found responsible for that violation.
   (B)   A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the same
manner as taxes. The lien may include the administrative and legal costs
incurred by the city in connection with collecting the unpaid administrative
penalty. Prior to assessing the lien against the property, the city must
attempt to obtain voluntary payment of the administrative penalty and provide
the property owner listed on the tax record with notice and an opportunity to
be heard.
   (C)   A personal obligation may be collected by any appropriate legal means.
   (D)   A late payment fee of 10% of the fine will be assessed for each 30-day
period, or part thereof, that the fine remains unpaid after the due date.
   (E)   During the time that a civil penalty remains unpaid, no city approval
will be granted for a license, permit, or other city approval sought by the
violator or for property under the violator’s ownership or control.
   (F)   Failure to pay a fine is grounds for suspending, revoking, denying, or
not renewing a license or permit associated with the violation.
('72 Code, § 903:90) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98; Am. Ord. 2009-1103, passed
9-8-09)
§ 37.09 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   The following are misdemeanors, punishable in accordance with state law:
   (A)   Failure, without good cause, to pay a fine or request a hearing within
30 days after issuance of an administrative citation.
   (B)   Failure, without good cause, to appear at a hearing which was
scheduled under §
37.05.
   (C)   Failure to pay a fine imposed by a hearing officer within 30 days
after it was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the hearing
officer, unless the matter is appealed under §
37.06.
   (D)   Failure to pay a fine imposed by the City Council within 30 days after
it was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the City Council.
('72 Code, § 903:100) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)
§ 37.10 APPLICABLE LAWS.
   Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and other
applicable code sections, this chapter applies.
('72 Code, § 903:110) (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)
CHAPTER 38: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
38.01   Charges for services and supplies
Unclaimed Property
   
38.15   Custody of found property other than bicycles and animals
   
38.16   Claims by owner
   
38.17   Claim by finder
   
38.18   Transfer to general fund
   
38.19   Sale or appropriation of unclaimed property
   
38.20   Disposition of proceeds
   
38.21   Claim by owner after auction
   
38.22   Summary disposal
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.01 CHARGES FOR SERVICES AND SUPPLIES.
   The City Council may by resolution from time to time adopt and establish a
schedule of rates for miscellaneous services provided by the city employees or
for supplies or materials sold by the city. It is the responsibility of the
Director of Finance to collect the charges and to allocate the monies collected
to the proper fund.
('72 Code, § 220:10) (Ord. 1972-121(A), passed 8-28-72)
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 38.15 CUSTODY OF FOUND PROPERTY OTHER THAN BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   The City Manager shall make provisions for receiving and safekeeping found
property and money delivered to the City Manager and coming into the City
Manager’s possession in the course of municipal operations. A receipt shall be
issued to the person delivering the property or money to the city. The property
must be stored in a safe place and the money deposited with the Director of
Finance in a special account for found money for a period of six months unless
claimed by the true owner. It will then be subject to disposal as unclaimed
property or money.
('72 Code, § 120:00)
§ 38.16 CLAIMS BY OWNER.
   During the six-month period, the City Manager may deliver the property or
order the money paid to the true owner upon proof of ownership satisfactory to
the City Manager after ten days notice by mail to any person who has asserted a
claim of ownership. No order for the disbursement of such money is to be made
without the written order of the City Manager. If ownership cannot be
determined to the City Manager’s satisfaction, the City Manager may refuse to
deliver the property or order the payment of the money to anyone until ordered
to do so by a court.
('72 Code, § 120:05)
§ 38.17 CLAIM BY FINDER.
   If the true owner does not claim the property or money during the six-month
period, the City Manager may deliver the property or order the money to be paid
to the person who delivered it to the City Manager if at the time of delivery
the person indicated in writing that the person wished to assert a claim to the
property or money as a finder.
('72 Code, § 120:10)
§ 38.18 TRANSFER TO GENERAL FUND.
   If any such money is not claimed by the true owner or finder within the six-
month period, the City Manager must then notify the City Clerk and the money
must then be transferred to the general fund of the city.
('72 Code, § 120:15)
§ 38.19 SALE OR APPROPRIATION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   After the six-month period, property not delivered to the true owner or
finder must be sold by the City Manager at a public auction or appropriated to
the use of the city. The City Manager or designee must give ten days published
notice of the auction in the official newspaper. The notice must describe the
article to be disposed of and announce the date, time and place of the auction.
Instead of being sold at auction, any article or property not delivered to the
true owner or finder may be appropriated to the use of the city by any
department in need thereof upon approval of such appropriation by the Council.
('72 Code, § 120:20)
§ 38.20 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   After the auction has been completed, the City Manager must remit the
proceeds thereof to the Director of Finance for deposit in the general fund.
Property offered for sale but not sold and not suitable for appropriation to
the use of the city is deemed worthless and is to be disposed of in such manner
as the City Manager directs.
('72 Code, § 120:25)
§ 38.21 CLAIM BY OWNER AFTER AUCTION.
   The true owner of property sold at auction hereunder must, upon application
to the City Clerk within six months of the auction and upon satisfactory proof
of ownership, be paid the sale price from the general fund.
('72 Code, § 120:30)
§ 38.22 SUMMARY DISPOSAL.
   The City Manager may without notice and in such manner as the City Manager
determines to be in the public interest dispose summarily of any property
coming into the City Manager’s possession which the City Manager determines to
be dangerous or perishable. The City Manager shall make a record of the
pertinent facts of the receipt and disposal of the property and must remit any
funds to the Director of Finance.
('72 Code, § 120:35)
CHAPTER 39: DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
39.01   Establishment
   
39.02   Duties
§ 39.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Department of Planning and Development, which was previously established
by Ordinance 2001-945, is renamed the Department of Community Development. The
Department and all of its employees operate under the jurisdiction of the City
Manager and Department Director.
(Ord. 2001-945, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2002-964, passed 2-25-02)
§ 39.02 DUTIES.
   The Community Development Department, supervised by the Department Director,
responsible to the City Manager, is responsible for comprehensive planning,
current planning, zoning administration, neighborhood and economic development,
general nuisance, zoning, health code enforcement, and building safety and
building maintenance inspections.
(Ord. 2001-945, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2002-964, passed 2-25-02; Am. Ord.
2009-1106, passed 10-5-09)
CHAPTER 40: OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
40.01   Establishment
   
40.02   Duties
§ 40.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created an Operations and Maintenance Department. The
Department and all of its employees operate under the jurisdiction of the City
Manager and Department Director.
(Ord. 2001-946, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2009-1106, passed 10-5-09)
§ 40.02 DUTIES.
   The Operations and Maintenance Department, supervised by the Department
Director, who shall also serve as the city's Director of Public Works and be
responsible to the City Manager, is responsible for planning and managing all
programs for the operation and maintenance of all city transportation
facilities, park facilities, forestry system, water utility, sanitary sewer
utility, recycling utility, storm sewer utility, street and signal lighting
utility, general public and recreational buildings, vehicles/equipment, design
and construction of public improvements, and traffic engineering.
(Ord. 2001-946, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2009-1106, passed 10-5-09)
CHAPTER 41: BACKGROUND CHECKS
Section
   
41.01   Purpose
   
41.02   Applicants for city employment/volunteers/committees
   
41.03   Access to data
   
41.04   Rental properties
§ 41.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish regulations that will
allow law enforcement personnel access to Minnesota's computerized criminal
history information for purposes of conducting criminal history background
checks for prospective tenants of rental properties in the city and for
prospective employment and volunteer positions described in §
41.02.
(Ord. 2010-1115, passed 6-7-10)
§ 41.02 APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT/VOLUNTEERS/COMMITTEES.
   Related to criminal history employment background investigations, the Police
Department is authorized, as the exclusive entity within the city, to conduct a
criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following
employment and volunteer positions in the city:
   (A)   Administration;
   (B)   Community development;
   (C)   Municipal utilities;
   (D)   Finance (including IT);
   (E)   Parks and recreation;
   (F)   Public safety;
   (G)   Operations and maintenance;
   (H)   Any regular part-time, full-time, and seasonal employees of the city
and other positions that will be working with cash, including volunteers that
work with children and/or vulnerable adults;
   (I)   Any groups/individuals that will have access to PD facility, i.e.,
Citizen's Academy attendees, multi-cultural committee, etc.
(Ord. 2010-1115, passed 6-7-10)
§ 41.03 ACCESS TO DATA.
   (A)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order
to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access
data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension computerized
criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department
under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her
designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data
may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority, including the
City Council, the City Administrator, or other city staff involved in the
hiring process.
   (B)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must give
written consent for the Police Department to undertake the investigation. The
written consent must fully comply with the provisions of the Minnesota
Government Data Practices Act, M.S. §§ 13.01 et. seq., regarding the
collection, maintenance, and use of the information. In making decisions with
respect to employment, the city must comply with the provisions in M.S. §§
364.01 et. seq. relating to the rehabilitation of criminal offenders.
(Ord. 2010-1115, passed 6-7-10)
§ 41.04 RENTAL PROPERTIES.
   The Police Department is authorized to do criminal history background checks
on prospective tenants of rental property in the city.
(Ord. 2010-1115, passed 6-7-10)
CHAPTER 42: PREVAILING WAGE REQUIRED
Section
   
42.01   Purpose
   
42.02   Definitions
   
42.03   Prevailing wage rate and prevailing hours of labor required
   
42.04   Contract requirements
   
42.05   Monitoring, compliance and enforcement
   
42.06   Retaliation
   
42.07   Exceptions
   
42.08   No conflict with related federal, state, county, or municipal laws,
ordinances, and policies
 
   
42.99   Violations and penalties
§ 42.01 PURPOSE.
   It is in the public interest that projects as defined herein, be
constructed, maintained and provided by the highest quality of labor that is
reasonably available and that persons working on such projects be compensated
according to the real and equitable value of the work they perform and that the
wages for such work are comparable to wages paid for similar work in the
community as a whole.
(Ord. 2024-1301, passed 5-13-24)
§ 42.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM. A bona fide apprenticeship program registered with
the U.S. Department of Labor or recognized by a governmental agency of the
State of Minnesota.
   BASIC HOURLY RATE. The hourly wage paid to any employee.
   CERTIFIED PAYROLL RECORDS. Payroll records furnished under oath signed by an
owner or officer of an employer and provided to the department named in the
contract no more than five working days after the submission of a written
request by the compliance officer for such records. A certified payroll report
includes information related to the wages and benefits paid to each employee
during the requested time frame specifying for each employee: name; prevailing
wage master job classification; number of hours worked each day; total hours
worked in the week; rate of pay; gross amount earned; each deduction for taxes;
total deductions; net pay for week; dollars contributed per hour for each
benefit, including name and address of administrator; benefit account number;
and telephone number for health and welfare, vacation or holiday,
apprenticeship training, pension, and other benefit programs.
   CITY. The City of Brooklyn Park.
   CITY FUNDS. Payment, financing, or financial assistance provided by the city
in the form of contract payments, grants, loans, loan guarantees, tax increment
financing, tax abatement, proceeds of bonds other than conduit revenue bonds,
land write-downs, lease payments, loan payments, or contract for deed payments.
With respect to a re- lending or re-granting program, the threshold level of
$50,000 of project costs is determined on an individual basis by the cost of
the project of each end borrower or grantee.
   COMPLIANCE OFFICER. Those persons designated by the City Manager to monitor
compliance and investigate complaints pertaining to this subchapter on behalf
of the city or EDA.
   COVERED PERSONS. Contractors, subcontractors, developers, holders of
interests in real property, agents, or other persons regardless of the form of
business entity used by the COVERED PERSON, including but not limited to
individuals, sole proprietorships, and independent contractors, performing all
or part of work on projects.
   DEPARTMENT. The department or office of the city or EDA designated to
undertake a project.
   EDA. The Brooklyn Park Economic Development Authority.
   EDA FUNDS. Payment, financing, or financial assistance provided by the EDA
in the form of contract payments, grants, loans, loan guarantees, tax increment
financing, tax abatement, proceeds of bonds other than conduit revenue bonds,
land write-downs, lease payments, loan payments, or contract for deed payments.
With respect to a re- lending or re-granting program, the threshold level of
$50,000 of project costs is determined on an individual basis by the cost of
the project of each end borrower or grantee.
   LABORERS, MECHANICS, AND WORKERS. All persons utilized, employed, or working
on a project who are doing work usually done by laborers, mechanics, and
workers.
   PREVAILING WAGE RATE. The meaning contained in M.S. § 177.42, Subd. 6, as
determined from time to time by the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry
for the area where the project is located. The Minnesota Department of Labor
and Industry shall determine the prevailing wage rate in accordance with M.S.
§§ 177.41 - 177.44, as amended from time to time, and applicable rules
promulgated thereto, including but not limited to Minn. Rules 5200.1000 -
5200.1120 as amended from time to time. In those instances where the Minnesota
Department of Labor and Industry has not certified and published a prevailing
rate of wages and benefits for a particular work classification, the minimum
wage and benefit rate per hour to be paid for such work classification means
the union wage and benefit rate in the locality of the project as the case may
be for such classification over which the union has jurisdiction.
   PREVAILING HOURS OF LABOR. The hours of labor per day and per week worked
within the area by a larger number of workers of the same class than are
employed within the area for any other number of hours per day and per week.
   PROJECT. Any construction work, demolition work, maintenance work,
remodeling work, or repair work on any roads, bridges, sewers, streets, alleys,
parks, parkways, buildings, water infrastructure, removal of public nuisances
or any other improvement of public or private property involving $50,000 or
more in city funds, or EDA Funds. A PROJECT consists of all construction
necessary to complete the work regardless of the number of contracts involved,
so long as all the contracts awarded are closely related in purpose, time, and
place, and includes, but is not limited to, multiple phases of work.
   RESTITUTION. Includes, but is not limited to, an amount at least equal to
the amount of underpayment of prevailing wages.
(Ord. 2024-1301, passed 5-13-24)
§ 42.03 PREVAILING WAGE RATE AND PREVAILING HOURS OF LABOR REQUIRED.
   (A)   Prevailing wage required. Except as otherwise provided below in §
42.08, all covered persons shall pay laborers, mechanics, and workers directly
performing work on a project, at a minimum, the prevailing wage rate.
   (B)   Prevailing hours of labor. Laborers, mechanics, and workers employed
directly on a project by a covered person may not work more hours than the
prevailing hours of labor, unless paid for all hours in excess of the
prevailing hours of labor at a rate of at least one and one-half times the
basic hourly rate of pay.
   (C)   Notice. All covered persons must post a notice describing the
applicable prevailing wage rate in at least one conspicuous place located on
the project site for the duration of the project.
   (D)   Subcontractors and independent contractors. Any contractor or
subcontractor who plans to accomplish all or a portion of the work under a
contract within the scope of this section using subcontractors or self-employed
independent contractors may be required to provide the city with bona fide
proof of the status of such entities before contract award. All such
subcontractors and independent contractors must have executed a written
contract/subcontract agreement for their work performance. The city will accept
the following as a bona fide demonstration of subcontractor status:
      (1)   Current business filing with the Minnesota Secretary of State along
with the address and telephone number for that entity;
      (2)   Proof of workers' compensation insurance coverage; or
      (3)   Proof of unemployment insurance. If the status of subcontractors or
self-employed independent contractors cannot be determined by submission of the
above information or documentation, subcontractor or independent contractor
status will be disallowed and the individual(s) performing the work will be
included on the engaging company's payroll as employees and will be entitled to
receipt of the prevailing wage from the engaging company for all work
performed.
   (E)   Combined funding. For projects funded in whole or in part with state
funds, contractors and subcontractors may be subject to applicable state
prevailing wage rates and rules for projects meeting state requirements. For
projects funded in whole or in part with federal funds, contractors and
subcontractors may be subject to federal rates, and regulations. For projects
with multiple sources of funding (federal, state, and city), contractors and
subcontractors may be subject to all applicable rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2024-1301, passed 5-13-24) Penalty, see §
42.99
§ 42.04 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.
   The requirements and obligations contained in this chapter are deemed to be
incorporated into the bid specifications and requests for bids or proposals for
all projects are material and binding in terms and conditions of all contracts
and all subcontracts for projects. The prevailing wage rates, prevailing hours
of labor, and hourly basic rates of pay must be set forth specifically in the
contract. All contracts for projects must include applicable schedules of
prevailing wage rates.
(Ord. 2024-1301, passed 5-13-24) Penalty, see §
42.99
§ 42.05 MONITORING, COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Collection of certified payroll records. Pursuant to this chapter and
M.S. §§ 177.41 - 177.44 and applicable rules as may be amended from time to
time, all contractors and subcontractors on a project must collect and/or
furnish a statement on the wages paid to each employee during the prior week.
   (B)   Submission of certified payroll records. Upon request of the city, the
EDA, or a city or EDA designee, all covered persons shall, within five working
days, supply the city or EDA a copy of certified payroll records for all work
performed on the project by laborers, mechanics, and workers.
   (C)   Compliance officer. A compliance officer, as designated by the city,
will investigate all complaints, and monitor compliance upon receipt of a
complaint regarding violations of this chapter. The compliance officer may
request additional records reasonably required to monitor compliance or
investigate complaints regarding this chapter. Upon request made by the
compliance officer, all covered persons shall promptly provide additional
records reasonably required to monitor compliance with this chapter. All
covered persons shall permit the compliance officer physical access to the
project site at any time for the purpose of monitoring compliance with this
chapter.
   (D)   Project completion. Upon completion of the project, the city or the
EDA shall have the right to require an appropriate audit of contractor's books
and records to determine compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of
this chapter. Each contractor and subcontractor shall retain the relevant bi-
weekly payrolls for a period of not less than three years after the completion
of the work.
   (E)   Regulations, guidelines, and procedures. The city shall be authorized
to coordinate implementation and enforcement of this chapter and may promulgate
appropriate guidelines and regulations, and/or procedures for such purposes.
Any such guidelines, regulations, and/or procedures promulgated by the city
will be consistent with this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-1301, passed 5-13-24) Penalty, see §
42.99
§ 42.06 RETALIATION.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for an employer or any other person
to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of, or the attempted exercise
of, any right protected under this chapter.
   (A)   Such rights include but are not limited to: the right to make
inquiries about the requirements of this chapter; the right to inform others
about their rights; the right to inform the person's employer, union, or
similar organization, and/or the person's legal counsel or any other person
about an alleged violation; the right to file an oral or written complaint with
the appropriate authority; the right to cooperate with the city in its
investigations; the right to testify in a proceeding under or related to a
violation; the right to refuse to participate in an activity that would result
in a violation of city, state, or federal law; and the right to oppose any
policy, practice, or act that is prohibited under this chapter.
   (B)   No employer or any other person shall communicate to a person
exercising rights protected under this chapter, directly or indirectly, the
willingness to inform a government employee that the person is not lawfully in
the United States, or to report, or to make an implied or express assertion of
a willingness to report, suspected citizenship or immigration status of an
employee or a family member of the employee to a federal, state, or local
agency because the employee has exercised a right under this chapter.
   (C)   An employer shall not take any adverse employment action or in any
other manner discriminate against an employee because the employee has
exercised in good faith the rights protected under this section.
   (D)   A person injured by a violation of this section may avail themselves
of any civil remedies available to them under the laws of the United States and
the State of Minnesota.
   (E)   It shall be a rebuttable presumption of retaliation if an employer or
any other person takes an adverse action against a person within 90 days of the
person's exercise of rights protected in this section. The employer may rebut
the presumption with clear and convincing evidence that the adverse action was
taken for a permissible purpose.
   (F)   Standard of proof. Proof of retaliation shall be sufficient upon a
showing that an employer or any other person has taken an adverse action
against a person and the person's exercise of rights protected was a motivating
factor in the adverse action, unless the employer can prove that the action
would have been taken in the absence of such protected activity.
   (G)   The protections afforded shall apply to any person who mistakenly but
in good faith alleges violations.
   (H)   A complaint or other communication by any person triggers the
protections of this section regardless of whether the complaint or
communication is in writing or makes explicit reference to this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-1301, passed 5-13-24) Penalty, see §
42.99
§ 42.07 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter does not apply to apprentices working on projects
pursuant to a bona fide registered apprenticeship program for work performed in
their trade. A trainee and a helper are not exempt under this provision; the
covered person must assign the trainee or helper a job classification that is
the “same or most similar” to the work being performed and compensate the
trainee or helper for the actual work performed regardless of the trainee’s or
helper’s skill.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to any project that received final project
approval from the city on or before May 31, 2024.
(Ord. 2024-1301, passed 5-13-24)
§ 42.08 NO CONFLICT WITH RELATED FEDERAL, STATE, COUNTY, OR MUNICIPAL LAWS,
ORDINANCES, AND POLICIES.
   Except as otherwise stated herein, no provision of this chapter is intended
nor shall be construed as being in conflict with any federal, State of
Minnesota, county or municipal laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, or
policies related to the matters to be regulated herein. Further, the
obligations and requirements contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be in
addition to the obligations and requirements contained in any such federal,
state county or municipal laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations.
(Ord. 2024-1301, passed 5-13-24)
§ 42.99 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Civil enforcement. In addition to pursuit of criminal sanctions as
provided in division (B) below, a violation of this chapter may result in the
city or the EDA undertaking the following actions: seeking injunctive relief to
compel specific performance of the requirements contained in this chapter; an
order for restitution to be paid; contract payment withholding sufficient to
satisfy back wages or restitution assessed; contract payment delay; the
withholding of a fee equal to 5% of the entire contract price to the city or
the EDA as liquidated damages; or the termination of the contract with the
violating party. None of the foregoing remedies are intended to be exclusive of
any other remedy, but each is in addition to every other remedy listed above or
otherwise available.
   (B)   Criminal enforcement. Any covered person who violates the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor with each day of violation
constituting a separate offense.
(Ord. 2024-1301, passed 5-13-24)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
         
72.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
         
73.   MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Intent of traffic code; conformance with state law
   
70.02   References to violations
   
70.03   Revocation of licenses
§ 70.01 INTENT OF TRAFFIC CODE; CONFORMANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   The City Council hereby expressly states that its legislative intent is to
adopt the provisions of its traffic control ordinances so they will be
identical to or in substantial agreement with state law as to all matters of
wording and meaning with respect to traffic control and to be identical with
the state law in all matters of penalty for violations thereof as required by
the authorization therefor by state statute and as incumbent upon the city by
the decision of the Supreme Court of the State of Minnesota in the Hoben case.
Violations are referred to throughout this code as “penal offenses” or “petty
offenses.”
('72 Code, § 1105:00(1))
§ 70.02 REFERENCES TO VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the state traffic code are referred to as “misdemeanors” or
“petty misdemeanors” as required by state law, both in this code and in the
state law. If reference is made in this code to “misdemeanor” when the clear
intent is a reference to a violation of this code, “misdemeanor” shall be
construed to mean “penal offense,” or “petty offense,” as the case may be.
('72 Code, § 1105:00(2))
§ 70.03 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Violation by a licensee of any provision of this code or state law
regulating, prescribing conditions or establishing requirements relative to
licenses held by such a licensee shall be grounds for revocation of the
license.
('72 Code, § 1110:00)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Highway Traffic Regulation Act adopted
   
71.02   Unreasonable acceleration
   
71.03   Use of engine or transmission braking devices
Licenses
   
71.15   Driver's license in possession
   
71.16   No license
Operation on Private Property
   
71.25   Definitions
   
71.26   Private property regulations
   
71.27   Public property regulations
   
71.28   Semi-public property regulations
   
71.29   Exceptions
   
71.30   Signs
Weight Restrictions
   
71.40   Definitions
   
71.41   Weight restrictions
   
71.42   No pneumatic tires
   
71.43   Weighing
   
71.44   Load removal
   
71.45   Emergency waiver
   
71.46   Truck routes
   
71.47   Resolution
   
71.48   Special permits
   
71.49   Permit fees
   
71.50   Truck traffic prohibition
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT ADOPTED.
   The regulatory provision of M.S. Chapter 169, as amended, including all
extra Session Laws, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance regulating the
use of highways, streets, and alleys within the city and three copies of said
Act are on file in the city office and marked “City of Brooklyn Park - Official
Copy.” Said Highway Traffic Regulation Act is hereby incorporated in and made a
part of this code as completely as if set out herein in full.
('72 Code, § 700:00) (Ord. 1971-31(A), passed 10-26-71)
§ 71.02 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION.
   (A)    UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE is hereby defined as
acceleration which unnecessarily breaks traction between a tire or tires and
the driving surface, thereby causing a prolonged squealing or screeching sound.
Prolonged squealing or screeching sound shall constitute prima facie evidence
of unreasonable acceleration.
   (B)   Any act of unreasonable acceleration as hereinabove defined by any
motor vehicle upon any street, road, parking lot or driving way, private or
public, within the corporate limits of Brooklyn Park is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and is prohibited.
('72 Code, §§ 720:00 - 720:05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.03 USE OF ENGINE OR TRANSMISSION BRAKING DEVICES.
   (A)   Findings. The City Council of the City of Brooklyn Park finds that the
use of engine or transmission braking devices or methods (a/k/a "jake braking"
or "dynamic braking") within the city limits creates unusual and excessive
noise that unreasonably disturbs and annoys residents. The prohibition of such
devices and methods is necessary to protect the health, safety and public
welfare.
   (B)   Prohibition. No person may slow a vehicle by a device, method or
practice known as engine braking or transmission braking, also referred to as
"jake braking" or "dynamic braking," whereby rapid downshifting of a vehicle's
engine or a compression release device is used in lieu of applying a vehicle's
wheel brakes, causing loud noises to emit from the vehicle's engine and exhaust
system. Such braking by any motor vehicle on any public highway, street,
parking lot or alley within the City of Brooklyn Park is declared to be a
public nuisance and is prohibited.
   (C)   Emergency vehicles. The foregoing provision does not apply to
emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 2000-931, passed 9-5-00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
LICENSES
§ 71.15 DRIVER'S LICENSE IN POSSESSION.
   Every person must have his or her driver's license in his or her immediate
possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and must display the
same upon the demand of a magistrate, peace officer, or by an officer
authorized by law to enforce the laws relating to the operation of motor
vehicles on public streets and highways. Licensee shall upon the request of any
such officer write his or her name in the presence of such officer in order
that the identity of the licensee may be determined.
('72 Code, § 705:00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.16 NO LICENSE.
   No person whose driver's license or driving privileges has been canceled,
suspended, or revoked as provided in Minnesota Statutes shall operate any motor
vehicle, the operation of which requires a driver's license, upon the streets
or highways of Brooklyn Park while such license or privilege is canceled,
suspended or revoked.
('72 Code, § 705:05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Revocation of licenses, see §
110.20
OPERATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 71.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Property owned by a person, firm, voluntary association or
corporation other than a government body and is not generally open for use by
the public.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property that may be used by all the public subject to
reasonable regulations by a governmental body, but does not include public
streets and highways.
   SEMI-PUBLIC PROPERTY. Private property generally open for use by the public
but not owned or maintained by a governmental body. Such property includes
without limitation church property, school property, shopping centers, and all
other property generally used by patrons of a commercial or private business
establishment, but not including private streets in residential areas.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
('72 Code, § 740:00) (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)
§ 71.26 PRIVATE PROPERTY REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful for a person to operate or permit to be operated any vehicle
across or upon any private property, other than driveway portions designated
for vehicular use, without the written or oral permission of the owner or
occupant or lessee thereof. Written permission may be given by a posted notice
of any kind or description that the owner, occupant or lessee prefers as long
as it specifies the kind of vehicles allowed.
('72 Code, § 740:05) (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.27 PUBLIC PROPERTY REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful for a person to operate or permit to be operated any vehicle
upon public property other than an area designated for vehicular use or upon a
path or area designed by appropriate signs permitting such use.
('72 Code, § 740:10) (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.28 SEMI-PUBLIC PROPERTY REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful for a person to operate or permit to be operated any vehicle
upon a portion of semi-public property which is not held open to the public for
vehicular use.
('72 Code, § 740:15) (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.29 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to emergency vehicles,
vehicles used by governmental bodies driving on such property with the consent
of the owner or the owner’s agent or a person in the lawful possession of such
real property.
('72 Code, § 740:20) (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)
§ 71.30 SIGNS.
   It is unlawful for a person to post, mutilate, or remove any notice or sign
provided in this chapter upon lands over which the person had no right, title,
interest or license.
('72 Code, § 740:25) (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
§ 71.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SINGLE AXLE. All wheels whose centers may be included within two parallel
transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
   VEHICLE. All motor vehicles, house trailers and trailers, of all kinds or
any objects or contrivances being moved on wheels of any kind, but excluding
vehicles of public bodies.
('72 Code, § 735:00) (Am. Ord. 1993-714, passed 2-8-93)
§ 71.41 WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles
equipped with pneumatic tires upon the streets or highways of Brooklyn Park
when the gross weight of any single wheel exceeds 9,000 pounds, or when the
gross weight of any single axle exceeds 18,000 pounds. The City Engineer may
prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any public streets or impose further
restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated upon the street,
whenever the street by reason of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climate
conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles
thereon is prohibited, or the permissible weights thereon are reduced.
   (B)   The City Engineer is authorized to erect and maintain or cause to be
erected and maintained, signs plainly indicating the prohibition or restriction
at each end of that portion of any street affected thereby, and the prohibition
or restriction shall not be effective unless and until the signs are erected
and maintained.
('72 Code, § 735:05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.42 NO PNEUMATIC TIRES.
   A vehicle or combination of vehicles not equipped with pneumatic tires shall
be governed by the foregoing provisions, except that the gross weight
limitations shall be reduced by 40%.
('72 Code, § 735:10)
§ 71.43 WEIGHING.
   Any police officer or duly authorized person having reason to believe that
the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful, is authorized to require the
driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the same, either by means of a
portable or stationary scale and may require that such vehicles be driven to
the nearest public scale. For purpose of weighing, vehicles must not be taken a
greater distance than five miles, except in such cases where scales of
sufficient capacity are not available within such limits.
('72 Code, § 735:15) (Am. Ord. 1988-591(A), passed 2-22-88)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.44 LOAD REMOVAL.
   An officer upon weighing a vehicle and load, as above provided, determines
that the weight is unlawful, the officer may require the driver to stop the
vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until a portion of the load is
removed as may be necessary to reduce the gross weight to a limit as permitted
under this subchapter. All material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner
or driver of the vehicle at the risk of the owner or driver.
('72 Code, § 735:20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.45 EMERGENCY WAIVER.
   In case of emergency or necessity a person may make written application to
the City Engineer for a waiver of a provision of this chapter or any regulation
imposed hereunder and the Engineer may in the Engineer’s sound discretion grant
such waivers under terms and conditions as the Engineer may deem advisable.
('72 Code, § 735:25)
§ 71.46 TRUCK ROUTES.
   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles upon the
streets or highways under the jurisdiction of Brooklyn Park which exceeds the
limits established in §
71.41 of this chapter, except on such routes as may be designated as truck
routes and identified as such by signs and markings to that effect.
('72 Code, § 735:30) (Am. Ord. 1982-386(A), passed 4-12-82)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.47 RESOLUTION.
   Truck routes are established by resolution to be adopted by the City Council
and the resolution must designate the route and the weight restrictions
applicable on the streets.
('72 Code, § 735:35) (Am. Ord. 1982-386(A), passed 4-12-82)
§ 71.48 SPECIAL PERMITS.
   Vehicles prohibited by §
71.46 of this chapter may be driven over other routes by special permit issued
under authority of the City Council or for delivery to homes or businesses in
which event the vehicle shall be driven over the shortest possible route.
('72 Code, § 735:40)
§ 71.49 PERMIT FEES.
   Under the provisions of this subchapter, other ordinances and certain state
statutes, the City Engineer has been given the responsibility for issuing
certain transportation permits for oversize and/or overweight vehicles that
wish to operate on city streets. The processing of the permits requires an
expenditure of time by engineering personnel and other administrative costs in
processing these permits. The City Council may establish from time to time a
permit fee for these services.
('72 Code, § 735:45) (Am. Ord. 1986-541(A), passed 8-18-86)
§ 71.50 TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITION.
   The City Council may, by resolution duly adopted, authorize that trucks over
a specified gross vehicle weight, be prohibited from operating on certain
streets or portions of streets. The restrictions established by City Council
resolution are not to become effective until the specified streets are posted
with clearly visible and appropriate signs which inform drivers of vehicles of
the restrictions. Any truck restrictions established under this provision do
not apply to city maintenance trucks nor to any truck making a delivery to, or
a pickup from, any lot or premises along the street.
('72 Code, § 735:50) (Am. Ord. 1993-714, passed 2-8-93)
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
Section
   
72.01   Parking prohibited
   
72.02   Close to curb
   
72.03   Lights
   
72.04   Stopping and standing prohibited
   
72.05   Unauthorized moving of parked car
   
72.06   Obstruct traffic
   
72.07   Alleys
   
72.08   All night
   
72.09   24-Hour limitations
   
72.10   Commercial vehicle, equipment, and trailer parking
   
72.11   Snow
   
72.12   For sale or washing
   
72.13   Schools
   
72.14   Narrow streets
   
72.15   One-way streets
   
72.16   Congested places
   
72.17   Parking for the handicapped
   
72.18   Illegal parking
   
72.19   Impound vehicles
   
72.20   Notice to owner
   
72.21   Owner unknown
§ 72.01 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   All on-street parking of vehicles is prohibited in this municipality except
in compliance with this chapter.
('72 Code, § 725:00) (Am. Ord. 1975-210(A), passed 10-27-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.02 CLOSE TO CURB.
   It is unlawful to stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway.
('72 Code, § 725:03) (Am. Ord. 1993-720, passed 5-24-93)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.03 LIGHTS.
   (A)   If a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon a street within a
business or residence district as defined in purpose statement of zoning
districts, no lights need to be displayed upon the parked vehicle.
   (B)   If a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a business
or residence district during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and
one-half hour before sunrise, the vehicle must be equipped with one or more
lamps which must exhibit a white light on the roadway side visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear.
   (C)   A lighted headlamp upon a parked vehicle must be depressed or dimmed.
('72 Code, § 725:15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.04 STOPPING AND STANDING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the places described
as follows:
   (A)   On a sidewalk.
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway or directly across therefrom.
   (C)   Within an intersection.
   (D)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
   (E)   On a crosswalk.
   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
   (G)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or
traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
   (H)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the
City Engineer has indicated a different length by signs or markings.
   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance of any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance of any fire station within 75 feet of
said entrance.
   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
   (L)   On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb
of a street.
   (M)    Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within
a highway tunnel or underpass.
   (N)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (O)   On any boulevards.
   (P)   Within 20 feet (either side) of any mailbox located on a public right-
of-way, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
Sundays are excepted.
('72 Code, § 725:18) (Am. Ord. 1980-320(A), passed 4-28-80; Am. Ord. 1984-467
(A), passed 10-8-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.05 UNAUTHORIZED MOVING OF PARKED CAR.
   It is unlawful to move a vehicle not lawfully under the person’s control
into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
('72 Code, § 725:21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.06 OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   It is unlawful to park a vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of
the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
('72 Code, § 725:24)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.07 ALLEYS.
   It is unlawful to park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and it is unlawful to stop,
stand, or park a vehicle within an alley, in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
('72 Code, § 725:27)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.08 ALL NIGHT.
   It is unlawful, except for a physician on an emergency call, to park a
vehicle on a street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day
from November 1 in one calendar year until March 31 in the following calendar
year.
('72 Code, § 725:30) (Am. Ord. 1983-424(A), passed 5-23-83; Am. Ord. 2023-1292,
passed 9-25-23)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.09 24-HOUR LIMITATIONS.
   It is unlawful to park a vehicle on a street in the city for a period longer
than 24 consecutive hours.
('72 Code, § 725:31) (Ord. 1983-424(A), passed 5-23-83)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.10 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, EQUIPMENT, AND TRAILER PARKING.
   It is unlawful to park or store on any public street, an open-bed or
enclosed trailer, boat trailer, camper trailer, utility trailer, or any other
type of trailer, farm vehicle or farm equipment, construction materials or
equipment, or commercial vehicle.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, a COMMERCIAL VEHICLE is defined
as:
         (a)   Any vehicle with Minnesota license plates carrying a designation
of “BY” (bus, except as provided below), “CZ” (commercial zone truck); or
         (b)   Any vehicle with Minnesota license plates carrying a designation
of “Y” (truck with Minnesota base plate) or “T” (farm truck), and displaying on
the lower right corner of the license plate any gross vehicle weight
designation of “G” through “T”; or
         (c)   Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 12,000
pounds except passenger-type trucks and vans; or
         (d)   Vehicles meeting the definition of "commercial vehicles" in §
152.105 of the City Code.
      (2)   Commercial vehicles described above shall include but are not
limited to buses, dump trucks, tow trucks, truck-tractors, step vans, cube
vans, delivery trucks and the like.
   (B)   Open-bed or enclosed trailers, boat trailers, camper trailers, utility
trailers, or any other type of trailers, farm vehicles, farm equipment,
construction equipment, and commercial vehicles are subject to all other
provisions of this section; however, the prohibitions of this section do not
apply to the following:
      (1)   If such trailers, vehicles, or equipment are actually in the
process of being loaded or unloaded, up to a maximum time period of 48 hours.
      (2)   Commercial vehicles that are directly ancillary to construction and
parked within 1,000 feet of the related construction site.
      (3)   Vehicles licensed with disability plates, or displaying a
disability parking certificate.
      (4)   One-ton passenger vans used solely for transporting persons.
      (5)   Vehicles with Minnesota license plates carrying a designation of
“SB” (school bus).
('72 Code, § 725:32) (Ord. 1993-720, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 2003-1008, passed
11-3-03; Am. Ord. 2009-1100, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord. 2010-1116, passed 7-6-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.11 SNOW.
   (A)   It is unlawful, except for a physician on an emergency call, to park
or leave a vehicle on a street when there is two inches or more of snow on the
street and snow is falling or has fallen within the previous 24 hours or snow
is blowing or has been blowing within the previous 24 hours.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, except an operator of an emergency
motor vehicle on an emergency call, to park or leave standing any vehicle on
any street after a snow emergency has been declared until that street has been
plowed curb to curb.
   (C)   The city may declare a snow emergency when the City Manager, or his or
her designated representative, determines an emergency exists in the city, or
in a section or sections thereof, because of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice,
snowdrifts, or other natural phenomena which create, or are likely to create,
hazardous road conditions. Notice of such emergency may be given by press,
radio, television, or electronic means, such as the city's website.
   (D)   In the event of a violation of this section, the city is authorized to
issue citations and remove violating vehicles, or cause them to be removed, and
the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the actual costs of removal
and storage. A removed vehicle shall not be released to the owner or the
owner's authorized agent until those costs have been paid.
('72 Code, § 725:33) (Am. Ord. 2018-1234, passed 7-23-18)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.12 FOR SALE OR WASHING.
   It is unlawful to park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal purpose of
displaying the vehicle for sale, washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle
except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
('72 Code, § 725:36)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.13 SCHOOLS.
   (A)   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon either or both sides of a street adjacent to school property when
such parking would, in the City Engineer’s opinion, interfere with traffic or
create a hazardous situation.
   (B)   If official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side
of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, it is
unlawful to park a vehicle in any such designated place.
('72 Code, § 725:39)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.14 NARROW STREETS.
   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking
upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon
one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway
does not exceed 30 feet or for snow removal.
   (B)   If official signs prohibiting parking are erected as authorized
herein, it is unlawful to park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of
any such sign.
('72 Code, § 725:42)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.15 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, it is unlawful to stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking. The City Engineer is authorized to
determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of
any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof.
('72 Code, § 725:45)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.16 CONGESTED PLACES.
   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized to determine and designate by proper
signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic.
   (B)   If official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein it is unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such
designated place.
('72 Code, § 725:48)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.17 PARKING FOR THE HANDICAPPED.
   It is unlawful to park in, obstruct or occupy with a motor vehicle, any
parking space, on public or private property, designated or signed as
handicapped parking, unless the vehicle prominently displays an insignia or
certificate issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to M.S. §
169.345, Subd. 3, and the vehicle is being used by a physically handicapped
person, as defined in M.S. § 169.345, Subd. 2. Signs designating handicapped
parking spaces shall be presumed to have been placed according to law, unless
the contrary is established by competent evidence. Violation of this provision
is a petty offense. Motor vehicles found in violation of this section may be
ordered removed by a member of the Police Department under the procedures
stated in §§
72.19 through
72.21.
('72 Code, § 725:50) (Ord. 1977-238(A), passed 2-28-77)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.18 ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing
the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, may
constitute in evidence an inference that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, such violation occurred.
('72 Code, § 725:51) (Am. Ord. 1975-210(A), passed 10-27-75)
§ 72.19 IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are authorized to remove, or cause to be
removed, a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other
place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police
Department, or otherwise maintained by this city under the circumstances set
forth as follows:
   (A)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or
causeway, or in any tube, tunnel or underpass where such vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic.
   (B)   When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody and removal.
   (C)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of
traffic, or snow plowing.
('72 Code, § 725:54)
§ 72.20 NOTICE TO OWNER.
   If an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this chapter
and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in
the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer must
immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of the
fact of removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which the vehicle
has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a
copy of the notice must be given to the proprietor of the garage.
('72 Code, § 725:57)
§ 72.21 OWNER UNKNOWN.
   If an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this chapter and does
not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other
reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore provided, and
in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three
days, then and in that event the officer must immediately send or cause to be
sent written report of removal by mail to the State Department whose duty it is
to register motor vehicles, and must file a copy of the notice with the
proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice
must include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place
from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and name of the garage or
place where the vehicle is stored.
('72 Code, § 725:60)
CHAPTER 73: MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES
Section
Motor Scooters and Motorcycles
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Operation of motor scooters and motorcycles
   
73.03   Obedience to traffic regulations
Bicycles
   
73.15   Registration
   
73.16   Bicycle rentals
   
73.17   Impounding of bicycles
   
73.18   Sale of impounded bicycles or found property
Snowmobiles
   
73.30   Intent
   
73.31   Definitions
   
73.32   Operation on city streets, highways or public lands
   73.33 to 73.37   [Reserved]
   
73.38   Operations of snowmobiles; exceptions
   
73.39   Prohibition for unprotected and protected animals
   
73.40   Penalty
Go-Karts
   
73.50   Definitions
   
73.51   Operation on city roadways prohibited
 
   
73.99   Penalty
MOTOR SCOOTERS AND MOTORCYCLES
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR SCOOTER and MOTORCYCLE. Every vehicle or device which is self-
propelled, which is not moved by human power, which does not derive its power
from overhead wires, and is not used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, and, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be drawn upon an
alley, street or highway, having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed
to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, including
bicycles with motor attached, but excluding a farm tractor.
('72 Code, § 715:00)
§ 73.02 OPERATION OF MOTOR SCOOTERS AND MOTORCYCLES.
   It is unlawful to operate a motor scooter or motorcycle within this
municipality while doing any of the acts prohibited in the divisions which
follow:
   (A)   It is unlawful to allow any passenger to ride on the vehicle, unless
it is equipped for more than one rider.
   (B)   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle while standing on same or perform
any trick riding or operate in any manner other than in a customary manner for
operating a vehicle.
   (C)   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon any sidewalk or upon any
private property without the express consent of the owner.
('72 Code, § 715:05)
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   A person operating a motor scooter or motorcycle within this municipality
must observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, must turn
only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the extreme right hand
side of the street or highway, and must pass to the left when overtaking other
vehicles and pedestrians that are slower moving.
('72 Code, § 715:10)
Penalty, see § 73.99
BICYCLES
§ 73.15 REGISTRATION.
   It is unlawful to ride a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway or other
public property in the city unless the bicycle is registered with the city
prior to March 1, 1977, or is registered with the state on or after that date.
('72 Code, § 405:01) (Ord. 1979-285(A), passed 3-12-79)
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.16 BICYCLE RENTALS.
   It is unlawful for a rental agency to rent or offer any bicycle for rent
unless the bicycle is registered with the State of Minnesota pursuant to M.S.
Chapter 168C, and a license is attached thereto and the bicycle is properly
equipped, in good mechanical condition and equipped with adequate brakes.
('72 Code, § 405:40) (Am. Ord. 1979-285(A), passed 3-12-79)
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.17 IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   If an unregistered bicycle is found unattended on any public property,
street or alley, the bicycle is deemed to have been operated in violation of
this subchapter and is to be impounded by the Police Department. The impounded
bicycle may be surrendered to the owner thereof upon satisfactory proof of
ownership and registration of the bicycle with the State of Minnesota.
('72 Code, § 405:45) (Am. Ord. 1979-285(A), passed 3-12-79)
§ 73.18 SALE OF IMPOUNDED BICYCLES OR FOUND PROPERTY.
   At the expiration of 60 days after impounding or after property has been
found, any property which has not been claimed may be sold at public auction or
at private sale. If sold at public auction, notice containing a description of
any property to be sold shall be published in the official newspaper at least
ten days prior to the auction sale. If the City Manager determines that it is
in the best interest of the city to dispose of the property at a private sale,
the City Manager must solicit at least two bids for the property and establish
the other terms of sale.
('72 Code, § 405:50) (Am. Ord. 1986-531(A), passed 6-9-86)
SNOWMOBILES
§ 73.30 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to supplement the laws of the State of
Minnesota, M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.88, and M.S. Chapters 168 through 171, with
respect to the operation of snowmobiles. This subchapter is not intended to
allow what the state statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the state statutes
expressly allow.
('72 Code, § 730:00)
§ 73.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its agencies
and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
steered by skis or runners.
('72 Code, § 730:05)
§ 73.32 OPERATION ON CITY STREETS, HIGHWAYS OR PUBLIC LANDS.
   It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon the roadway, public boulevard or
on any public lands within the City of Brooklyn Park.
('72 Code, § 730:10) (Am. Ord. 1999-912, passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord. 2001-959,
passed 11-13-01)
Penalty, see § 73.99
§§ 73.33 to 73.37 [Reserved].
§ 73.38 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Operation on private property. It is unlawful for a person to operate
a snowmobile on private property of another without permission of the owner of
the property. It is a sufficient defense to the prosecution for violation of
this division that the defendant has permission in writing from the owner or
lawful occupant of the land.
   (B)   Operation on publicly owned lands. It is unlawful for a person to
operate a snowmobile on publicly owned land, including schools, park property,
playgrounds and recreation areas, except where permitted by §
73.32 and division (E) of this section.
   (C)   Noise. It is unlawful for a person to operate a snowmobile in a manner
so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, annoys, or
interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons.
   (D)   Unattended snowmobiles. It is unlawful for the owner or operator to
leave or allow a snowmobile to be or remain unattended on public property.
   (E)   Exception.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B) of this section, the
Director of Recreation and Park shall have the authority to supervise and
regulate events or programs in connection with events conducted by the City’s
Recreation and Park Department in which snowmobiles are used.
      (2)   The Council upon recommendation of the Recreation and Park
Department may designate park areas or publicly owned property where snowmobile
operations will not interfere with the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. The
Council may establish rules and regulations which will provide a location on
park or publicly owned property which will provide recreational facilities for
snowmobile users. The Council may, from time to time, by resolution designate
city park or public areas deemed available for such use and establish rules and
regulations compatible with the site and the use of abutting properties.
('72 Code, §§ 730:40 - 730:65) (Am. Ord. 1972-117(A), passed 8- 14-72; Am. Ord.
1999-912, passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord. 2001-959, passed 11-13-01)
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.39 PROHIBITION FOR UNPROTECTED AND PROTECTED ANIMALS.
   M.S. § 97B.091 is adopted as a city ordinance and is incorporated in and
made a part of this subchapter as completely as if set out herein in full.
('72 Code, § 730:70) (Am. Ord. 1999-912, passed 10-25-99)
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.40 PENALTY.
   A person registered as owner of a snowmobile may be fined or imprisoned for
committing a penal offense, or both, if a snowmobile bearing that person’s
registration number is operated contrary to the provisions of M.S. §§ 84.81 to
84.88, M.S. § 97B.091 or of §§
73.30 through
73.39, both inclusive, of this code. The registered owner may not be so fined
if the snowmobile was reported as stolen to the Commissioner or a law
enforcement agency at the time of the alleged unlawful act, or if the
registered owner demonstrates that the snowmobile either was stolen or was not
in use at the time of the alleged unlawful act, or if the registered owner
furnishes to law enforcement officers upon request the identity of the person
in actual physical control of the snowmobile at the time of such violation. The
provisions of this subdivision do not apply to a person who rents or leases a
snowmobile if the person keeps a record of the name and address of the person
or persons renting or leasing the snowmobile, the registration number thereof,
the departure date and time, and expected time of return thereof. The record
must be preserved for at least six months and is prima facie evidence that the
person named therein was the operator thereof at the time it was operated
contrary to M.S. §§ 84.81 to 84.88, M.S. § 97B.091 or of §§
73.30 through
73.39 of this code. The provisions of this subdivision do not prohibit or limit
the prosecution of a snowmobile operator for violating any of the sections
referred to in this division.
('72 Code, § 730:75) (Am. Ord. 1983-440(A), passed 11-21-83; Am. Ord. 1999-912,
passed 10-25-99)
GO-KARTS
§ 73.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GO-KART. Every self-propelled device or vehicle in, upon or by which any
person is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or natural terrain or
designed to travel on wheels in contact with the ground, except automobiles,
trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, snowmobiles, and devices or vehicles moved
by human power.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a go-kart.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
go-kart.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its agencies
and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.
('72 Code, § 710:00)
§ 73.51 OPERATION ON CITY ROADWAYS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for a person to operate a go-kart upon the roadway of any
street or highway within the City of Brooklyn Park.
('72 Code, § 710:05)
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided is subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates a provision of M.S. §§ 84.81 to 84.88 or §§
73.30 through 73.39 of this chapter or any regulation of the Commissioner of
Natural Resources or of the Commissioner of Public Safety promulgated pursuant
to law is guilty of a penal offense and is to be punished according to §
10.99 of this code.
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   ABANDONED PROPERTY
         
91.   ALARM SYSTEMS
         
92.   ANIMALS
         
93.   RESERVED
         
93A.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
         
94.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
         
95.   PARK REGULATIONS
         
96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
97.   GRASS, WEED, AND TREE REGULATIONS
         
98.   GARBAGE AND RECYCLING
         
99.   SEWERS
         
100.   WATER
         
101.   PRIVATE SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS
         
102.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
         
103.   BUILDING CODE
         
104.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE
         
105.   SWIMMING POOLS
         
106.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
         
107.   GRAFFITI
         
108.   STORM SEWER UTILITY
         
109.   STREET/SIGNAL LIGHTING SYSTEM
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Disposition of abandoned property
Abandoned Vehicles
   
90.15   Findings and purpose
   
90.16   Definitions
   
90.17   Violation to abandon motor vehicle
   
90.18   Authority to impound vehicles
   
90.19   Sale; waiting periods
   
90.20   Notice of taking and sale
   
90.21   Right to reclaim
   
90.22   Operator's deficiency claim; consent to sale
   
90.23   Disposition by impound lot
   
90.24   Disposal authority
   
90.25   Contracts; reimbursement by MPCA
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Procedure. Except for vehicles impounded pursuant to §
90.18 of this Chapter, all property lawfully coming into possession of the city
will be disposed of as provided in this section which is adopted pursuant to
M.S. § 471.195, as it may be amended from time to time. Vehicles impounded
pursuant to §
90.18 of this Chapter will be disposed of according to the procedures of §§
90.15 et seq.
   (B)   Storage. The department of the city acquiring possession of the
property will arrange for its storage. If city facilities are unavailable or
inadequate, the department may arrange for storage at a privately-owned
facility.
   (C)   Claim by owner. The owner may claim the property by exhibiting
satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or maintenance
costs incurred by it. A receipt for the property must be obtained upon release
to the owner.
   (D)   Sale. If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the city
for 60 days, the property will be sold to the highest bidder at a public
auction conducted by the Chief of Police or Chief’s designee after two weeks’
published notice setting forth the time and place of the sale and the property
to be sold. If the auction is to be held by way of an on-line auction service
on the internet, an advertisement will be published in the city's designated
newspaper two weeks prior to sale with the internet address of the auction and
a general list of the property to be sold. The City of Brooklyn Park will also
advertise on the city's designated website with a link to the internet auction
service.
   (E)   Disposition of proceeds. The proceeds of the sale will be placed in
the general fund of the city. If the former owner makes application and
furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within six months of the sale, the
former owner will be paid the proceeds of the sale of the property less the
costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of published notice and
other costs of the sale.
(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01; Am. Ord. 2005-1047, passed 8-22-05)
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 90.15 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The presence of abandoned vehicles, junk vehicles, inoperable
vehicles, and abandoned property unlawfully kept on property in the city
constitutes a public health and safety hazard because they can harbor disease,
provide harborage and breeding places for vermin, and present physical dangers
to the well-being of children and other residents. The presence of these
vehicles and abandoned property constitutes a blight on the landscape and
therefore becomes a detriment to the environment and general welfare of the
residents. In many instances these vehicles and abandoned property are kept on
property by the owners of the property themselves, occupants, or by others with
the consent of the property owner. It is necessary to adopt regulations that
are more stringent than those contained in M.S. Ch. 168B for the removal of
these types of vehicles and abandoned property.
   (B)   M.S. Ch. 168B, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as they may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference. Sections
90.15 through
90.25 of this code are adopted under the authority of M.S. § 168B.09, Subd. 2,
as it may be amended from time to time. If any of these provisions are less
stringent that the provisions of M.S. Ch. 168B or Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as it
may be amended from time to time, the statute or rule shall take precedence.
(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01)
§ 90.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter and
Chapter 152 of the City Code, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Property which, after appropriate notification to the
property owner, the owner fails to redeem, or property to which the owner
relinquishes possession without reclaiming the property.
   DEPARTMENT. The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
   IMPOUND. To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody. There are two types of
impounds: public and nonpublic.
   IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OPERATOR. A person who engages in impounding or
storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. OPERATOR
includes an operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot, regardless of
whether tow truck service is provided.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. A vehicle that has a missing or defective part that is
necessary for the normal operation of the vehicle; or is stored on blocks,
jacks or other supports; or has not had a current vehicle license for at least
90 days for operation within the State of Minnesota or otherwise in a condition
which renders it unlawful to operate in the State of Minnesota.
   JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle that is not in operable condition, or which is
partially dismantled, or which is used for sale of parts or as a source of
repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, or which is kept for scrapping,
dismantling, or salvage of any kind, or has no substantial potential use
consistent with its usual function.
   MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE. Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the operation
of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as tires, used
motor oil, lead acid batteries, and antifreeze, but excluding scrap metal.
   MPCA or AGENCY. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NONPUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot that is not a public impound lot.
   POSTED. Placing a sign or notice in a conspicuous location on the property
or vehicle.
   PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot owned by or contracting with a unit of
government under section §
90.24.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
publicly maintained way when any part of it is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to removal and impoundment
pursuant to §
90.18(B), or M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended from time to time, but is not
a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.
   UNIT OF GOVERNMENT. Includes a state department or agency, a special purpose
district, and a county, statutory or home rule charter city, or town.
   VEHICLE. Any vehicle, motor vehicle, semitrailer, or trailer as those terms
are defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may be amended from time to time, including
pioneer, classic collector and street rod vehicles, or any machine or equipment
propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground
by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides, and transport persons or property
or pull machinery It also includes, without limitation, automobile, truck,
trailer, motorcycle and tractor.
   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to
the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things as the motor,
drive train and wheels.
(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01)
§ 90.17 VIOLATION TO ABANDON MOTOR VEHICLE.
   A person who abandons, parks, keeps, places or stores any junk vehicle or
inoperable vehicle on any public, or on any private property without the
consent of the person in control of the property is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.18 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   (A)   Inoperable or junk vehicles on public property. No person shall park,
keep, place, store or abandon any junk vehicle or inoperable vehicle on a
public street, alley, or public property within the city. The City Manager or
Manager’s designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are
contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any inoperable or
junk vehicle.
   (B)   Unauthorized vehicles. The City Manager or Manager’s designee or any
peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the city may
take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under M.S. § 169.041 as
it may be amended from time to time. A vehicle may also be impounded after it
has been left unattended in one of the following public or private locations
for the indicated period of time:
      (1)   In a public location not governed by M.S. § 169.041 as it may be
amended from time to time:
         (a)   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace officer, four hours;
         (b)   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic hazard to the
traveling public, as determined by a peace officer, immediately; or
         (c)   That is a parking facility or other public property owned or
controlled by a unit of government, properly posted, four hours.
   (C)   Vehicles on private property. No person in charge or control of any
property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or
otherwise, shall allow any junk vehicle or inoperable vehicle to be parked,
stored, kept, or otherwise placed on property longer than 48 hours; and no
person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for a
longer time than 48 hours, except as follows:
      (1)   If the vehicle is located in an enclosed building; or
      (2)   The vehicle is located on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such
business enterprise; or
      (3)   The vehicle is located in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.
   (D)   Illegally parked vehicles. The City Manager, Manager’s designee or any
peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the city may
take into custody and impound any vehicle which is illegally parked and the
owner of which has been ordered to remove it.
   (E)   Vehicles impeding road or utility activities. The City Manager,
Manager's designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are
contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any vehicle that
is impeding, obstructing, or interfering with the repair, construction, or
maintenance activities of public utilities or public transportation. Except in
an emergency situation, reasonable notice must be given to the vehicle owner or
user of such activities.
   (F)   Vehicles obstructing traffic or emergency response. The City Manager,
Manager's designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are
contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any vehicle,
whether occupied or not, that is: (1) found stopped, standing, or parked in
violation of an ordinance or state statute; (2) reported stolen; or (3)
impeding firefighting or other emergency activities, snow removal or plowing,
or the orderly flow of traffic.
   (G)   Notice and hearing. Before impounding a junk vehicle or inoperable
vehicle, the Manager or suthorized designee must give 10 days' written notice
through service by mail, by posting a notice on the property, or by personal
delivery to the owner of or person in control of the property on which the
vehicle is located. When the property is occupied, service upon the occupant is
deemed service upon the owner. Where the property is unoccupied or abandoned,
service may be by mail to the last known owner of record of the property or by
posting on the property. The notice must state:
      (1)   A description of the vehicle;
      (2)   That the vehicle must be moved or properly stored within 10 days of
service of the notice;
      (3)   That if the vehicle is not removed or properly stored as ordered,
the vehicle will be towed and impounded at an identified location;
      (4)   That the vehicle may be reclaimed in accordance with the procedures
contained in M.S. § 168B.07 or disposed of in accordance with M.S. § 168B.08;
and
      (5)   That the owner of the vehicle or the owner of or person in control
of the property on which the vehicle is located may in writing request a
hearing before the City Manager or authorized designee.
   (H)   Hearing, action. If a hearing is requested during the 10-day period,
the City Manager or authorized designee must promptly schedule the hearing, and
no further action on the towing and impoundment of the vehicle may be taken
until the City Manager's decision is rendered. At the conclusion of the
scheduled hearing, the City Manager or authorized designee may (1) cancel the
notice to remove the vehicle; (2) modify the notice; or (3) affirm the notice
to remove. If the notice is modified or affirmed, the vehicle must be disposed
of in accordance with the city's written order.
   (I)   Impounding procedures. The impounded vehicle will be surrendered to
the owner by the towing contractor only upon payment of the required impound,
towing and storage fees. Vehicle impounding will be conducted in accordance
with M.S. Ch. 168B, governing the sale of abandoned motor vehicles.
(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01)
§ 90.19 SALE; WAITING PERIODS.
   (A)   Sale after 15 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or
sale under §
90.23, 15 days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be:
      (1)   A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subdivision; or
      (2)   An abandoned vehicle.
   (B)   Sale after 45 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or
sale under §
90.23, 45 days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be an
unauthorized vehicle.
§ 90.20 NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE.
   (A)   Contents; notice given within five days. When an impounded vehicle is
taken into custody, the city or impound lot operator taking it into custody
must give notice of the taking within five days. The notice must:
      (1)   Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year, make, model
and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if the information can be
reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is being held;
      (2)   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the
vehicle under §
90.21; and
      (3)   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the appropriate time allowed
under §
90.19 is deemed a waiver by them of all right, title and interest in the
vehicle and contents and a consent to the transfer of title to and disposal or
sale of the vehicle and contents pursuant to §
90.23.
   (B)   Notice by mail or publication. The notice must be sent by mail to the
registered owner, if any, of an impounded vehicle and to all readily
identifiable lienholders of record. The Department makes this information
available to impound lot operators for notification purposes. If it is
impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of
the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice will be published once in
a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was
towed from or abandoned. Published notices may be grouped together for
convenience and economy.
   (C)   Unauthorized vehicles; notice. If an unauthorized vehicle remains
unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice was sent under division (B) of
this section, a second notice must be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and to
all readily identifiable lienholders of record.
§ 90.21 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
   (A)   Payment of charges. The owner or any lienholder of an impounded
vehicle will have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or impound lot
operator taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and storage charges
resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or 45 days, as
applicable under §
90.19, after the date of the notice required by §
90.20.
   (B)   Lienholders. Nothing in this chapter is to be construed to impair any
lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right of a
lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, GARAGE KEEPER is an
operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle
storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles.
§ 90.22 OPERATOR'S DEFICIENCY CLAIM; CONSENT TO SALE.
   (A)   Deficiency claim. The nonpublic impound lot operator has a deficiency
claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the reasonable costs of
services provided in the towing, storage and inspection of the vehicle minus
the proceeds of the sale or auction. The claim for storage costs may not exceed
the costs of:
      (1)   25 days storage for a vehicle described in section §
90.19(A); and
      (2)   55 days storage for a vehicle described in §
90.19(B).
   (B)   Implied consent to sale. A registered owner who fails to claim the
impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under section §
90.19 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and consents to the
disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer of title.
§ 90.23 DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.
   (A)   Auction or sale.
      (1)   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents taken into
custody by the city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under §
90.21, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible pursuant
to §§
90.20 and
90.21.
      (2)   The purchaser must be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles which will be sufficient title to dispose of the
vehicle. The receipt must also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle
and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
   (B)   Unsold vehicles. Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the city or
public impound lots pursuant to division (A) of this section must be disposed
of in accordance with §
90.24.
   (C)   Sale proceeds; public entities. From the proceeds of a sale under this
section by the city or public impound lot of an abandoned or unauthorized motor
vehicle, the city will reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and
storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice and publication costs
incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this chapter. Any remainder from
the proceeds of a sale must be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled
lienholder for 90 days and then must be deposited in the treasury of the city.
   (D)   Sale proceeds; nonpublic impound lots. The operator of a nonpublic
impound lot may retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted under the
authority of division (A) of this section. The operator may retain all proceeds
from sale of any personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that were not
claimed by the owner or the owner's agent before the sale, except that any
suspected contraband or other items that likely would be subject to forfeiture
in a criminal trial must be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement
agency.
§ 90.24 DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.
   The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal. The
city may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and
storage of not more than five abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without
advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-day period.
§ 90.25 CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY MPCA.
   (A)   MPCA review and approval. If the city proposes to enter into a
contract with a person licensed by the MPCA pursuant to this section or a
contract pursuant to section §
90.24, the MPCA may review the proposed contract before it is entered into by
the city, to determine whether it conforms to the MPCA's plan for solid waste
management and is in compliance with MPCA rules. A contract that does so
conform may be approved by the MPCA and entered into by the city. Where a
contract has been approved, the MPCA may reimburse the city for the costs
incurred under the contract that have not been reimbursed under §
90.23. Except as otherwise provided in §
90.24, the MPCA shall not approve any contract that has been entered into
without prior notice to and request for bids from all persons duly licensed by
the MPCA to be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to M.S. § 116.07, as it
may be amended from time to time; does not provide for a full performance bond;
or does not provide for total collection and transportation of abandoned motor
vehicles, except that the MPCA may approve a contract covering solely
collection or transportation of abandoned motor vehicles where the MPCA
determines total collection and transportation to be impracticable and where
all other requirements herein have been met and the unit of government, after
proper notice and request for bids, has not received any bid for total
collection and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles.
   (B)    The city may perform work. If the city utilizes its own equipment and
personnel pursuant to its authority under §
90.24, and the use of the equipment and personnel conforms to the MPCA's plan
for solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA rules, the city may
be reimbursed by the MPCA for reasonable costs incurred which are not
reimbursed under §
90.23.
   (C)   The city required to contract work. The MPCA may demand that the city
contract for the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal
pursuant to the MPCA's plan for solid waste disposal. If the city fails to
contract within 180 days of the demand, the MPCA, through the Department of
Administration and on behalf of the city, may contract with any person duly
licensed by the MPCA for the disposal.
CHAPTER 91: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Operation of system
   
91.03   Miscellaneous
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment or devices, either mechanically or
electrically operated, which signals, either audibly or in any other manner so
as to be seen, heard, or otherwise detected inside or outside the protected
area serviced by the alarm system, that an incident is occurring which could
reasonably be expected to summon police or fire services. ALARM SYSTEM does not
include systems affixed to motor vehicles, trailers or recreational motor
vehicles unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site.
   ALARM USER. The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind which uses an alarm system to protect its premises,
regardless of whether it owns or leases the system.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. A device which utilizes the public primary
telephone trunk lines or other dedicated lines to select a predetermined or
assigned telephone number and which transmits, by a pre-recorded voice message
or code signal, that an incident of the kind noted in the definitions of
“Alarms System” has occurred.
   FALSE ALARM. Any activation of an alarm system that results in a response by
police or fire personnel where an emergency does not exist. FALSE ALARM
includes, but is not limited to, activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligent use or
maintenance of the alarm system by the alarm user or the alarm user's employee
or agents. FALSE ALARM does not include alarm activations caused by utility
company power outages, by climatic conditions such as unusually strong winds or
lightning, or by any other conditions that are clearly beyond the control of
the alarm manufacturer, installer, and user. FALSE ALARM does not include
activation of an alarm system as the result of an effort or order to upgrade,
install, test, or maintain the system if the police and/or fire departments
and, where applicable, the central monitoring agency for the alarm system are
each notified before such work on the alarm system.
('72 Code, § 1025:00) (Ord. 1994-752, passed 1-10-94)
§ 91.02 OPERATION OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   Operation and maintenance. The alarm user must maintain the alarm
system and premises in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms.
   (B)   Signed statement. Within five days of notification of each false
alarm, the alarm user must submit a signed statement to the Brooklyn Park
Police Department or Fire Department, stating the apparent cause of the false
alarm and the measure(s) taken or to be taken to remedy the problem. An
administrative penalty of $25 must be paid by the alarm user to the city for
each signed statement not returned to the city within five days. Payment of
these penalties may be enforced by civil action.
   (C)   Penalties. An administrative penalty must be paid by the alarm user to
the city for each false alarm in excess of three during a calendar year. The
penalty shall be $50 for the fourth alarm and shall increase by the sum of $25
for each succeeding false alarm thereafter. Payment of these penalties may be
enforced by civil action.
   (D)   Hearing. An alarm user who receives an administrative citation
including a change under this chapter may request a hearing before a hearing
officer to contest the charge under the City of Brooklyn Park Administrative
Penalties Program, as outlined in
Chapter 37.
('72 Code, § 1025:05) (Ord. 1994-752, passed 1-10-94; Am. Ord. 2003-996, passed
4-14-03)
§ 91.03 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   Local exterior alarms with audible sounds must not sound for a period
exceeding 15 minutes.
   (B)   It is unlawful to intentionally set off a false alarm.
   (C)   The use of automatic dialing devices is permitted, except that such
device must not be set or programmed to dial the Brooklyn Park Police
Department, Fire Department or the Hennepin County Sheriff's Dispatch Center.
   (D)   (1)   Alarm users whose protected premises are located within the city
must provide, upon the occurrence of its first false alarm and on an ongoing
basis, the following information:
         (a)   The name, date of birth and address of the alarm user, alarm
owner (if different from the user) and the alarm servicer.
         (b)   The type of alarm system being used.
         (c)   The person(s) designated by the alarm user as its contact person
(s) for purposes of alarm related matters and home or appropriate telephone
number.
      (2)   The provision of this information must be an on- going requirement
such that the Police/Fire Department must be notified of additions or changes.
   (E)   All information and statistics collected and maintained in the
administration of this section are deemed non-public data and security
information exempt from disclosure pursuant to state statute.
('72 Code, § 1025:10) (Ord. 1994-752, passed 1-10-94)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Except for the occurrence of a false alarm, or the failure to submit a
signed statement, the remedy for which is an administrative fine under the
city’s administrative penalties program, a violation of any other provision of
this chapter is a penal offense and will be punished according to §
10.99 of this code.
('72 Code, § 1025:15) (Ord. 1994-752, passed 1-10-94)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   [Reserved]
   
92.03   Restraint
   
92.04   Confinement
   
92.05   Animal noise
   
92.06   Public nuisances
   
92.07   Animal defecation
   
92.08   Notice to owner
   
92.09   Responsibility of owner
   
92.10   Pound
   
92.11   Diseased animals prohibited
   
92.12   Impounding
   
92.13   Enforcement
   
92.14   Quarantine
   
92.15   Commercial kennels
   
92.16   Certain male dogs to be neutered
   
92.17   Animals posing an imminent threat
   
92.18   Treatment during impounding
   
92.19   Redemption
   
92.20   Notice to owner; disposal of unredeemed animals
   
92.21   Limit of animals on one premises
   
92.22   Abandonment
   
92.23   Reports by pound keeper
   
92.24   Nuisance prohibited
   
92.25   Potentially dangerous dogs
   
92.26   Dangerous dogs
   
92.27   Concealment
   
92.28   Restrictions on future ownership
   
92.29   Basic care
   
92.30   Public protection from dogs
   
92.31   Conditioning equipment prohibited
   
92.32   Identification and vaccination
Deer Management
   
92.40   Prohibition on deer feeding
Beekeeping
   
92.50   Definitions
   
92.51   Purpose
   
92.52   Beekeeping limited
   
92.53   Colony location
   
92.54   Colony density
   
92.55   Required conditions
   
92.56   Registration required
   
92.57   Inspection
   
92.58   Appeal and hearing procedure
Cross-reference:
   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Cats, dogs, domestic animals and wild animals, and crossbreeds with
wild animals not customarily maintained at all times in an enclosure cage
within a dwelling.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. That person or agency designated by the City Manager
to control the keeping of animals within Brooklyn Park.
   AT LARGE. An animal is “at large” when it is not under restraint. A dog is
not "at large" when accompanied by an owner at an off leash dog exercise area.
   CAT. An animal of the species Felis Domestica.
   COMMERCIAL KENNEL. A place in a proper business zoning district where
animals are kept, congregated, or confined and where the business of selling,
boarding (during the day or overnight), breeding, showing, treating, training,
or grooming animals is conducted.
   COMPETENT PERSON. An individual that has full control of the animal, either
by physical control or verbal control.
   DANGEROUS DOG.  
      (1)   Any dog that has:
         (a)    Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;
         (b)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the
owner's property; or
         (c)   Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      (2)   A dog is dangerous when the owner or custodian is in possession of
training apparatus, paraphernalia, or drugs intended to be used to prepare or
train dogs for fighting and the dog displays evidence that it has been or will
be fought.
   DOG. An animal of the species Canis Domestica.
   GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which creates a high probability of death,
or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a permanent or
protracted loss or  impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or
other serious bodily harm.
   KEEPING OF ANIMAL. Providing for any animal in compliance with M.S. Chapter
346, Companion Animal Welfare Act.
   OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREA. A public, city-designated area where a dog
owner is permitted to allow a dog or dogs to socialize and exercise off leash,
subject to the rules and regulations for such an area.
   OWNER. Any person, group, or corporation owning, keeping, harboring, or
having custody of an animal.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.  Any dog that:
      (1)   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on
public or private property;
      (2)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person
on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property,
other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or
      (3)   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
   SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or which causes a temporary but substantial loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or which causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
   UNATTENDED ANIMAL. An animal unaccompanied or not in the control of a
competent person.
   UNDER RESTRAINT.  An animal is "under restraint" if it is controlled by a
leash or within a vehicle being driven or parked on a public street, or within
the property limits of its owner's premises under some form of physical
restraint such as a leash or fence or in the presence of a competent person. An
unattended animal on the property of another, without the consent of such
property owner, is "at large" and not under restraint, even though it is on a
leash.
('72 Code, § 415:00) (Am. Ord. 1977-251(A), passed 10-11-77; Am. Ord. 1989-626
(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2001-944,
passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2006-1067, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed
2-23-09; Am. Ord. 2010-1114, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 2012-1149, passed 9-4-12)
§ 92.02 [RESERVED].
§ 92.03 RESTRAINT.
   No person shall permit an animal to be at large in this city, but must keep
such animal under restraint at all times. No person having custody or control
of any animal shall permit the same to be on any unfenced area or lot abutting
upon a street, public park, public place or upon any private land without being
effectively restrained from moving beyond such unfenced area or lot; nor shall
any person having custody or control of any animal permit the same at any time
to be on any street, public park, school ground or any public place without
being effectively restrained by chain or leash not exceeding eight feet in
length. A dog may be unrestrained by a chain or leash in an off leash dog
exercise area, subject to the rules and regulations for such an area. Service
animals may be allowed off leash in the performance of a disability-related
task.
('72 Code, § 415:18) (Am. Ord. 2001-944, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2010-1114,
passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 2022-1269, passed 1-10-22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.04 CONFINEMENT.
   The owner must confine within a building or secure enclosure any fierce, or
vicious animal except when muzzled and in the control of a competent person.
Every female animal in heat must be confined in a building, secure enclosure,
veterinary hospital, or commercial kennel, or must be controlled on a leash
while being exercised, provided it does not create a public nuisance. While on
the owner's property, dogs designated as dangerous must be kept in a proper
enclosure as described in M.S. §§ 347.50, 347.52 and this code.
('72 Code, § 415:21) (Am. Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 2009-1096,
passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 2012-1149, passed 9-4-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.05 ANIMAL NOISE.
   It is unlawful to keep any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long
continued noise unreasonably annoys or disturbs the peace, quiet, comfort, or
repose of any ordinary person or persons in the vicinity.
('72 Code, § 415:23) (Am. Ord. 1984-455(A), passed 6-11-84; Am. Ord. 1990-654
(A), passed 6-25-90)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.06 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   The keeping of an animal that annoys other persons is a public nuisance and
is unlawful. Any animal which damages property, plantings, or structures, or
which deposits fecal matter on public or private property of others or which
scratches or bites persons while at large, or which habitually barks, cries, or
mews, or which chases or approaches persons on public streets or sidewalks in a
threatening manner, after the owner has been notified of such acts pursuant to
§
92.08 hereof, is declared to be a nuisance. Upon the receipt of a written
complaint of such annoyance signed by the occupants of two or more neighboring
properties, the Animal Control Officer must notify the owner of such animal
that the nuisance must be abated within 48 hours. Failure to obey such notice
is a penal offense.
('72 Code, § 415:24) (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.07 ANIMAL DEFECATION.
   (A)   Animal defecation prohibited. Any person being the owner of or having
charge of any animal not confined to that person's property must immediately
remove any feces deposited on public or private property. Any such person must
have in their possession a means to collect and dispose of all fecal matter in
a proper manner. A person convicted of a violation of this provision is guilty
of a penal offense.
   (B)   Accumulation of feces prohibited. A person being the owner of or
having charge of any animal must keep their premises free from an unreasonable
accumulation of fecal matter. A person convicted of a violation of this
provision is guilty of a penal offense.
('72 Code, § 415:245) (Ord. 1993-713, passed 1-11-93; Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed
10-27-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.08 NOTICE TO OWNER.
   In addition to the provisions of §
92.06, anyone may send or deliver to the City Manager or other person the City
Manager designates, or the Animal Control Officer a written complaint, stating
the acts committed by an animal, the name and address of the person owning or
harboring the animal, and the name and the address of the person making the
complaint. The City Manager or other person the City Manager designates, or the
Animal Control Officer must then promptly notify the person owning or harboring
the dog or cat of the acts complained of, must request that the animal be
restrained from committing any more such acts, and must inform the person that
if the animal continues to commit such acts thereafter then the person owning
or harboring the animal may be convicted hereunder.
('72 Code, § 415:25) (Ord. 1977-251(A), passed 10-11-77; Am. Ord. 1997-861,
passed 10-27-97)
§ 92.09 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   A person who owns or harbors an animal declared to be a nuisance hereunder
is deemed to be maintaining a nuisance.
('72 Code, § 415:26) (Ord. 1977-251(A), passed 10-11-77)
§ 92.10 POUND.
   The Council may provide for an animal pound, either within or outside the
municipal limits.
('72 Code, § 415:27)
§ 92.11 DISEASED ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly bring into the city, or have in
the person’s possession, an animal which is afflicted with infectious or
contagious diseases. All such diseased animals must be destroyed in a humane
manner unless the disease is curable and the animal is under the care of, and
receiving treatment from, a licensed veterinarian.
('72 Code, § 415:28) (Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.12 IMPOUNDING.
   It is the duty of the Animal Control Officer to apprehend any animal found
running at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter
and to impound such animal in the pound or other suitable place pending
compliance or a determination on the animal's disposition. The Animal Control
Officer upon receiving any animal must make a complete registry, entering the
breed, color, sex, if such information can be obtained safely. If the animal
bears no identification which reasonably reveals its ownership, the Animal
Control Officer shall impound the animal in the pound for a period of at least
seven days. Immediately upon impounding an animal, reasonable efforts shall be
made to notify the owner and inform the owner of the animal's confinement and
the procedures for release of the animal to the owner. Any animal impounded,
with the exception of a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog or a dog
that has inflicted substantial or great bodily harm upon a person, may be
reclaimed by the owner within five days after such impoundment. Before the
owner shall be permitted to recover possession of the animal, the owner shall
pay the impound facility all required fees and costs of impoundment. An animal
that is not redeemed by its owner within five days after impounding may be
euthanized and disposed of in a sanitary manner by the Animal Control Officer.
('72 Code, § 415:30) (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2006-1067,
passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 2019-1246, passed
11-12-19; Am. Ord. 2025-1309, passed 3-10-25)
§ 92.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   To enforce this chapter, the Animal Control Officer or a police officer may
enter upon private property where there is reasonable cause to believe that an
animal is on the premises and does not have the proper identification as
required by ordinance, or that there is an animal on the premises which is not
being kept, confined, or restrained.
('72 Code, § 415:33) (Am. Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 2019-1246,
passed 11-12-19)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.14 QUARANTINE.
   An animal that has bitten a person will immediately be euthanized, if
required to test for rabies as determined by state or county health agencies,
as recommended by the Center for Disease Control, or at the request of the
owner. An animal not euthanized under this section must be quarantined by a
responsible person designated by the Chief of Police, or by the owner, if all
other sections of this chapter are met, as approved by the Animal Control
Officer for a period of ten days and must be kept apart from other animals.
Upon completion of the ten-day requirement the animal must be examined by a
veterinarian, designated by this municipality, to determine if the animal has a
disease which may have been transmitted by such bite, such impound and
examination are the expense of the animal owner. Upon the expiration of the ten
days, if the required and satisfactory examination by a licensed veterinarian
occurs, the quarantine will be lifted. If during the course of the quarantine,
it is determined that the animal may be afflicted with an infectious disease,
the Animal Control Officer must take immediate action to determine conclusively
if such a disease is present in the animal, up to and including euthanasia and
testing of the animal. Any animal which has been bitten by a rabid animal must
be euthanized or impounded and kept in the same manner for a period of six
months; provided that if the animal, which has been bitten by a rabid animal,
has been vaccinated at least three weeks before such bite and within one year
of such bite and if it is again immediately vaccinated, then the animal must be
confined or impounded for a period of 40 days before it is released. This
section does not apply to a dog serving in the city’s Police Department as a
part of its canine patrol or to a dog that has inflicted substantial or great
bodily harm on a human being on public or private property without provocation,
which is governed by §
92.26.
('72 Code, § 415:36) (Am. Ord. 1973-156(A), passed 11-12-73; Am. Ord. 1989-626
(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2006-1067,
passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)
§ 92.15 COMMERCIAL KENNELS.
   The following performance standards are for commercial kennels:
   (A)   The owner of a commercial kennel must receive a license per M.S. §
347.31 through 347.40.
   (B)   Fecal waste. All animal wastes must be disposed of in a timely and
sanitary manner. In no event shall there be an accumulation of waste beyond 24
hours. In public areas during operating hours, all wastes must be disposed of
immediately or, at minimum, such waste to be stored in a container with tight
fitting lids and disposed of in an approved sanitary manner at the end of the
day.
   (C)   All cages, pens, benches, boxes, or receptacles in which animals are
confined shall be easily cleanable, durable and constructed of non-corrosive
material and maintained in good repair. Such cages and pens shall also be
properly sufficient and humane in size for the confinement of such animals.
   (D)   Abandoned animals. M.S. § 346.37 regulating the abandonment of animals
in commercial kennels is hereby adopted by reference and fully set forth in
this code.
   (E)   Sale of animals. Any commercial kennel engaging in the sale of animals
must comply with Minn. Rules § 1720.1560 which are hereby adopted by reference.
   (F)   Bites. All sections of this chapter pertaining to dog bites shall
apply to commercial kennels.
   (G)   Humane treatment. M. S. §§ 343.20 through 343.36 relating to cruelty
to animals are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in and made a part
of this article as though fully set forth in this section.
   (H)   Exception. Hospitals, clinics, and federally-regulated medical
facilities operated by licensed veterinarians exclusively for the care and
treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2012-1149, passed 9-4-12)
§ 92.16 CERTAIN MALE DOGS TO BE NEUTERED.
   A male dog which bites a human must be neutered upon completion of the
quarantine requirement, unless the animal owner can demonstrate that neutering
the animal will significantly decrease its value for show. This neutering is to
be at the expense of the animal owner. If the owner or person in whose custody
the animal resides refuses to neuter the dog, the Animal Control Officer will
declare the keeping of the dog to be a public nuisance and must by written
notice direct the owner or person keeping the dog to abate the public nuisance,
and if the person fails to do so, the person is guilty of a penal offense. Dogs
designated as dangerous and potentially dangerous must be sterilized at the
owner's expense as set forth in this code and M.S. § 347.52.
('72 Code, § 415:38) (Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2009-1096,
passed 2-23-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.17 ANIMALS POSING AN IMMINENT THREAT.
   If an animal is diseased, vicious, rabid, or exposed to rabies, or poses an
imminent threat to public safety, and if such animal cannot be impounded after
a reasonable effort, or cannot be impounded without serious risk to the persons
attempting it, the animal may be immediately killed by or under the direction
of the Animal Control Officer or a police officer.
('72 Code, § 415:39) (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2009-1096,
passed 2-23-09)
§ 92.18 TREATMENT DURING IMPOUNDING.
   Any dog or cat or other animal impounded must be kept with kind treatment
and comfort.
('72 Code, § 415:42) (Am. Ord. 1989-626(A), passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1997-861,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2006-1067, passed 11-27-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.19 REDEMPTION.
   (A)   An animal may be redeemed from the pound during the hours set forth by
the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, by the owner upon paying the following
fees and charges:
      (1)   Providing proof of current rabies vaccination.
      (2)   The boarding fee.
      (3)   An impounding fee.
      (4)   Any fees incurred by the city or impound facility for required
treatment of the animal.
      (5)   Any animal that is not microchipped will be microchipped by the
impounding facility, prior to release, at the owner's expense.
   (B)   This section does not require the pound keeper or the Animal Control
Officer to extend services other than during regular business hours unless it
is reasonably convenient for those persons to provide those services.
('72 Code, § 415:45) (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2019-1246,
passed 11-12-19; Am. Ord. 2025-1309, passed 3-10-25)
§ 92.20 NOTICE TO OWNER; DISPOSAL OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.
   The Animal Control Officer must make a reasonable effort to notify the owner
of any dog or cat or other impounded animal which has identification on it from
which the name and address of the animal’s owner can be readily determined. For
the purposes of this section, a reasonable effort to notify the owner will have
been made if within 48 hours of impound a written notice containing the date
and time of impoundment, the location and phone number of the pound, the end of
the impoundment period and a copy of this section, is either mailed by first
class mail or delivered to the place of residence of the owner, if known. If at
the end of the impounding period the animal is not reclaimed by the owner, such
animal is deemed to have been abandoned and becomes the property of the pound
keeper for disposal in a humane manner. The notice, reclamation, and
disposition of a dangerous dog is set forth in §
92.26 of this code.
('72 Code, § 415:48) (Am. Ord. 1985-482(A), passed 4-22-85; Am. Ord. 1997-861,
passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2009-2096, passed 2-23-09)
§ 92.21 LIMIT OF ANIMALS ON ONE PREMISES.
   It is unlawful to keep more than three animals at any one dwelling unit
except at a commercial kennel. If an animal owner exceeds the amount of animals
kept at any one dwelling unit, the owner has eight weeks to remove all animals
exceeding the limit specified in this section. Up to five animals over six
months of age may be kept at any one dwelling unit only if at least two of the
animals are trained or in training by a recognized program with an established
curriculum for animals to perform certain tasks such as animals that provide
assistance to persons with disabilities, police K-9s, detecting animals, and
search and rescue animals and animals awaiting adoption in foster homes under a
recognized animal foster program.
('72 Code, § 415:54) (Am. Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-861,
passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2018-1230, passed 4-23-18; Am. Ord. 2025-1309, passed
3-10-25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.22 ABANDONMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to abandon any animal in this municipality.
Failure to timely redeem animals from the city pound constitutes abandonment as
provided in this section.
('72 Code, § 415:57) (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.23 REPORTS BY POUND KEEPER.
   The pound keeper must make an accurate written report each month to the City
of Brooklyn Park stating all cats or other animals impounded, the duration of
any such impoundment, all animals destroyed, and any other pertinent data
relating to animal control which may be requested by the City Manager or
designated person.
('72 Code, § 415:75) (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97)
§ 92.24 NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   Nothing herein contained in this chapter shall be construed to allow any
acts which constitute a nuisance under this code.
('72 Code, § 415:76) (Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89)
§ 92.25 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Registration. Any person who has a dog that has been determined to be
a potentially dangerous dog pursuant to this code or pursuant to M.S § 347.50,
must register the dog as a potentially dangerous dog with the city.
      (1)   The owner shall also make the potentially dangerous dog available
to be photographed by the city's Animal Control Officer for identification
purposes at a time and place specified by Animal Control.
      (2)   The registration of the potentially dangerous dog must be renewed
annually with the city until the dog is deceased or is determined to be no
longer potentially dangerous. The current owner of a potentially dangerous dog
must notify the city's Animal Control Officer in writing of the death of the
dog or its transfer to another owner or to another location within 30 days of
the dog's death or transfer. If requested by the city, the owner must execute
an affidavit under oath setting forth the circumstances of the dog's death and
disposition or the complete name, address and telephone number of the person to
whom the dog was transferred to. The Chief of Police, or its designee, shall be
allowed to inspect the animal and the place where the animal is now located at
any reasonable time.
      (3)   The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must be 18 years of age or
older.
   (B)   Appeal. An appeal of the designation must be submitted on the form
supplied by the city. The completed form and designation appeal fee must be
returned to the Chief of Police within seven days of notification. Potentially
dangerous determination appeals consist of a record review by the Chief of
Police, or its designee. The owner shall be notified of the results of the
record review within ten days of the receipt of the completed form and
designation appeal fee.
   (C)   Microchip implantation. All dogs that are determined to be potentially
dangerous pursuant to the definition contained within this code or pursuant to
M.S § 347.50 by the city shall be implanted with a microchip for identification
purposes within 14 days of the date the dog is declared potentially dangerous.
All costs related to purchase and implantation of the microchip shall be borne
by the owner of the dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the
microchip is not implanted by the owner, the city may have a microchip
implanted in the dog at the owner's expense. Upon request, the owner or
custodian of a potentially dangerous dog must make the dog available to Animal
Control for an inspection to determine whether a microchip has been implanted.
   (D)   Sterilization. The city may require a potentially dangerous dog to be
sterilized at the owner's expense within 14 days of the date the dog is
declared potentially dangerous. If the owner does not have the dog sterilized,
Animal Control may have the dog sterilized at the owner's expense. Upon
request, the owner or custodian of a potentially dangerous dog must make the
dog available to Animal Control for an inspection or provide proof in the form
of a statement from a licensed veterinarian to determine whether the dog has
been sterilized.
   (E)   Obedience class. The city may require that the owner and its
potentially dangerous dog attend and complete an approved obedience class.
   (F)   Removal of potentially dangerous dog classification. A dog determined
to be a potentially dangerous dog may be evaluated by a professional animal
behaviorist. The owner may provide to the city a report by such animal
behaviorist. If the report states that the dog has been rehabilitated, the dog
may no longer be classified as potentially dangerous and is no longer subject
to the requirements of this section.
   (G)   Victim's request. Upon the request of an adult victim, the Chief of
Police may waive the designation as a potentially dangerous dog so long as the
owner of the dog complies with the requirements of this code and state law as
it applies to potentially dangerous dogs.
   (H)   Removal of potentially dangerous dog classification. Beginning six
months after a dog is declared a potentially dangerous dog, an owner may
request on an annual basis that the city review the dog's designation as a
potentially dangerous dog. The owner must provide evidence that the dog's
behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion
of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive behavior, or
other factors. If Animal Control finds sufficient evidence that the dog's
behavior has changed, the city may rescind the potentially dangerous dog
classification. The owner of the dog shall be notified in writing of the review
results within ten business days of receipt of the request.
   (I)   Misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be
subject to the penalties specified by state statute.
   (J)   Exemption. Dogs owned and controlled by local, state and federal law
enforcement agencies that are used in law enforcement or related activities and
service animals, which are individually trained or being trained to do work or
perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, are exempt
from the provisions of this section. A dog may not be declared potentially
dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained under the conditions
set forth in M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 5.
(Ord. 2006-1067, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord.
2019-1246, passed 11-12-19)
§ 92.26 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Registration. Any person who has a dog that has been determined to be
a dangerous dog pursuant to this code or pursuant to M.S. § 347.50, Subd. 1,
must register the dog as a dangerous dog with the city, pay an annual fee, and
meet all the other requirements provided for in M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 2.
      (1)   The owner shall also make the dangerous dog available to be
photographed by the city's Animal Control Officer for identification purposes
at a time and place specified by Animal Control.
      (2)   The registration of the dangerous dog must be renewed annually with
the city until the dog is deceased or is determined to be no longer dangerous.
The current owner of the dangerous dog must notify the city's Animal Control
Officer in writing of the death of the dog or its transfer to another owner or
to another location within 30 days of the dog's death or transfer. If requested
by the city, the owner must execute an affidavit under oath setting forth the
circumstances of the dog's death and disposition or the complete name, address
and telephone number of the person to whom the dog was transferred to.
      (3)   The owner of the dangerous dog must be 18 years of age or older.
      (4)   Dangerous dogs registered in the city shall be provided with a
warning symbol for posting on the owner's property pursuant to M.S. § 347.51,
Subd. 2a. The city may charge the registrant a reasonable fee for the symbol.
      (5)   Owners of dogs designated as dangerous must affix an additional tag
to the dog's collar identifying the dog as dangerous and containing the
dangerous dog symbol as further set forth in M.S. § 347.51
   (B)   Keeping of dangerous dogs.
      (1)   Confinement.  A dangerous dog must be securely confined indoors or
confined in a secure outdoor enclosure suitably sized for the dog and otherwise
meeting the requirements of a proper enclosure. An enclosure is secure and
proper within the meaning of this section if it meets the following
specifications:
         (a)   A floor area of 32 square feet per animal kept in such
enclosure;
         (b)   A sidewall height of five feet, constructed of 11 gauge of
heavier wire with openings that do not exceed two inches; and
         (c)   If the enclosure is on a permeable surface, the fence must be
buried a minimum of 18 inches into the ground;
         (d)   The support posts are one and one-quarter inch or larger steel
pipe buried a minimum of 18 inches into the ground;
         (e)   A cover over the entire kennel that is constructed of the same
gauge wire as the sidewalls or heavier with openings no greater than two
inches;
         (f)   An entrance/exit self closing, self locking gate constructed of
the same material as the sidewalls and with openings no greater than two
inches; and
         (g)   In compliance with all zoning setbacks requirements unless a
variance is obtained.
   When the dog is confined in the enclosure, all access points of the
enclosure must be locked. An Animal Control Officer may seize a dangerous dog
that is unconfined while on the owner's property and not otherwise restrained
as provided below.
      (2)   Restraint. If the dangerous dog is outside of the proper enclosure,
it must be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain not exceeding three
feet in length, and having a tensile strength sufficient to restrain it. The
dog's muzzle must be designed in a manner that will prevent it from biting any
person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration.
      (3)   Sterilization. The city may require a dangerous dog to be
sterilized at the owner's expense within 14 days of the date the dog is
declared dangerous. If the owner does not have the dog sterilized, Animal
Control may have the dog sterilized at the owner's expense. Upon request, the
owner or custodian of a dangerous dog must make the dog available to Animal
Control for an inspection to determine whether the dog has been sterilized.
      (4)   Microchip implantation. All dogs that are determined to be
dangerous shall be implanted with a microchip for identification purposes. All
costs related to purchase and implantation of the microchip shall be borne by
the owner of the dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and identification
number of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the microchip is not
implanted by the owner, the city may have a microchip implanted in the dog at
the owner's expense. Upon request, the owner or custodian of a dangerous dog
must make the dog available to Animal Control for an inspection to determine
whether a microchip has been implanted.
      (5)   Surety bond or liability insurance. Before the city will register a
dangerous dog the owner must present sufficient evidence that the owner has
obtained a surety bond or a policy of liability insurance in the amounts set
forth in M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 2.
   (C)   Obedience class. The city may require that the owner and its dangerous
dog attend and complete an approved obedience class.
   (D)   Removal of dangerous dog classification. Beginning six months after a
dog is declared a dangerous dog, pursuant to M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 3(a), an
owner may request on an annual basis that the city review the dog's designation
as a dangerous dog. The owner must provide evidence that the dog's behavior has
changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience
training that includes modification of aggressive behavior, or other factors.
If Animal Control finds sufficient evidence that the dog's behavior has
changed, the city may rescind the dangerous dog classification. The owner of
the dog shall be notified in writing of the review results within ten business
days of receipt of the request.
   (E)   Seizure of dangerous dogs.  The city may seize any dangerous dog if
the dog has been declared dangerous and the owner has not registered the dog
pursuant to this section within 14 days of receiving notice of the dangerous
dog declaration. The city may also seize a dangerous dog that is not being
maintained in a secure enclosure, a dog that is outside of the enclosure and is
not under the required physical restraint, or if the owner of a dangerous dog
has otherwise violated M.S. § 347.54. The city shall provide the dog's owner
with notice of the dog's seizure. A dangerous dog seized under this section may
be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of impound and boarding fees and
presenting proof that all requirements of this section are being met. A
dangerous dog that is not reclaimed within seven days of the date of the notice
may be disposed of as provided in this section and the dog's owner shall be
responsible for any costs incurred in the confinement and disposal of the dog.
   (F)   Destruction of dangerous dogs.  The Chief of Police or the Chief of
Police's designee, after having been advised that a dog has inflicted
substantial or great bodily harm on a human being on public or private property
without provocation; inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private
property without provocation; bit multiple human victims on public or private
property in the same attack without provocation; bit a human on public or
private property without provocation in an attack where more than one dog
participated in the attack; or the dangerous dog is in violation of this
section or state law may proceed as follows:
      (1)   The owner of the dog shall be notified by the city in writing
either personally or by mail as to the reasons the dog is subject to
destruction under this section and the date(s), time(s), place(s), names of
person(s) harmed, circumstances, telephone number and contact person where the
dog is kept, copy of the ordinance and state statute, and the statements and
form required by M.S. § 347.541 including that the owner shall be given seven
days to request a hearing for a determination as to the disposition of the dog.
If the owner does not request a hearing within seven days of the date of
receiving the notice, the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police's designee may
order the dog to be destroyed and shall serve or deliver a copy of the
destruction order to the dog's owner. The city shall not destroy a dog until at
least seven days have passed since the issuance of a destruction order.
      (2)   If the dog's owner requests a hearing for determination as to the
dangerous nature of the dog, the hearing shall be held before an impartial
hearing officer selected by the Chief of Police from a list of persons approved
by the City Council at a date not more than 14 days after receipt of the
owner's demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal Control Officer shall
be admissible for consideration without further foundation. After considering
all evidence, the hearing officer shall make a determination as he or she deems
proper and issue a decision on the matter within ten days of the hearing. The
hearing officer shall consider the following factors:
         (a)   Whether the threat, injury, or damage fits any of the exemptions
set forth in M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 5; and
         (b)   Whether the threat, injury, or damage occurred while the animal
was protecting or defending a person or the animal's offspring within the
immediate vicinity of the animal.
      (3)   The hearing officer may order the dog to be destroyed. The city
shall deliver a copy of the hearing officer's order to the dog's owner. The
decision of the hearing officer shall be final unless the owner files an appeal
to the Court of Appeals. The city shall not destroy a dog until at least five
business days have passed since the issuance of a destruction order.
      (4)   The Animal Control Officer is authorized to take the dog subject to
the destruction order into custody at the time a destruction order is served or
delivered. The dog's owner must immediately make the dog available to the
Animal Control Officer at the time a destruction order is delivered. The city
shall not destroy a dog until at least seven days have passed since the
issuance of a destruction order.
      (5)   If the dangerous dog declaration is upheld by the hearing officer,
the actual expenses of the hearing will be the responsibility of the dog's
owner. If the declaration is overturned by the hearing officer, the costs and
fees of the hearing, impound, and boarding will be reviewed by the hearing
officer.
   (G)   Misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be
subject to the penalties specified by state statute.
   (H)   Exemption. Dogs owned and controlled by local, state and federal law
enforcement agencies that are used in law enforcement or related activities and
service animals, which are individually trained or being trained to do work or
perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, are exempt
from the provisions of this section. A dog may not be declared dangerous if the
threat, injury, or damage was sustained under the conditions set forth in M.S.
§ 347.51, Subd. 5.
(Ord. 2006-1067, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord.
2019-1246, passed 11-12-19)
§ 92.27 CONCEALMENT.
   Any person who harbors, hides, or conceals a dog declared dangerous that has
been ordered into custody for disposition shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord, 2090-1096, passed 2-23-09)
§ 92.28 RESTRICTIONS ON FUTURE OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Convictions. A person may not own a dog if he or she has been
convicted of any of the violations set forth in M.S. § 347.542. This
prohibition applies to any member of that same person's household.
   (B)   Non-compliance. An owner of a potentially dangerous of dangerous dog
that fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or state law may be
prohibited or restricted from future ownership or custody of other dogs. An
owner in violation of this chapter or state law shall be notified in writing
and may request a hearing within seven days of the receipt of the notice of
violation. If a hearing is requested, the Chief of Police, or its designee,
shall schedule a hearing before an impartial hearing officer within 14 days of
the receipt of the request. A hearing fee shall be paid to the city prior to
the scheduling of the hearing. The owner shall be notified of the hearing
results in writing within ten days.
(Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)
§ 92.29 BASIC CARE.
   All animals shall receive kind and humane treatment from their owners, which
shall include proper and adequate, clean, ventilated, and sanitary housing or
shelter from the elements, and sufficient food and water for their comfort.
Failure to provide basic care is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)
§ 92.30 PUBLIC PROTECTION FROM DOGS.
   Any person owning or having care, control, or custody of a dog shall at all
times prevent the dog from attacking, biting or otherwise causing injury or
attempting to cause injury to any person engaged in an lawful act or causing
injury or attempting to cause injury to a domestic animal.
(Ord. 2090-1096, passed 2-23-09)
§ 92.31 CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use or possess any device, equipment, treatment or products
for the strengthening or conditioning of an animal with the intent to enhance
the animal's ability to inflict bodily injury upon human beings or domestic
pets on public or private property.
(Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)
§ 92.32 IDENTIFICATION AND VACCINATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful to own, harbor, keep, or have custody of an animal over
six months of age within this municipality without an identification tag on
them, and the animal has a current vaccination against rabies with an approved
vaccine as determined by the current official “Compendium of Animal Rabies
Vaccines” published by the Conference of State Public Health Veterinarians and
the Center for Disease Control of the Department of Health and Human Services.
Every person convicted of a violation of this provision is guilty of a penal
offense.
   (B)   Identification. All animals are required to have identification on
them at all times. Identification includes veterinarian issued rabies tags, any
tags or collars with contact information and phone number(s) inscribed on it,
or a microchip.
('72 Code, § 415:03) (Am. Ord. 1973-138(A), passed 2-26-73; Am. Ord. 1989-626
(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2019-1246,
passed 11-12-19; Am. Ord. 2025-1309, passed 3-10-25) Penalty, see §
10.99
DEER MANAGEMENT
§ 92.40 PROHIBITION ON DEER FEEDING.
   (A)   No person may place, or permit to be placed, on the ground or within
four feet of the ground surface, any grain, fodder, salt licks, or any other
food, including feed for birds, which may reasonably be expected to result in
deer feeding, unless such items are screened or protected in a manner that
prevents deer from feeding on them; except as follows:
      (1)   Feeding programs or efforts undertaken by the city in accordance
with the deer management plan of the Department of Natural Resources;
      (2)   Veterinarians, city animal control officers, or county, state or
federal game officials who, in the course of their duties, have deer in their
custody; or
      (3)   Any food placed upon the property for the purpose of trapping or
otherwise taking deer, where such are trapped or taken pursuant to a permit
issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
   (B)   No person shall hunt or otherwise engage in the hunting or removal of
deer, unless such person is acting on the city's behalf and has obtained a
special permit in conjunction with its Deer Management Program.
(Ord. 2001-954, passed 7-9-01)
BEEKEEPING
§ 92.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCREDITED INSTITUTION. An educational institution holding accredited status
which has been licensed or registered by the Minnesota Office of Higher
Education at the time the registrant obtained their certificate.
   APIARY. The assembly of one or more colonies of bees on a single lot.
   APIARY SITE. The lot upon which an apiary is located.
   BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of honey
bees or a person who owns or controls a lot on which a colony is located
whether or not the person is intentionally keeping honey bees.
   BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT. Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as
hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
   COLONY. An aggregate of honey bees consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs and honey.
   FLYWAY BARRIER. A barrier that raises the flight path of bees as they come
and go from a hive.
   HIVE. The receptacle inhabited by a colony.
   HONEY BEE. All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera.
This definition does not include wasps, hornets, African subspecies or
Africanized hybrids.
   NUCLEUS COLONY. A small quantity of honey bees with a queen housed in a
smaller than usual hive box designed for a particular purpose, and containing
no supers.
   REGISTRANT. Any registered beekeeper and any person who has applied for
approval of a beekeeping registration.
   ROOFTOP. The uppermost section of a primary or accessory structure of at
least one full story and at least 12 feet in height. Areas including but not
limited to decks, patios and balconies shall not be considered a rooftop.
   SUPER. A box that holds the frames where bees will store the honey.
   SWARMING. The process where a queen bee leaves a colony with a large group
of worker bees in order to form a new honey bee colony.
   UNUSUAL AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR. Any instance in which unusual aggressive
characteristics such as stinging or attacking without provocation occurs.
Provocation is an act that an adult could reasonably expect may cause a bee to
sting or attack.
(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)
§ 92.51 PURPOSE.
   Honey bees are an asset to the community and important in the pollination of
plants and in the production of honey and other products. The purpose and
intent of this portion of
Chapter 92 is to permit and establish requirements for the keeping of honey bee
colonies, hives, and equipment within the city.
(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)
§ 92.52 BEEKEEPING LIMITED.
   No person shall keep, harbor, maintain or allow to be kept any hive or other
facility for the housing of honeybees on or in any property in the city without
an approved registration unless otherwise exempted by §§
92.54(A)(5) and 92.56(B).
(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)
§ 92.53 COLONY LOCATION.
   (A)   Hives cannot be located in the front yard and must be located a
minimum of ten feet from the rear or side property lines and 20 feet from
public rights-of-way unless further restricted elsewhere in this code. A corner
lot shall be considered to have two front yards.
   (B)    Hives must be located a minimum of ten feet from any adjacent
dwelling unit.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, in each instance where
any part of a hive is kept within 25 feet of a lot line of the apiary site, a
flyway barrier of at least six feet in height must be constructed.
      (1)   The flyway barrier must consist of a wall, fence, or dense
vegetation that requires honey bees to fly over, rather than through, the
barrier.
      (2)   If a dense vegetation flyway barrier is used, the initial planting
may be a minimum of four feet in height, but the vegetation must reach a height
of at least six feet within two years after installation.
      (3)   If a wall or fence flyway barrier is used, the materials must be
decay resistant, maintained in good condition and constructed in accordance
with § 152.1000 of this code.
      (4)   The flyway barrier must continue parallel to the lot line of the
apiary site for at least ten feet in both directions from the hive or must
contain the hive or hives in an enclosure at least six feet in height.
      (5)   A flyway barrier is not required if the hive is located on a
rooftop.
(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)
§ 92.54 COLONY DENSITY.
   (A)    Every lot or parcel of land in the city shall be limited to the
following number of colonies based on the size of the apiary lot:
      (1)   One-half acre or smaller is allowed two colonies;
      (2)   More than one-half acre to three-quarters of an acre is allowed
four colonies;
      (3)   More than three-quarters of an acre to one acre is allowed six
colonies;
      (4)   More than one acre to five acres is allowed eight colonies;
      (5)   More than five acres, there is no restriction on the number of
colonies and no registration is required.
   (B)   If any beekeeper serves the community by removing a swarm or swarms of
honeybees from locations where they are not desired, that person shall not be
considered in violation of the colony density restrictions in this section if
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person temporarily houses the honeybees at an apiary site of a
beekeeper registered with the city;
      (2)   The bees are not kept for more than 30 days; and
      (3)   The site remains in compliance with the other provisions of this
section.
(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)
§ 92.55 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames, which
shall be kept in sound and useable condition.
   (B)   Each colony on the apiary site shall be provided with a convenient
source of water which must be located within ten feet of each active colony.
   (C)   Materials from a hive such as wax combs or other materials that might
encourage robbing by other bees shall be promptly disposed of in a sealed
container or placed within a building or other bee and vermin proof enclosure.
   (D)   For each colony permitted to be maintained, there may also be
maintained upon the same apiary lot, one nucleus colony in a hive structure not
to exceed one standard nine and five-eighths-inch depth box, ten frame hive
body with no supers.
   (E)   Beekeeping equipment must be maintained in good condition, including
keeping the hives free of chipped and peeling paint if painted, and any unused
equipment must be stored in an enclosed structure.
   (F)   Hives shall be continuously managed to provide adequate living space
for their resident honeybees in order to prevent swarming.
   (G)   In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual aggressive
behavior, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly re-queen the
colony.
   (H)   Honey may not be sold from any residential property unless a home
occupation permit has been obtained and required conditions met in accordance
with § 152.1001(B) of this code.
(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)
§ 92.56 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The application for registration must be upon a form provided by the
city. All required information must be complete.
   (B)   Each apiary site must apply for registration and receive approval
prior to bringing any honey bees into the city. Registration is not required
for sites over five acres in size.
   (C)   If the beekeeper relocates a hive or colony to a new apiary site, the
beekeeper shall apply for an updated registration, prior to the relocation, on
the form provided by the city.
   (D)   The beekeeping registration shall be valid until March 31 of each
calendar year following initial issuance and must be renewed by the registrant
prior to expiration each year by submitting a renewal form to the Community
Development Department on the form provided by the city.
   (E)   Upon receipt of an application for initial registration, the city will
send written notice to all owners of properties located within 200 feet of the
property line of the apiary site(s) identified on the application. Any
objections to the registration must be made in writing and received within 14
days of mailing the notice. If any written objection is received, the
registration application must be referred to the City Manager.
      (1)   The registration application must be denied if the city receives a
written objection from a resident living within the designated notification
area that includes medical documentation by a licensed physician of an allergy
to honey bee venom.
   (F)   Beekeeping training and education is required for the beekeeper prior
to the issuance of the initial beekeeping permit by the city. At the time of
application for registration, the beekeeper must submit a certificate of
completion of a honey beekeeping course from an accredited Minnesota
institution.
   (G)   The fees for the registration will be determined by the City Council
in the city's fee schedule.
   (H)   The property must be in compliance with all other applicable city
regulations in order to receive approval and renewal.
   (I)   If the standards of practice are not maintained subsequent to issuance
of a beekeeping permit, the permit may be revoked by the City Manager.
   (J)    Beekeepers operating in the city prior to the effective date of the
section will have until July 1, 2015 to apply for registration.
(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)
§ 92.57 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Upon initial registration, annual renewal or any updated registration,
each beekeeper must allow for an inspection of the site.
   (B)   Upon prior notice to the owner of the apiary site, city staff shall
have the right to inspect any apiary.
   (C)   In the case of a complaint regarding the apiary, the apiary site may
be inspected without prior notice.
(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)
§ 92.58 APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Registrations issued under this section may be denied, revoked or non-
renewed due to any of the following:
      (1)   The keeping of honey bees in a manner which constitutes a nuisance
to the health, safety or general welfare of the public;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement contained in the
registration application or during the course of the registered activity;
      (3)   Any violation of the applicable provisions in this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of approval, denial, revocation or non-renewal must be made in
writing to the registrant and to any person opposing the application for
initial registration specifying the reason(s) for the action. The registrant or
any person opposing the application may request a hearing within 14 days of the
date of the notification letter.
   (C)   A hearing officer shall hold a hearing on a contested approval,
denial, revocation, or non-renewal. The hearing officer shall be a person
appointed by the city. At the hearing, the applicant and any person objecting
to the application for initial registration may speak and may present witnesses
and other evidence. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue a written decision that includes findings of fact. The city shall
provide the registrant and any objecting party with a copy of the hearing
officer's decision. The registrant may appeal the hearing officer's decision in
accordance with state law.
(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)
CHAPTER 93: RESERVED
CHAPTER 93A: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
   
93A.01   Code enforcement
   
93A.02   Fees
   
93A.03   Adoption of Minnesota State Fire Code
   
93A.04   Amendments to Minnesota State Fire Code
   
93A.05   Copies on file
   
93A.06   Open flame heaters banned
   
93A.07   Open burning
   
93A.08   Recreational fires
   
93A.09   D.C. welders for thawing frozen waterlines
   
93A.10   Pyrotechnics
   
93A.11   Underground liquid storage systems
   
93A.12   Fire hydrant placement
 
   
93A.99   Penalty
§ 93A.01 CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Marshal and investigators/inspectors appointed to assist the Fire
Marshal, must enforce all statutes, ordinances and codes aimed at fire
prevention and may achieve enforcement through the issuance of notices, warning
tickets or citations in lieu of arrest or detention.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)
§ 93A.02 FEES.
   (A)   Licenses, permits, service fees, inspection fees and charges shall be
in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City Council in the amount
provided by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (B)   Approved key boxes are purchased directly through approved vendor(s).
Fees shall be determined by approved vendor(s).
   (C)   The installation of any fire suppression system/fire alarm system,
equipment or device(s) requires payment by the applicant of fees in the amount
provided by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (D)   No permit will be issued until the applicant files with the Fire Chief
or the Fire Chief's designee a complete set of plans and permit application
with appropriate fees and the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee gives
final approval.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17; Am. Ord. 2020-1255, passed 6-22-20)
§ 93A.03 ADOPTION OF MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE.
   The Minnesota State Fire Code as promulgated by the Commissioner of Labor
and Industry together with Appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, O and P is
adopted by reference and incorporated into this code as if fully set forth
herein, subject to deletions or modifications contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17; Am. Ord. 2020-1255, passed 6-22-20)
§ 93A.04 AMENDMENTS TO MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE.
   Amendments made to the 2015 edition of the Minnesota State Fire Code:
   (A)   Standpipe systems. Class II standpipe hose stations, Class I and Class
III standpipe outlets shall not be concealed, obstructed or impaired. A 3-foot
(914.4 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of all
standpipe stations and/or outlets, and valving, except as otherwise required by
the Fire Chief.
   (B)   Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers shall not be obstructed or
obscured from view. In rooms or areas in which visual obstruction cannot be
completely avoided, means shall be provided to indicate the locations of
extinguishers. A 3-foot (914.4 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of all fire extinguishers, except as otherwise required by the
Fire Chief.
   (C)   Fire alarm and detection systems. Alarm-initiating devices, alarm-
signaling devices and annunciators shall not be concealed, obstructed or
impaired. A 3-foot (914.4 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of fire alarm and detection equipment except as otherwise
required by the Fire Chief.
   (D)   Commercial cooking systems. Permits are required to conduct hood
cleaning. Every application for such a permit shall be made in writing to the
Fire Department at least five working days in advance of the date of proposed
cleaning. A permit shall be issued only after the Fire Chief or the Fire
Chief's designee has given approval and the applicant has paid the permit fee
in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City Council in the amount
provided by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code. Prior
to setting an appointment for the hood cleaning, a pre-arranged appointment
must be set with the fire department for the inspection. Changes in the
appointment time should be communicated as soon as possible. If the Fire Chief
or the Fire Chief's designee does not approve the cleaning of the system and/or
has to return for additional inspections, the applicant shall be required to
apply for additional permits, and pay additional fees as required.
   (E)   Alarm system monitoring. Fire alarm systems shall be electrically
monitored by an approved central station service. Electrically monitoring shall
require an Underwriters Laboratories (U.L.) 72 "Central Station Fire Alarm
System" Certificate Service be issued on all new Fire Alarm Systems and
Communicators.
EXCEPTIONS:
   i.   For existing fire alarm systems, monitoring is required when the
systems are upgraded or altered with additions.
   ii.   Supervisory service is not required for automatic sprinkler systems in
one- and two- family dwellings.
General fire alarm, water-flow alarm, trouble, and supervisory signals shall be
distinctively different and shall be automatically transmitted to an approved
central station in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
(N.F.P.A.) Standard 72.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17; Am. Ord. 2020-1255, passed 6-22-20)
§ 93A.05 COPIES ON FILE.
   The Fire Chief must have one copy of the Minnesota Fire Code and one copy of
this chapter available for public inspection.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)
§ 93A.06 OPEN FLAME HEATERS BANNED.
   It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any structure containing three
or more residential units to maintain in an operable condition or operate
within a garage, whether attached or detached, used as an accessory use to such
residential unit, the following:
   (A)   An open flame-type heater or stove.
   (B)   Welding or torch cutting equipment.
   (C)   Any other equipment utilizing an open flame.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)
§ 93A.07 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by this section, all open burning is
prohibited in the City of Brooklyn Park. The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's
designee is authorized to issue burning permits, and is granted the authority
to place conditions upon applicants requesting a burning permit. Items that
will require a burning permit are:
      (1)   Fires purposely set under the supervision of the City Fire
Department for the instruction and training of firefighting personnel.
      (2)   Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be
abated by any other practical means.
      (3)   Fires purposely set for forest and game management purposes.
      (4)   The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter in
the clearing of land, the maintenance of street, road and highway right-of-way,
and in accepted agricultural land management practices, located within the City
of Brooklyn Park.
      (5)   Fires for which the Fire Chief has deemed necessary.
   (B)   Permits are required to conduct open burning. The permit application
shall include a diagram of the grounds on which the burning is to be conducted
showing the point at which the material to be burned is located; the location
of buildings, highways and other lines of communication; and the location of
nearby trees, telegraph or telephone lines and other overhead obstructions. The
Fire Chief shall make an investigation to determine whether the proposed
burning location meets the minimum requirements of the code and these
ordinances. At the time of permit application, the Fire Chief or the Fire
Chief's designee shall be consulted regarding requirements for standby fire
apparatus. A permit shall be issued only after the Fire Chief or the Fire
Chief's designee has given approval for the open burning and the applicant has
paid the permit fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City
Council in the amount provided by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix
to this code. After the permit has been issued, it shall be lawful for that
purpose and time period only. No permit so granted shall be transferable.
   (C)   Open burning material restrictions.
      (1)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of oils,
petro fuels, rubber, plastics, paper, chemically treated materials or other
materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad
ties, treated, painted or glued wood, composite shingles, tar paper,
insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wiring, asbestos material, paint or
paint filters.
      (2)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous
waste or salvage operations, solid waste generated from an industrial or
manufacturing process or from a service or commercial establishment, or
building material generated from demolition of commercial or industrial
structures, or discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food.
   (D)   Time and atmospheric restrictions. Open burning shall only be
performed when time limits comply with the time limits set forth in the open
burning permit. The prevailing wind at the time of burning and expected burning
duration shall not exceed ten mph, and must not blow towards nearby residences,
or other occupied buildings, roads or high power lines which would create a
hazard or nuisance.
   (E)   Location.
      (1)   Open burning shall not be conducted within 600 feet (182,880 mm) of
any road, high power line, or any occupied structure; other than those occupied
structure(s) located on the property on which the open burning is to be
conducted. Open burning shall not be conducted within one mile (1.609 km) of an
airport or landing strip unless the affected airport or landing strip gives
written approval. Open burning shall not be conducted within 50 feet (15,240
mm) of any other combustible material.
      (2)   All combustible materials within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of the open
burn site shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
   (F)   Fire-extinguishing equipment. Appropriate fire-extinguishing equipment
(as required by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee) shall be readily
available for use at open-burning sites.
   (G)   Attendance. Burning material shall be constantly attended by a person
knowledgeable in the use of the fire-extinguishing equipment required in
Section 307.1.6 of the Minnesota State Fire Code, have a copy of the burn
permit at the burn site at all times, and be familiar with the permit
limitations which restrict open burning. The open burn fire shall be completely
extinguished before the permit holder or permit holder's representative leaves
the site.
   (H)   Permit holder responsibility. The permit holder is responsible for
compliance and implementation of all general conditions, and special conditions
as established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn including, but not limited to, fire
suppression and administrative fees.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17; Am. Ord. 2020-1255, passed 6-22-20)
§ 93A.08 RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   In additional to complying with the requirements of the Minnesota State Fire
Code, the following shall be required.
   (A)   Material restrictions.
      (1)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit burning of oils, petro
fuels, rubber, plastics, paper, refuse, rubbish, chemically treated materials
or other materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires,
railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood, composite shingles, tar paper,
insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wiring, asbestos material, paint or
paint filters, leaves, or grass.
      (2)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit burning of hazardous waste
or salvage operations, solid waste generated from an industrial or
manufacturing process or from a service or commercial establishment, or
building material generated from demolition of commercial or industrial
structures, or discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food.
   (B)   Responsibility. The property owner is responsible for compliance and
implementation of all general conditions, and special conditions as established
for recreational fires. The property owner shall be responsible for all costs
incurred as a result of the recreational fire including, but not limited to,
fire suppression and administrative fees.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)
§ 93A.09 D.C. WELDERS FOR THAWING FROZEN WATERLINES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to use an electric welding machine within the limits of
the city for purposes of thawing frozen water mains or services.
   (B)   It is unlawful to make any connection from an electric welding machine
to any water main, service, or any appurtenance thereto within the city.
   (C)   Exception: Unless the person and/or company obtains a permit from
Operations and Maintenance. The person and/or company must show proof of
liability and property damage, minimum insurance of $500,000. Before any
machine is turned on, a continuity test must be conducted to ensure proper
connection of the effective water pipe.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17; Am. Ord. 2020-1255, passed 6-22-20)
§ 93A.10 PYROTECHNICS.
   (A)   Pyrotechnic special-effect material. Temporary storage, use/display
and handling of pyrotechnic special effects material used in motion pictures,
television and theatrical and group entertainment productions shall be required
to obtain a permit.
   (B)   Displays. Permits are required to conduct a fireworks display. Permit
fee(s) shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City
Council in the amount provided by the fee resolution, set forth in Appendix to
this code. No permit so granted shall be transferable.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17; Am. Ord. 2020-1255, passed 6-22-20)
§ 93A.11 UNDERGROUND LIQUID STORAGE SYSTEMS.
   Wherever there is a conflict of requirements, the more restrictive governs
so as to further the purpose of this section in protecting the public's health,
safety and welfare from the dangers of leakage of systems contents.
   (A)   Permits; general provisions. The installation, alteration, repair or
removal of any underground liquid storage system governed by this section
requires permits issued pursuant to the provisions of the Minnesota State Fire
Code and any other applicable code, ordinance, statute or rule. The issuance of
permits and the collection of fees shall be in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the City Council in the amount provided by the fee resolution, set
forth in the Appendix to this code. The Fire Chief may deny a permit to persons
not capable of performing pursuant to ordinance requirements.
   (B)   Permits; application. The application for any permit required by this
section must contain as a minimum and in addition to any further information
the city may require, the following:
      (1)   The address and legal description of the property on which the
underground liquid storage system is or will be located;
      (2)   The name and address of each owner of the property;
      (3)   The name and address of each owner of the underground liquid
storage system for which a permit is desired;
      (4)   The name and address of the operator who will be responsible for
the maintenance and upkeep of the underground storage system(s) and who is
legally constituted and empowered to receive service of notice of violation of
the provisions of city ordinances, to receive orders, to institute remedial
action to affect such orders, to accept all service of process pursuant to law
and to be available to be contacted by the city in the case of an emergency.
The Fire Chief must be notified immediately in writing of any change of
required operator information;
      (5)   The actual or anticipated contents of the underground liquid
storage tank(s);
      (6)   The purpose for which the permit is requested;
      (7)   The name and address of the applicant and the applicant's
relationship to the owners of the underground liquid storage tank(s);
      (8)   The location of any records required to be maintained pursuant to
this section;
      (9)   The resin composition used in the manufacture of the fiberglass
tank, if fiberglass, together with a listing of compatible product types;
      (10)   A current copy of the contractor's certificate of certification
approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency;
      (11)   A report containing the highest known or calculated water table.
As referenced in the 100-year flood plain plan for the city, for the proposed
tank location.
If any of the information contained in the application required by the above
changes before the granting or expiration of the permit, the applicant or
permittee, as the case may be, must notify the Fire Chief of any such change.
Every permittee must respond in writing to the Fire Chief within 72 hours of
the Fire Chief's inquiry concerning the ownership or control of any underground
liquid storage system, the land on which it is located, or the activity for
which the permit was granted.
   (C)   Qualifications for licensee.
      (1)   The Fire Chief may investigate applicants and applications for all
licenses required by this section. The Fire Chief may deny any application for
license required by this section for just cause.
      (2)   It is unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation, including
subcontractors, to engage in the business of installing, maintaining, altering,
repairing or removing any underground liquid storage system without first
having procured a license therefor as herein provided. Licenses are issued only
to contractors who have been approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
as a certified contractor, pursuant to M.S. § 116.491 Subd. (1), to enable them
to install, maintain, alter, repair or remove underground liquid storage
systems.
      (3)   Applications for licenses must be made to the Fire Department and
the license will be granted upon proof of the applicant's qualifications
therefor and upon filing a bond in the amount of $2,000 and the Fire Chief's
approval conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this section. The
provisions of §
110.37 of this code apply to licenses issued pursuant to this section, which
licenses expire on December 31 next following the date of issuance.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)
§ 93A.12 FIRE HYDRANT PLACEMENT.
   With respect to the placement of fire hydrants for new development, at least
one fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the intended location of
the Fire Department connection.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)
§ 93A.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of the chapter hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of a penal offense and punished according to §
10.99 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified each ten days that prohibited conditions
are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Public nuisance prohibited
   
94.03   Specific public nuisances prohibited
   
94.04   Limitations on keeping of animals
   
94.05   Litter prohibited
   
94.06   Abatement of nuisance and assessment of cost
   
94.07   Service charges and special assessments against benefitted properties
   
94.08   Purpose and intent
   
94.09   Declaration of property as a public nuisance
   
94.10   Law enforcement notice to other authorities
   
94.11   Seizure of property
   
94.12   Action by City Health Official
   
94.13   Responsibilities of owner
   
94.14   Owner's responsibility for costs
   
94.15   City authority to initiate cleanup and recovery of costs
 
   
94.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances regarding excavations and earth moving, see §§
118.01 et seq.
NUISANCES
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. In the form of deteriorated, wrecked or derelict
property in unusable condition, having no value other than nominal scrap or
junk value, and left unprotected from the elements; the term includes, but is
not limited to, deteriorated, wrecked, inoperable, or partially dismantled
motor vehicles, trailers, plumbing fixtures, and furniture.
   CHILD. Any person less than 18 years of age.
   CHEMICAL DUMPSITE. Any place or area where chemicals or other waste
materials have been located.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB. The unlawful manufacture or attempt to manufacture
controlled substances.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE.  Any place or area where an unlawful clandestine
drug lab exists. A CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE includes any dwellings, accessory
structures, a chemical dump site, a vehicle boat trailer or other similar
appliance or any other area or location.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug, substance or immediate precursor in
Schedules I through V of M.S. § 152.02. The term does not include distilled
spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
   GARBAGE. See MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Shall have the meaning set forth in Minnesota Statutes.
Household hazardous waste (HHW) is a subset. Wastes are hazardous in Minnesota
when they display one or more of these characteristics: ignitable, oxidizer,
corrosive, reactive, toxic, or lethal.
   LITTER. Garbage, recyclables, and all other waste material which, if thrown
or deposited as prohibited in this code, tends to create a nuisance or danger
to public health, safety, and welfare.
   METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS.    Any:
      (1)   Drug or product containing as its sole active ingredient ephedrine,
pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts, optical isomers,
or salts or optical isomers; or
      (2)   Combination drug or product containing as one of its active
ingredients ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or any of their
salts, optical isomers, or sales of optical isomers.
   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW).  Has the same meaning set forth in
Minnesota Statutes and means garbage. Garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, and
other solid waste from residential, commercial, industrial, and community
activities, that the generator of the waste aggregates for collection. MSW does
not include auto hulks, street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining
waste, sludges, tree and agricultural wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, motor
and vehicle fluids and filters, and other materials collected, processed, and
disposed of as separate waste streams. Also referred to as "trash" or
"garbage."
   OVER-THE-COUNTER SALES.  A retail sale of a drug or product, but not
including the sale of a drug or product pursuant to the terms of a valid
prescription.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who owns, in whole or
in part, the land, building, structure, vehicle, boat, trailer or other
location associated with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site.
   REFUSE. All solid waste products or those wastes having the character of
solids rather than liquids in that they will not flow readily without
additional liquid and which are composed wholly or partly of such materials as
garbage, sweepings, swill, cleanings, trash, rubbish, industrial solid wastes
or domestic solid wastes; organic wastes or residue of animals sold as meat,
fruit, or other vegetable or animal matter from kitchen, dining room, market,
food establishment or any place dealing or handling meat, fowl, fruit, grain or
vegetables; offal, animal excreta, or the carcass of animals; tree or shrub
trimmings, or grass clippings; brick, plaster, wood, metal or other waste
matter resulting from the demolition, alteration or construction of buildings
or structures; accumulated waste materials, cans, containers, junk vehicles,
ashes, tires, junk, or other such substances which may become a nuisance.
   UNDERGROUND LIQUID STORAGE SYSTEM, UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK or TANK. Any one
or a combination of containers including tanks, vessels, enclosures, or
structures and underground appurtenances connected to them, that is used to
contain or dispense an accumulation of liquid substances deemed by the city to
pose a threat to the public's health, safety or welfare. The volume of which,
including the volume of the underground pipes connected to them, is 10% or more
beneath the surface of the ground, this does not include septic tanks.
   YARD WASTE. Organic material consisting of garden wastes, leaves, lawn
cuttings, weeds, shrubs, and tree waste and pruning.
('72 Code, § 1000:01) (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1993-741,
passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05; Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed
5-10-21)
§ 94.02 PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   Whoever, by act or failure to perform a legal duty, intentionally does any
of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, and is punishable
as set forth herein:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures,
or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any number of
members of the public; or
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage, public
streets, highway or right of way, or waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by statutory law, the
common law, or this subchapter to be a public nuisance, whether or not any
sentence is specifically provided therefor; or
   (D)   Permits real property under the person’s control to be used to
maintain a public nuisance or rents the same, knowing it will be so used.
('72 Code, § 1000:06) (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.03 SPECIFIC PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   It is declared to be a public nuisance to permit, maintain, or harbor any of
the following:
   (A)   Diseased animals, fish, or fowl, wild or domestic, whether confined or
running at large.
   (B)   Carcasses of animals, fish, or fowl, wild or domestic, not buried at
least three feet under the surface of the ground or destroyed within 24 hours
after death.
   (C)   Garbage not stored in rodent free or fly-tight containers, or garbage
stored so as to emit foul and disagreeable odors, or garbage stored so as to
constitute a hazard to public health.
   (D)   Accumulations of refuse, yard waste, garbage, litter, abandoned
property or hazardous waste as defined herein.
   (E)   The dumping of any effluent, garbage, refuse, yard waste, wastewater,
or other noxious substance upon public or private property.
   (F)   Any open well, pit, excavation, structure, barrier or other
obstruction which endangers public health, safety, or welfare.
   (G)   The pollution of any public or private well or cistern, any public
stream, lake, canal, or body of water by effluent, garbage, yard waste, or
other noxious substance.
   (H)   Any noxious weeds, or any other vegetation which endangers public
health, safety, or welfare, or which is contraband within the meaning of state
or federal laws.
   (I)   The emitting or production of dense smoke, foul odor, noise, noxious
fumes, gases, soot, cinders, or sparks in quantities which unreasonably annoy,
injure, or endanger the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any
number of members of the public.
   (J)   The public exposure of persons having a contagious disease or
condition which endangers public health, safety, or welfare.
   (K)   Accumulation of junk, disused furniture, appliances, machinery,
automobiles or parts thereof, or any matter which may become a harborage for
rats, snakes, or vermin or which creates a visual blight, or which may be
conducive to fire, or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety, or
welfare of the public.
   (L)   It is unlawful to cause, permit, or maintain any abandoned cesspool or
septic tank without its being properly filled.
   (M) Any abandoned, damages, defective, leaking, destroyed, unrepaired or
unrestored underground liquid storage system.
('72 Code, § 1000:11) (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1993-741,
passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.04 LIMITATIONS ON KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to permit, maintain, or harbor
any of the following:
   (A)   More than three animals, as defined by §
92.01 of this code, over six months old, except in a commercial kennel.
   (B)   Chickens and other domestic fowl.
   (C)   Any combination of animals and/or fowl of any age kept in such numbers
or under conditions which reasonably annoy, injure, or endanger the health,
safety, comfort, repose, or welfare of the public or of the animals or fowl.
   (D)   Any wild animal, including crossbreeds with wild animals, which in
their wild state pose a threat to humans or domestic animals or are capable of
transmitting rabies, including, but not limited to, wolves, bear, cougar,
skunk, lynx, bobcat and fox.
   (E)   Any animal prohibited by
Chapter 92 of this code.
('72 Code, § 1000:16) (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-861,
passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2012-1149, passed 9-4-12)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.05 LITTER PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful to throw, deposit or store litter on private or public
property within the city.
   (A)   Duties of owners and occupants. The owner, lessee, or occupant of
private property, whether occupied or vacant, must maintain the property free
of litter.
   (B)   Authorized storage. Nothing in this section prohibits the storage of
litter on private property in receptacles or containers which meet the
requirements of the city code.
   (C)   Removal of litter; procedure; collection of costs.
      (1)   Notice; service. When there exists litter on private property, a
notice to remove the litter will be served upon the owner, lessee or occupant
thereof by the Health Authority. The notice must be served by certified mail,
or by personal delivery. When the property is occupied, service upon the
occupant is deemed service upon the owner; where the property is unoccupied or
abandoned, service must be by mail to the last known owner of record of the
property.
      (2)   Notice; contents. The notice required by subdivision (1) must
state:
         (a)   The nature and location of the litter;
         (b)   That the litter must be removed or properly stored within ten
days of service of the notice; and
         (c)   That if the litter is not so removed or stored, it will be
removed by the city and the cost of such removal assessed against the property.
      (3)   Costs. The Health Authority must keep a record of all costs
incurred by the city in the removal and disposition of litter pursuant to this
section, including all administrative costs involved in the service of the
notice required by this section, and must report to the City Clerk annually not
later than August 1.
      (4)   Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the Clerk must
list the total costs incurred by the city under this section against each
separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable. The City Council must
then spread the costs against each property as a special assessment for
collection as other special assessments in the following year, all as
authorized by M.S. Chapter 429.
('72 Code, § 1000:21) (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE AND ASSESSMENT OF COST.
   (A)   When any nuisance is found to exist, the Health Authority of the city
must order the owner or occupant thereof to remove the same, at the expense of
the owner or occupant, within a period not to exceed ten days, the exact time
to be specified in the notice. Upon failure of the owner or occupant to abate
the nuisance, the City Manager or designee must cause the nuisance to be abated
and must certify the cost thereof to the Finance Department, and the Finance
Department must certify the costs to the County Auditor to be extended on the
tax roll of the county against the real estate from which the nuisance has been
abated, all in accordance with M.S. §§ 145A. It is unlawful to obstruct any
official of the City of Brooklyn Park in enforcing this chapter.
   (B)   In the event the Health Authority of the city deems a nuisance
situation to constitute an immediate public health hazard, the Health Authority
may immediately abate or condemn the nuisance.
   (C)   The owner or occupant must then make safe or secure the property or
nuisance in accordance with the above provisions.
('72 Code, § 1000:26) (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1989-640(A),
passed 12-18-89)
§ 94.07 SERVICE CHARGES AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS AGAINST BENEFITTED PROPERTIES.
   (A)   The city is authorized by M.S. § 429.101 to provide for the collection
of unpaid special charges for all or any part of the cost of snow, ice or
rubbish removal from sidewalks or public ways; weed elimination from streets or
private property; removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards
from private property; installation or repair of water service lines; street
sprinkling or other dust treatment of streets; the trimming and care of trees
and the removal of unsound trees from any street or public way; the treatment
and removal of insect infested or diseased trees on private property; the
repair of sidewalks and alleys; or the operation of a street lighting system;
as a special assessment against the property benefitted.
   (B)   The city provides that all of the foregoing services may be special
assessed against benefitted properties which require these services. The City
Manager must provide the property owner or owners as shown on city tax records
with a written notice to correct the problems addressed in division (A) of this
section. The City Manager may also provide in the written notice that the
primary responsibility for correction of the problem is upon the property owner
or occupant to do the work correcting the problem within a specific time. This
provision applies in all cases except street sprinkling or other dust
treatment, alley repair, tree trimming, care and removal or the operation of a
street lighting system. If the property owner does not correct the problem or
remove or eliminate the public health or safety hazard the notice must state
that the city will do the work and attempt to collect the costs from the
property owner or other person served for the charges and if the costs are not
paid the unpaid charges must be specially assessed pursuant to the provisions
of M.S. § 429:101.
   (C)   All the provisions of M.S. § 429.101 are incorporated by reference.
('72 Code, § 1000:60)
§ 94.08 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of §§
94.08 through
94.15 of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare and
to reduce public exposure to health risks where law enforcement officers have
determined that hazardous chemicals from a suspected clandestine drug lab or
chemical dump site may exist. The City Council finds that such sites may
contain hazardous chemicals, substances, or residues that place people,
particularly children or adults of child-bearing age, at risk of exposure
through inhabiting or visiting the site or using or being exposed to
contaminated personal property.
(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)
§ 94.09 DECLARATION OF PROPERTY AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any property containing a clandestine drug lab or chemical dump site
will be declared a public health nuisance.
   (B)   No person may occupy, enter or allow occupancy or entrance to property
declared a public health nuisance under this section until such declaration is
vacated or modified to allow occupancy.
(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.10 LAW ENFORCEMENT NOTICE TO OTHER AUTHORITIES.
   Upon identification of a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dumpsite
deemed to place neighbors, visiting public, or present and future occupants of
the affected property at risk for exposure to harmful contaminants and other
associated conditions, law enforcement officials will notify the City Health
Official and other appropriate municipal, child protection, and public health
authorities of the property location, property owner if known, and conditions
found.
(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)
§ 94.11 SEIZURE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   If a clandestine drug lab or chemical dump site is located inside a
vehicle, boat, trailer, or other form of moveable personal property, law
enforcement authorities may immediately seize such property and transport it to
a more secure location.
   (B)   Personal property may not be removed from a clandestine drug lab site
or a chemical dump site without the prior consent from the City Health
Official.
(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)
§ 94.12 ACTION BY CITY HEALTH OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Upon notification by law enforcement authorities, the City Health
Official or other appropriate municipal or public health authority will issue a
Declaration of Public Health Nuisance for the affected property and post a copy
of the Declaration at all probable entrances to the dwelling or property.
   (B)   Removal of the posted Declaration of Public Health Nuisance by anyone
other than the City Health Official, law enforcement authorities, or their
designees, is prohibited.
   (C)   The City Health Official will also attempt to notify the following
parties of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance:
      (1)   Owner of the property;
      (2)   Occupants of the property;
      (3)   Neighbors at probable risk;
      (4)   The City of Brooklyn Park Police Department;
      (5)   Other state and local authorities, such as the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency and the Minnesota Department of Public Health, which are known
to have public and environmental protection responsibilities applicable to the
situation.
   (D)   Any rental license issued by the city for the property is immediately
suspended upon issuance of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance. Such
license will be reinstated only after full compliance with an abatement order.
   (E)   After issuance of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance, the City
Health Official will issue an order to the property owner to abate the public
health nuisance. The abatement order will include the following:
      (1)   A copy of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance;
      (2)   An order to immediately vacate those portions of the property,
including building or structure interiors, which may place the occupants or
visitors at risk;
      (3)   Notification of suspension of the rental license, if applicable;
and
      (4)   A summary of the owner's and occupant's responsibilities.
(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)
§ 94.13 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER.
   (A)   Within ten days after the abatement order is mailed to the owner, the
property owner must, at the owner's expense:
      (1)   Properly secure and post the perimeter of any contaminated areas on
the property in an effort to avoid exposure to unsuspecting parties;
      (2)   Promptly contract with appropriate environmental testing and
cleaning firms to conduct on-site assessment, complete cleanup and remediation
testing, including periodic follow-up testing to assure that the health risks
are sufficiently reduced to allow safe human occupancy of the property and
structures located on the property;
      (3)   Regularly notify the city of actions taken and reach agreement with
the city on the cleanup schedule; and
      (4)   Provide written documentation to the city of the cleanup process,
including a signed, written statement that the property is safe for human
occupancy and that the cleanup was conducted in accordance with Minnesota
Department of Health guidelines.
   (B)   The property may not be reoccupied or used in any manner until the
city has obtained the written statement in division (A)(4) and has confirmed
that the property has been cleaned in accordance with the guidelines
established by the Minnesota Department of Health.
(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.14 OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.
   The owner is responsible for all costs associated with nuisance abatement
and cleanup of the clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site, including,
but not limited to, costs for:
   (A)   Emergency response;
   (B)   Posting and physical security of the site;
   (C)   Notification of affected parties;
   (D)   Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment
process;
   (E)   Laboratory fees;
   (F)   Cleanup services;
   (G)   Administrative fees: and
   (H)   Other associated costs.
(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.15 CITY AUTHORITY TO INITIATE CLEANUP AND RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   If, after issuance of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance and
the abatement order, the city is unable to locate the property owner or the
property owner fails to arrange appropriate assessment and cleanup, the City
Health Official is authorized to initiate the on-site assessment and cleanup.
   (B)   The city may initiate on-site assessment and cleanup before the
expiration of the ten-day period in § 94.13(A) if the Health Authority deems
the situation to be an immediate public health hazard.
   (C)   The city may abate the nuisance by removing any hazardous structure,
building, or otherwise, in accordance with M.S. Chapter 463.
   (D)   If the city abates the public health nuisance, it may recover all
costs associated with such abatement. In addition to any other legal remedy,
the city may recover costs by civil action against the person or persons who
own the property or by assessing such costs as a special tax against the
property in the manner that taxes and special assessments are certified and
collected pursuant to M.S. § 429.101 and §§
94.06 and
94.07 of this chapter.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the owner's, occupant's
or the city's right to pursue an action authorized by law to recover costs
incurred from the persons contributing to or operating a clandestine drug lab
or from any other lawful source.
(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 and by imprisonment for a period of not exceeding 90 days or both,
together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Each day that a prohibited act shall continue, or such nuisance shall
be maintained, shall constitute a separate offense.
('72 Code, § 1000:31) (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 2005-1030,
passed 1-10-05)
CHAPTER 95: PARK REGULATIONS
Section
   
95.01   Purpose; definitions
   
95.02   Regulation of public use
   
95.03   Regulation of general conduct; personal behavior
   
95.04   Regulations pertaining to general parkland operation
   
95.05   Protection of property, structures and natural resources
   
95.06   Regulation of recreation activity
   
95.07   Regulation of motorized vehicles, traffic and parking
   
95.08   Enforcement
Cross-reference:
   Recreation and Park Department, see §§
31.01 et seq.
   Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission, see §§
31.45 et seq.
§ 95.01 PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The city deems it appropriate, reasonable and necessary to
specify rules and regulations in order to provide for the recreational
enjoyment of park areas and facilities; for the protection and preservation of
park property, facilities and natural resources of the city; and for the safety
and general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Definitions.
      AMUSEMENT CONTRAPTIONS. Any contrivance, device, gadget, machine or
structure designed to test the skill or strength of the user or to provide the
user with any sort of ride, lift, swing or fall experience including, but not
limited to, ball-throwing contest device, pinball type devices, animal ride
devices, dunk tank, ball and hammer device, trampoline devices and the like.
      AREA or AREAS. A specified place within a park.
      CITY. The City of Brooklyn Park, established pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes.
      COUNCIL. Mayor and City Council of Brooklyn Park.
      DIRECTOR. Either the Director of Recreation and Parks or the Director of
Operations and Maintenance.
      EMPLOYEE. Any city volunteer or full or part-time regular or temporary
worker hired by the city.
      GLUE. Any substance that releases vapors and which is used by a person
for the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, excitement,
confusion, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner
changing, distorting or disturbing the balance or coordination of a person's
audio, visual, or mental processes.
      HIKING. Traveling on foot, i.e., walking, running or with an assistive
mobility device.
      LASER. Any device which emits a coherent, monochromatic beam of light.
      MOBILITY DEVICE. Any device powered by batteries, fuel, or other engines
used by an individual with mobility disabilities for the purpose of locomotion.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a roadway except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      MOTORIZED RECREATION VEHICLE. Any self-propelled, off-the-road or all-
terrain vehicle including, but not limited to, snowmobile, mini-bike,
amphibious vehicle, motorcycle, go- cart, trail bike, dune buggy or all-terrain
cycle.
      NATURAL RESOURCES. All flora and fauna within the city and the physical
factors upon which they depend, including air, water, soil and minerals.
      OFF LEASH DOG AREA. A public, city-designated area where a dog owner is
permitted to allow a dog or dogs to socialize and exercise off leash, subject
to the rules and regulations for such an area.
      PARK. Any land, water area, or trail corridor and all facilities thereon,
under the jurisdiction, control or ownership of the city.
      PARK PATROL OFFICER. Any regular, temporary, or intermittent employee
vested with the legal authority to enforce the City Ordinance.
      PERMIT/SPECIAL USE PERMIT. Written permission obtained from the city to
carry out certain activities.
      PERSON or PERSONS. Individuals, firms, corporations, societies or any
group or gathering whatsoever.
      PEST. Any plant, animal, or microorganism that is determined to be
undesirable because it conflicts with park management objectives, creates an
annoyance to park guests, or has the potential to create a health hazard.
      PESTICIDE. A chemical or biological substance intended to prevent or
destroy a pest; and/or a substance to be used as a plant regulator, defoliant,
or desiccant. Repellents are not considered pesticide.
      PET. A domestic animal that is accompanied by a person in the immediate
vicinity of the animal.
      POLICE OFFICER. Those individuals that are licensed as Minnesota police
officers by the Minnesota Post Board vested with the legal authority to enforce
laws and ordinances.
      POLLUTANT. Any substance, solid, liquid or gas, which could cause
contamination of air, land or water so as to create or cause a nuisance or
render it unclean or noxious or unpure so as to be actually or potentially
harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or
that of wildlife or vegetation.
      POSSESSION.
      (1)   PHYSICAL POSSESSION. Having a controlled substance on one’s person
with knowledge of the nature of the substance.
      (2)   CONSTRUCTIVE POSSESSION. Having once possessed a controlled
substance or continuing to exercise dominion and control over the substance up
to the time of arrest, or aiding and abetting another in possessing a
controlled substance.
      PROPERTY. Any land, waters, facilities or possessions of the city.
      RESPONSIBLE PERSON. The parent, guardian, or person having lawful custody
and control of a juvenile.
      ROLLERSKATER. Any person riding or propelling oneself by human power or
gravity on wheeled devices that are worn on a person’s feet or stood upon by a
person. Such devices specifically include, but are not limited to,
rollerskates, in-line skates, rollerskis, skateboards and scooters.
      SERVICE ANIMAL. Any dog that is individually trained to do work or
perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a
physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability.
      WATERCRAFT. Any contrivance used or designed for navigation on water.
      WEAPON. All those weapons included under M.S. § 609.02, Subd. 6 but also
includes spears, crossbows, bows and arrows, sling shots, paintball gun or any
other dangerous weapon or projectile.
      WILDLIFE. Any living creature, not human, wild by nature, including, but
not limited to, mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, insects, reptiles,
crustaceans and mollusks.
(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2010-1114, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord.
2022-1269, passed 1-10-22)
§ 95.02 REGULATION OF PUBLIC USE.
   (A)   Park hours .
      (1)   Parks shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in a park at any other
time without a use permit except when the park area or facility is otherwise
designated by the city, or the park area or facility is being used as part of
an authorized city program.
      (2)   The City Manager, his/her designee or an on-duty police/fire
supervisor is authorized to close any park or portion thereof at any time for
the protection of park property or the public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   Permits.
      (1)   City permits shall be required for the exclusive or special use of
all or portions of park areas, special use facilities, buildings or trails or
for the use of park areas and facilities when they are otherwise closed to the
public.
      (2)   Permits shall be required for an entertainment, tournament,
commercial filming, exhibition or any other special use which can reasonably be
expected to have 25 or more persons involved or potentially have a detrimental
effect on park property or other park users. Security, insurance and/or
security bonds may be required and paid by permit holder prior to usage.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for a person to violate any provision of a
permit.
   (C)   Use fee; failure to pay use fee. It shall be unlawful for any person
to use, without payment, any facility or area for which a permit is required
and user fee charged, unless the payment is waived by the city.
(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2010-1114, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord.
2022-1269, passed 1-10-22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.03 REGULATION OF GENERAL CONDUCT; PERSONAL BEHAVIOR.
   (A)   Drug, cannabis, and alcohol use and sales. It shall be unlawful for
any person to:
      (1)   Use, possess or sell any alcoholic beverage in violation of state
statutes or City Code §
112.047 and unless expressly approved by city permit or license.
      (2)   Consume or display any alcoholic beverage at sites where the city
or its agent is a licensed vendor of alcoholic beverages, unless purchased at
that site, or authorized by special permit.
      (3)   Possess or bring beer or wine into a park in kegs, barrels, or
other bulk tap quantities, except by city permit.
      (4)   Use, manufacture, possess, constructively possess, sell, give away,
barter, exchange, distribute, or otherwise transfer any controlled substance,
except on a lawful prescription by a person licensed by law to prescribe and
administer controlled substances as specifically defined in City Code
Chapter 135.
      (5)   Inhale, breathe, or drink or be or become intoxicated by reason of
inhaling, breathing, or drinking any substance defined as "glue."
      (6)   Sell, furnish or deliver intoxicating liquor for any purpose to any
minor or to any person obviously intoxicated or to any other person to whom
sale is prohibited by state statute or by the City Code.
      (7)   Sell, give away, barter, exchange, distribute, or otherwise
transfer any product or substance containing or consisting of cannabis flower
or any cannabinoid, synthetic cannbinoid, or artificially derived cannabinoid,
including by not limited to tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), unless specifically
allowed under M.S. § 342.09, Subd. 1(6), or authorized by city permit.
   (B)   Public nuisance; personal safety. It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
      (1)   Engage in fighting or exhibit threatening, violent, disorderly or
indecent behaviors.
      (2)   Make unreasonable coarse utterance, gesture or display.
      (3)   Address abusive language tending to incite a breach of the peace or
to be inimical to the peace of any person present.
      (4)   Engage in any course of conduct or participate in any activity in
any park after he or she is advised by a police officer or other park employee
or park patrol agent having authority to regulate or manage the area, that such
conduct or participation is unreasonably and unnecessarily hazardous to the
personal safety of said person or another person; or impairs or limits the
lawful use and enjoyment of the facility or area by other persons.
      (5)   Intentionally expose his or her own genitals, pubic area, buttocks,
or female breast below the top of areola, with less than a fully opaque
covering, except while breast feeding, while on park property, if ten years of
age or older.
      (6)   Otherwise create a hazardous or physically offensive condition to
any person present.
   (C)   Property of others. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Intentionally disturb, harass or interfere with a park visitor’s
property.
      (2)   Leave or store personal property on city property.
   (D)   Littering. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, scatter,
drop or abandon in a park any bottles, cans, broken glass, hot coals, ashes,
sewage, waste or other material, except in receptacles provided for such
purposes.
   (E)   Possession and use of firearms; weapons; fireworks  Except for a
licensed police officer, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Have in his/her possession within any city park, fire or discharge,
or cause to be fired or discharged across, in, or into any portion of a park
all those weapons included under M.S. § 609.02, Subd. 6, but also includes a
spear, bow and arrow, crossbow, sling shot, paintball gun, or any other
dangerous weapon or projectile, except for purposes designated by the city in
areas and at times designated by the city.
      (2)   Possess, set off or attempt to set off or ignite any firecracker,
fireworks, smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns or other pyrotechnics
without a city permit.
      (3)   Shine a laser in the face of another person.
   (F)   Interference with employee performance of duty. It shall be unlawful
for any person to impersonate or pretend to be any employee of the city or
interfere with, harass or hinder any employee in the discharge of his/her
duties.
   (G)   Smoking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any
substance by means of smoking, vaporizing, igniting, or otherwise heating the
substance to produce smoke or vapor which is then inhaled. Notwithstanding any
other penalty provision in the city code, a violation of this section shall be
considered a petty misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of $100.
(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2022-1269, passed 1-10-22; Am. Ord.
2024-1302, passed 6-24-24; Am. Ord. 2024-1303, passed 6-24-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.04 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO GENERAL PARKLAND OPERATION.
   (A)   Commercial use; solicitation; advertising; photography. It shall be
unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Solicit, sell, or in any manner charge admission, or otherwise
peddle any goods, wares, merchandise, services, liquids or edibles in a park
except by authorized concessionaire with a city permit and the required
licenses from the city. Including any product or substance containing or
consisting of cannabis flower or any cannabinoid, synthetic cannabinoid, or
artificially derived cannabinoid, including but not limited to
tetrahyrdocannabinol (THC).
      (2)   Operate a still, motion picture, video or other camera for
commercial purposes in a park without a city permit. News coverage or media
journalism is not considered a commercial purpose.
      (3)   Expose, distribute or place any sign, advertisement, notice poster
or display in a park without a city permit.
   (B)   Pets in parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Bring a pet, except a service animal, into a park unless caged or
kept on a leash not more than six feet in length, except that an owner of a dog
is not required to restrain a dog or dogs by a chain or leash in an off leash
dog exercise area, subject to the rules and regulations for such an area and
Chapter 92 of this code.
      (2)   Permit a pet under his/her control to disturb, harass or interfere
with any park visitor, a park visitor’s property or park employee.
      (3)   Tether any animal to a tree, plant, building or park equipment.
      (4)   Have custody or control of any dog or domestic pet in a park
without possessing and using an appropriate device for cleaning up pet feces
and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner.
   (C)   Noise; amplification of sound. It shall be unlawful for any person
except emergency equipment operated by public emergency personnel to install,
use or operate or permit the use or operation within a park of any of the
following devices:
      (1)   Loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment without a city permit.
      (2)   Radios, tape players, musical instruments or other machine or
device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to be
disturbing or a nuisance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity within the
area of audibility.
   (D)   Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Start a fire in a park, except in a designated area, and then only
in fire rings or grills, except for city employees or contractors engaged in
cleaning or maintaining public property.
      (2)   Leave a fire unattended or fail to fully extinguish a fire.
      (3)   Scatter or leave unattended lighted matches, hot coals, burning
tobacco, paper or other combustible material.
   (E)   Aviation. It shall be unlawful, except for emergency aircraft, to use
city property for a starting or landing field for aircraft, hot air balloons,
parachutes, hang gliders, drones or other flying apparatus without a city
permit.
   (F)   Amusement contraptions. It shall be unlawful to bring in, set up,
construct, manage or operate any amusement or entertainment contraption,
inflatables, device or gadget without a city permit.
   (G)   Engine-powered models and toys. It shall be unlawful for any person to
start, fly or use any fuel or battery powered model aircraft, model boat or
rocket or like powered toy or model without a city permit unless in an area
designated by the city.
   (H)   Unlawful occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Enter in any way any building, installation, or area that may be
under construction, locked or closed for public use except public safety
workers.
      (2)   Enter in any way or be upon any building, installation or area
after the posted closing time or before the posted opening time, or contrary to
posted notice in any park.
      (3)   Enter in any way any building, installation or area after receiving
a permit revocation or unlawful occupancy notification during the time period
specified.
(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2010-1114, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord.
2022-1269, passed 1-10-22; Am. Ord. 2024-1303, passed 6-24- 24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.05 PROTECTION OF PROPERTY, STRUCTURES AND NATURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Disturbance of natural features. It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
      (1)   Intentionally remove, alter, injure or destroy any tree, other
plant, rock, soil or mineral without a permit.
      (2)   Dig trenches, holes or other excavations in a park.
      (3)   Introduce any plant, animal or other agent within a park.
      (4)   Harvest, grow or cultivate controlled substances.
   (B)   Wildlife. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb or cause to be
disturbed, any species of wildlife, except as permitted by city permit in
designated areas.
      (2)   Remove any animal, living or dead, from a park. Any animal so
removed or taken contrary to the provisions of this chapter or laws of the
State of Minnesota shall be considered contraband and subject to seizure and
confiscation.
      (3)   Release or abandon any animal within a park.
      (4)   Feed any wildlife or feral animals in a park.
   (C)   Destruction; defacement of park property; signs. It shall be unlawful
for any person to:
      (1)   Intentionally deface, vandalize or otherwise cause destruction to
park property.
      (2)   Intentionally deface, destroy, cover, damage or remove any placard,
notice or sign, or parts thereof, whether permanent or temporary, posted or
exhibited by the city.
      (3)   Graffiti: reference Graffiti Ordinance.
   (D)   Release of harmful or foreign substances. It shall be unlawful for any
person to:
      (1)   Place any debris or other pollutant in or upon any city lands or
any body of water in or adjacent to a park or any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such waters.
      (2)   Discharge waste water or any other wastes in a park, except into
designated containers, drains or dumping stations.
      (3)   Release a pesticide in or upon any park lands except by city
permit.
   (E)   Interference of park property. It shall be unlawful for any person to
build an encroaching structure, such as a fence, shed or garden, on park
property.
(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2022-1269, passed 1-10-22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.06 REGULATION OF RECREATION ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Camping; swimming. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Camp in a park without a written city permit.
      (2)   Wade or swim within a park, except at designated areas.
   (B)   Picnicking. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Assume exclusive use of a reservation picnic site without a permit.
      (2)   Use a reservation picnic area without a permit if the area is
reserved by permitted group.
      (3)   Conduct picnic activity at reservation picnic sites contrary to a
city permit, or otherwise violate provisions on the city permit.
      (4)   Set up temporary shelters, tents, tarps, canopies and other such
devices without a city permit.
   (C)   Fishing. It shall be unlawful for any person to fish in a park except
in designated areas.
   (D)   Horseback riding. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Ride, lead or allow a horse or other animal within a park except in
designated areas or trails at designated hours.
      (2)   Ride a horse in a reckless manner so as to create a nuisance or to
endanger the safety or property of any park visitor.
      (3)   Tether a horse to a tree, other plant, building or park equipment.
      (4)   Allow a horse to graze or browse.
   (E)   Cross-country skiing. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Cross-country ski on any city golf course or sports complex except
on designated trails.
      (2)   Conduct a race, meet, or ski team practice with over 12
participants on city ski trails without a city permit.
      (3)   Cross-country ski on park trails contrary to rules and regulations
issued by the city or in violation of any posted trail sign.
   (F)   Rollerskating; in-line skating. It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
      (1)   Rollerskate, including the activities of skateboarding, in-line
skating and rollerskiing in a park except on paved areas unless posted
otherwise.
      (2)   Rollerskate in a park except in a prudent and careful manner and at
a speed that is reasonable and safe with regard to the safety of the operator
and others in the immediate area.
      (3)   Rollerskate except as close to the right hand side of the
authorized trail or roadway as conditions permit.
      (4)   Rollerskate including the activities of skateboarding, in-line
skating, and rollerskiing in or on a city building, stairway, railing, or other
park structure.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in or conduct any
activity, except those uses for which a park area or facility has been planned
or promoted by the city, without a permit or written authorization from the
city.
(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2022-1269, passed 1-10-22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.07 REGULATION OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING.
   (A)   Motorized recreation vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a motorized recreation vehicle within a park except in such areas and
at times as may be designated by the city.
   (B)   Snowmobiles. It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon the roadway,
public boulevard or on any public lands within the city in accordance with §
73.32 of the Brooklyn Park City Code.
   (C)   Vehicle operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour or
posted speed limits, except for emergency vehicles.
      (2)   Operate a vehicle within a park in violation of posted regulations,
M.S. Chapter 169, county or municipal traffic codes, or orders or directions of
traffic officers or park employees authorized to direct traffic.
      (3)   Operate a vehicle in a careless or reckless manner.
      (4)   Operate a vehicle which emits excessive or unusual noise, noxious
fumes, dense smoke or other pollutants.
      (5)   Fail to yield right of way to pedestrians and other trail users.
   (D)   Parking vehicles. It shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Park or leave a vehicle standing except in a designated area and
then only in a manner so as not to restrict normal traffic flow.
      (2)   Leave a vehicle standing after posted closing hours without written
permission. The city reserves the right to impound cars after 24 hours.
      (3)   Leave a vehicle in a park for purposes of offering it for sale.
      (4)   Park or leave a vehicle in an area designated for drop-off only.
      (5)   Park in a space designated for handicapped parking without a
handicapped vehicle license or permit.
      (6)   Park a vehicle with a boat trailer except in designated boat
trailer parking areas.
      (7)   Leave a vehicle unattended with keys in the ignition.
   (E)   Maintenance of personal vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person
to wash, grease, change oil or perform other maintenance on any vehicle on park
property, except in a designated area or except in emergencies.
(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2022-1269, passed 1-10-22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Police officers shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law,
diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter and may issue citations,
arrest, arrest with warrant, and eject from parks persons acting in violation
of this chapter.
   (B)   Police officers shall have the authority to seize, confiscate and
impound any substance, plant, animal, vehicle or other article which, upon
probable cause, they find to be used or possessed in violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Park Patrol Officers shall, in connection with their duties as
prescribed by the city diligently enforce the provisions of the chapter and,
except as limited by the City Manager, issue warnings to persons acting in
violation of this chapter.
   (D)   The city retains the right to require security insurance and/or
security bonds for any event or activity occurring on public property if it is
determined to be necessary for the safety and security of the park guests or
general public. The cost of the above security will be paid by the permit
holder prior to the usage of the park facility.
   (E)   Future usage of park facilities may be revoked if permit holders,
participants or spectators violate any section of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Routing of traffic
   
96.02   Obstruction and impairment of fire hydrants and fire-protection
equipment
   
96.03   Protection of traffic, utilities, property, and the like
   
96.04   Attractive nuisance
   
96.05   Care of excavated material
   
96.06   Damage to existing improvements
   
96.07   Property lines and easements
   
96.08   Clean-up
   
96.09   Protection of water courses
   
96.10   Breaking through pavement
   
96.11   Tunnels
   
96.12   Backfilling
   
96.13   Rock excavating and backfill material
   
96.14   Restoration of surface
   
96.15   Trenches in pipe laying
   
96.16   Prompt completion of work
   
96.17   Urgent work
   
96.18   Emergency action
   
96.19   Noise, dust and debris
   
96.20   Preservation of monuments
   
96.21   Inspections
   
96.22   City right to restore surface
   
96.23   Maintain drawings
   
96.24   Applicability to city work
   
96.25   Public service companies
   
96.26   Liability of city
   
96.27   Requirements and additional provisions
   
96.28   Ice and snow removal
Permits and Insurance
   
96.40   Excavation permit
   
96.41   Application
   
96.42   Display of excavating permits
   
96.43   Fee
   
96.44   Surety bond
   
96.45   Insurance
Cross-reference:
   House numbering, see §
151.071
   Excavations and earth moving, see
Ch. 118
   Road designations, see §
151.070
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 ROUTING OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   The permittee must provide all traffic control for the proposed work
and take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the
excavation work traffic conditions are maintained as nearly normal as
practicable at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to
the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public. The City
Engineer or other duly authorized employees may permit the closing of streets
to all traffic for a period of time prescribed in the permit if it is deemed
necessary. The permittee must route and control traffic including its own
vehicles. All traffic control must conform to the latest version of the
Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MMUTCD) including all
appendices. Traffic control for work zones in the public right-of-way are
separated into three categories: short term, long term, and roadway closure.
   (B)   The following steps must be taken by the permittee for each category:
      (1)   Short term (less than 12 hours).
         (a)   Obtain an approved right-of-way permit;
         (b)   Use appropriate traffic control plan from Appendix B of MMUTCD;
         (c)   Notify the City Engineer upon the removal of traffic control
devices and completion of the work.
      (2)   Long term (12 hours or more).
         (a)   Submit and receive approval of a traffic control plan;
         (b)   Obtain an approved right-of-way permit;
         (c)   Notify the City Engineer at least one day in advance of the
implementation of the plan;
         (d)   Monitor and maintain the traffic control devices daily;
         (e)   Notify the City Engineer upon the removal of the traffic control
devices and completion of the work.
      (3)   Roadway closure.
         (a)   Submit and receive approval of a detour and traffic control
plan;
         (b)   Obtain an approved right-of-way permit;
         (c)   Post notification signs of roadway closure and notify police,
fire, emergency response, and other roadway users at least one week in advance
to the closing of any street;
         (d)   Notify the City Engineer at least two days in advance of the
implementation of the plan;
         (e)   Monitor and maintain the traffic control devices daily;
         (f)   Obtain all other state, county, or municipal permits required;
         (g)   In the case that there are no existing streets to utilize as a
detour route, the permittee must construct all detours at its expense and in a
manner approved by the City Engineer;
         (h)   Notify the City Engineer, police, fire, and emergency response
upon the removal of the traffic control devices and completion of the work.
('72 Code, § 650:14) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.02 OBSTRUCTION AND IMPAIRMENT OF FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE-PROTECTION
EQUIPMENT.
   The excavation work must be performed and conducted so as not to interfere
or obstruct fire hydrants, Fire Department inlet connections or fire-protection
system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire
hydrants from being immediately discernible. The Fire Department must not be
deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire-protection equipment
or hydrants. Materials or obstructions must not be placed within 15 feet of
fire-protection equipment or hydrants.
('72 Code, § 650:17) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.03 PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC, UTILITIES, PROPERTY, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Protection of traffic. The permittee must stockpile excavated
materials in a manner as to not encroach upon any streets, sidewalks,
trailways, or sight distances for intersections. If stockpiling interferes with
facilities as stated above, the permittee must employ the use of traffic
control devices as stated in §
96.01 of this chapter. Adequate planking for sidewalk and trailway pedestrian
crossings must be placed in a manner as approved by the City Engineer and OSHA
trench safety standards. If a sidewalk or trailway must be closed off, the
permittee must utilize traffic control devices to delineate the work zone and
show an alternate route. In the case that there are no existing facilities to
use as an alternate route, the permittee must construct a detour at its expense
and in a manner approved by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Removal and protection of utilities. The permittee must not interfere
with any existing utility without the written consent of the City Engineer and
the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to
remove an existing utility this must be done by its owner. No utility owned by
the city will be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such
work is borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities
must be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements
with the person owning the utility. The permittee must support and protect by
timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which
may be in any way affected by the excavation work and do everything necessary
to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. In
case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, mires or apparatus should be damaged,
they must be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of
such repairs will be charged to the permittee, and its bond will be liable
therefor. The permittee is responsible for any damage done to any public or
private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe,
electric conduit or other utility and its bond is liable therefor. The
permittee must inform itself as to the existence and location of all
underground utilities by contacting the Gopher State One Call System or other
similar service as approved by the City Engineer and protect the same against
damage.
   (C)   Protection of adjoining property. The permittee must at all times and
at its own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by
providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the
purpose. The permittee must, at its own expense shore up and protect all
buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the
progress of the excavation work and is responsible for all damage to public or
private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and
carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench
through any lawn area, the sod must be carefully cut and rolled and replaced
after ditches have been backfilled as required in this chapter. All
construction and maintenance work must be done in a manner calculated to leave
the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as equal to or
better to that which existed before such work began. The permittee must not
remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas
or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained
the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property the
appropriate department or official having control of the property.
   (D)   Protective measures. The permittee must erect such fence, railing or
barriers about the site of the excavation work as will prevent danger to
persons using the city street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers must
be maintained until the work is completed or the danger removed. At twilight
there must be placed upon the place of excavation and upon any excavated
materials or structures or other obstructions to streets suitable and
sufficient lights which must be kept burning throughout the night during the
maintenance of the obstructions. It is unlawful for anyone to remove or tear
down the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any lights provided
there for the protection of the public.
('72 Code, §§ 650:18 - 650:24) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24- 95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.04 ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE.
   It is unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain unguarded at
the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment or other device
having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children
and hazardous to their safety or health.
('72 Code, § 650:26) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.05 CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
   (A)   All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench
or in any street must be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger
those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that
as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and
adjoining property.
   (B)   Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to
permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such might be the
case in a narrow alley, the City Engineer has the authority to require that the
permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to
the trench site at the time of backfilling. It is the permittee's
responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary
arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.
('72 Code, § 650:28) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.06 DAMAGE TO EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS.
   All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the
excavation work must be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair
must conform with the requirements of any applicable code or ordinance. If upon
being ordered the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials
for such repairs, the City Engineer has the authority to cause the necessary
labor materials to be furnished by the city and the cost will be charged
against the permittee, and the permittee is also liable on its bond therefor.
('72 Code, § 650:30) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.07 PROPERTY LINES AND EASEMENTS.
   Property lines and limits of easements must be indicated on the plan of
excavation submitted with the application for the excavation permit and it is
the permittee's responsibility to confine excavation work within these limits.
('72 Code, § 650:32) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.08 CLEAN-UP.
   As the excavation work progresses all streets and private properties must be
thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris
resulting from such work. All clean-up operations at the location of the
excavation must be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and must be
completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. From time to time as may be
ordered by the City Engineer and in any event immediately after completion of
the work, the permittee must at its own expense clean up and remove all refuse
and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work and upon failure to do
so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the City Engineer,
the work may be done by the City Engineer and the cost thereof charged to the
permittee and the permittee is also liable for the cost thereof under the
surety bond provided hereunder.
('72 Code, § 650:34) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.09 PROTECTION OF WATER COURSES.
   The permittee must provide for the flow of all water courses, sewers or
drains intercepted during the excavation work and must replace the same in as
good condition as it found them or must make such provisions for them as the
City Engineer may direct. The permittee must not obstruct the gutter of any
street but must use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of
surface water. The permittee must make provision to take care of all surplus
water, muck, silt, slickings or other run-off pumped from excavations or
resulting from sluicing or other operations and must be responsible for any
damage resulting from its failure to so provide.
('72 Code, § 650:36) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.10 BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for
excavation purposes and where trenches are to be four feet or over in depth,
the pavement in the base must be removed to at least six inches beyond the
outer limits of the sub-grade that is to be disturbed in order to prevent
settlement, and a six-inch shoulder of undisturbed material must be provided in
each side of the excavated trench.
   (B)   The face of the remaining pavement must be approximately vertical. A
power-driven concrete saw must be used so as to permit complete breakage of
concrete pavement or base without rugged edges. Asphalt paving must be scored
or otherwise cut in a straight line. No pile driver may be used in breaking up
the pavement.
('72 Code, § 650:38) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.11 TUNNELS.
   Tunnels under pavement are not permitted except by permission of the City
Engineer and if permitted must be adequately supported by timbering or encasing
and backfilling under the direction of the City Engineer.
('72 Code, § 650:40) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.12 BACKFILLING.
   Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation
permit issued hereunder must be compacted to a degree equivalent to the
requirements as outlined in the city's standard detail specifications for
excavation and restoration procedures. Compacting must be done by mechanical
tampers or vibrators as required by the soil in question and sound engineering
practices generally recognized in the construction industry.
('72 Code, § 650:42) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.13 ROCK EXCAVATING AND BACKFILL MATERIAL.
   Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is made through rock, the
pipe must be laid six inches above the rock bottom of the trench and the space
under, around and six inches above the pipe must be backfilled with clean river
sand, non- corrosive soil or one-quarter inch minus gravel. Broken pavement,
large stones, and debris must not be used in the backfill. Use of frozen
backfill is prohibited, in any case.
('72 Code, § 650:48) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.14 RESTORATION OF SURFACE.
   (A)   The permittee must restore the surface of all streets, broken into or
damaged as a result of the excavation work, to its original condition in
accordance with the specifications of the City Engineer. The permittee may be
required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic
lanes. Except when the pavement is to be replaced before the opening of the cut
to traffic, the fill above the bottom of the paving slab must be made with
suitable material well tamped into place and this fill must be topped with a
minimum of at least one inch of bituminous mixture which is suitable to
maintain the opening in good condition until permanent restoration can be made.
The crown of the temporary restoration must not exceed one inch above the
adjoining pavement. The permittee must exercise special care in making such
temporary restorations and must maintain the restorations in safe traveling
condition until such time as permanent restorations are made. The asphalt which
is used must be in accordance with the City Engineer specifications.
   (B)   Permanent restoration of the street must be made by the permittee in
strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the City Engineer to
restore the street to its original and proper condition, or as near as may be.
   (C)   Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the Engineer does not
prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and/or its surety
under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if
discovered within 12 months from the completion of the excavation work. The
City Engineer's presence during the performance of any excavation work does not
relieve the permittee of its responsibilities hereunder.
('72 Code, § 650:52) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.15 TRENCHES IN PIPE LAYING.
   Except by special permission from the City Engineer, no trench may be
excavated more than 50 feet in advance of the pipe laying nor left unfilled
more than 100 feet where the pipe has been laid. The length of the trench that
may be opened at any one time must not be greater than the length of pipe and
the necessary accessories which are available at the site ready to be put in
place. Trenches must be braced and shored according to OSHA, 29 C.F.R. Part
1926, Occupational Safety and Health Standards for Excavations. Bracing,
shoring, pipe, or appurtenance materials must not be left in any trench.
('72 Code, § 650:54) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.16 PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.
   The permittee must prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation
work covered by the excavation permit and must promptly complete such work and
restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as
practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the
excavation permit therefor. It is the duty of the permittee to guarantee and
maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to
the excavation for one year after restoring it to its original condition.
('72 Code, § 650:56) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.17 URGENT WORK.
   If in the City Engineer’s judgment, traffic conditions, the safety, or
convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require that the
excavation work be performed as emergency work, the City Engineer has full
power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and women
and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end
that the excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.
('72 Code, § 650:58) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.18 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   In the event of any emergency in which a sewer main, conduit or utility in
or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the person owning or controlling the sewer, main, conduit or utility, without
first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, must
immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous
conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of
individuals. However, the person owning or controlling the facility must apply
for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day
during which the city offices are open for business, and must not proceed with
permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit hereunder.
('72 Code, § 650:60) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.19 NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS.
   Each permittee must conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner
as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and
occupants of neighboring property. The permittee must take appropriate measures
to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the
excavation work, noise, dust, and unsightly debris and during the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., must not use, except with the express written permission
of the City Engineer or in case of an emergency as herein otherwise provided,
any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to
disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighbors property.
('72 Code, § 650:62) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.20 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.
   The permittee must not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found on the
line of excavation work until ordered to do so by the City Engineer.
('72 Code, § 650:64) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.21 INSPECTIONS.
   The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city must make
such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this
chapter. The City Engineer has the authority to promulgate and cause to be
enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce
and carry out the intent of this chapter.
('72 Code, § 650:66) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 96.22 CITY RIGHT TO RESTORE SURFACE.
   Work must progress in an expeditious manner until completion in order to
avoid unnecessary inconvenience to traffic. In the event that the work is not
performed in accordance with the applicable regulations or ceases or is
abandoned without due cause, or if the permittee fails to restore the surface
of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the
time fixed by the permit or otherwise fails to complete the excavation work
covered by the permit, the City Engineer, if the City Engineer deems it
advisable, may, after 24 hours notice in writing to the holder of the permit of
intent to do so, do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to
complete the excavation work. The permittee is liable for the actual cost
thereof and 25% of such cost in addition for general overhead and
administrative expenses. The city will have a cause of action for all fees,
expenses and amounts paid out and due it for such work and will apply in
payments of the amount due it any funds of the permittee deposited with the
city and the city will also enforce its rights under the permittee's surety
bond provided pursuant to this chapter.
('72 Code, § 650:68) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.23 MAINTAIN DRAWINGS.
   Users of sub-surface street space must maintain accurate drawings, plans,
and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures
including abandoned installations. Corrected maps must be filed with the City
Engineer within 60 days after new installations, changes or replacements are
made.
('72 Code, § 650:70) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 96.24 APPLICABILITY TO CITY WORK.
   The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to any excavation work
under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city or
by any contractor of the city performing work for and in behalf of the city
necessitating openings or excavations in streets.
('72 Code, § 650:72) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 96.25 PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES.
   All persons operating public utilities in the city under franchises granted
by the city and having the right either by general or special permission to
enter upon streets and open and excavate pavements, sidewalks or disturb the
surface thereof by excavation or other work are not required to apply for
permit but are required to perform the work and bring it to completion as
promptly as practicable and to that end must employ an adequate standing force.
Any person operating any such public utility must however, comply with other
requirements of this chapter, including the surety bond and deposit
requirements.
('72 Code, § 650:74) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.26 LIABILITY OF CITY.
   This chapter is not to be construed as imposing upon the city or any
official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person
injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation
permit is issued hereunder; nor is the city or any official or employee thereof
deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the approval of
any excavation work.
('72 Code, § 650:76) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 96.27 REQUIREMENTS AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter are not in lieu of but in addition to all
utility connection permits that may be required by ordinance, or by the rules
and regulations of the Engineer of the city.
('72 Code, § 650:78) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 96.28 ICE AND SNOW REMOVAL.
   The owners or occupant of any building, grounds, or premises within the
corporate limits must keep the public sidewalks along or in front of the same
free from snow and ice and must sprinkle the sidewalk with sand or ashes, if
necessary.
('72 Code, § 655:00) (Am. Ord. 1973-159(A), passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
PERMITS AND INSURANCE
§ 96.40 EXCAVATION PERMIT.
   It is unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine
or in any manner disturb any public right-of-way or to make or cause to be made
any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or to
place, deposit or leave upon any street, any earth or other excavated material
obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the public right-of-
way or easement, unless such person has first obtained an excavation permit
therefor from the City Engineer as herein provided.
('72 Code, § 650:00) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110
§ 96.41 APPLICATION.
   No excavation permit will be issued without submission of a written
application on a form provided by the City Engineer. The written application
must state the name and address of the applicant, the nature, location or
purpose of the excavation, the date of commencement and date of completion of
the excavation, and other data as may reasonably be required by the City
Engineer. The application must be accompanied by plans showing the extent of
the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both the
existing ground prior to the excavation and of the proposed excavated surfaces,
the location of the excavation work and such other information as may be
prescribed by the City Engineer or other duly authorized employee.
('72 Code, § 650:02) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 96.42 DISPLAY OF EXCAVATING PERMITS.
   Permits for excavations will be issued in writing and the permit must be
kept on the site of the work while it is in progress in the custody of the
individual in charge, and must be exhibited upon request made by any city
official or police officer.
('72 Code, § 650:04) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 96.43 FEE.
   Before a permit is issued, the applicant requesting the permit must pay a
fee in the amount set forth in the Appendix to this code to the city's cashier
for each location covered by the permit. Each transverse excavation and each
150 feet or portion thereof of longitudinal excavation is deemed a location.
('72 Code, § 650:08) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 96.44 SURETY BOND.
   (A)   Before an excavation permit as herein provided is issued, the
applicant must deposit with the City Engineer a surety bond in the minimum
amount of $5,000 payable to the city.
   (B)   The required surety bond must:
      (1)   Be with good and sufficient surety;
      (2)   Be by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State
of Minnesota;
      (3)   Be dated and signed by an authorized officer of the principal and
by a representative of the surety (attorney-in- fact);
      (4)   Be conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this chapter
and to secure and hold the city, its officials, and employees harmless against
any and all claims, damages, liabilities, losses, actions, suits, judgments, or
other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the
excavation permit or for which the city, Council or any city employee may be
made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through
the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or
for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and
further conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as
near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer or other duly authorized employee, all openings, and excavations made
in streets, and to maintain any street where excavation is made in as good
condition for the period of 12 months after the work is done, usual wear and
tear excepted as it was in before the work was done. Any settlement of the
surface within the one-year period is deemed conclusive evidence of defective
backfilling by the permittee. Nothing herein contained is construed to require
the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such
repairs should prove defective. Recovery on such bond for any injury or
accident must not exhaust the bond but it must in its entirety cover any or all
future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given.
In the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence
or default of the permittee, upon the city's giving written notice to the
permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city requiring
it to pay for such damage is conclusive upon the permittee and surety. An
annual bond may be given under this provision which must remain in force for
one year conditioned as above, in the amount specified above and in other
respects as specified above but applicable as to all excavation work in streets
by the principal in such bond during the term of one year from the date;
      (5)   Be described as a permit bond to carry on the business of
excavations within the public right-of-way or easements of the city for the
tapping, installation, modification, or construction of utilities, driveways,
or streets.
      (6)   Be identified with a reference or claim number;
      (7)   Identify the principal (contractor) and the surety company;
      (8)   Identify the principal and the surety company both as being bound
to the owner (city);
      (9)   Be an amount as specified on the permit. The dollar amounts should
be identified numerically in addition to being written out with words;
      (10)    Have a corporate seal which clearly identifies the surety
company;
      (11)    Pay all damages imposed upon it for violation of any federal or
state law, city or county ordinance, or conditions of any permit issued
thereunder;
      (12)    Indemnify any person who suffers a loss through violation by said
principal of any federal or state law, city or county ordinance, or conditions
of any permit issued thereunder;
      (13)    Guaranty to replace or perform again in a faithful and adequate
manner all work and materials not in accordance with the applicable federal or
state law, city or county ordinance, and permits;
      (14)    Indemnify any person for whose benefit the applicable federal or
state law, city or county ordinance specifically provides indemnification;
      (15)    Faithfully satisfy all judgements based on tort liability which
are obtained by reason of negligence through the business which negligence is
attributable to the principal or agent.
('72 Code, § 650:10) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 96.45 INSURANCE.
   The permittee must hold the city harmless and agrees to defend and indemnify
the city and the city’s employees and agents, for any claims, damages, losses,
and expenses related to the permittee’s excavation work. A permittee, prior to
the commencement of excavation work hereunder, must furnish the City Engineer
satisfactory evidence in writing that the permittee has in force and will
maintain in force during the performance of the excavation work and the period
of the excavation permit general liability, worker's compensation, and business
automotive insurance as specified from time to time by the City's Risk
Management Office. The insurance must be duly issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in this state. The city must be named as additional
insured under that insurance for any claims arising from the permittee’s
excavation work against either the city or the permittee. The permittee’s
insurance must be the primary insurance for the city.
('72 Code, § 650:12) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
CHAPTER 97: GRASS, WEED, AND TREE REGULATIONS
Section
   
97.01   Purpose
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Adoption of state law by reference
   
97.20   Weed and grass maintenance and elimination; duty of owner
   
97.25   Public notification of weed elimination
   
97.30   City Tree Inspector; duties and inspections
   
97.35   Public tree planting and maintenance
   
97.40   Private tree planting and maintenance
   
97.45   Shade tree disease control, prevention, pest control and abatement
   
97.50   Nuisances
   
97.55   Removal and abatement
§ 97.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to prohibit the uncontrolled growth
of vegetation, while permitting the planting and maintenance of landscaping or
garden treatments that add diversity and a richness to the quality of life.
There are reasonable expectations regarding the maintenance of vegetation
because vegetation that is not maintained may threaten public health, safety,
and order, and may decrease adjacent property values. It is also in the
public's interest to encourage diverse landscaping and garden treatments,
particularly those that restore native vegetation, which requires less moisture
and places a lower demand on the public's water resources.
   (B)   The city recognizes the value of a healthy urban forest to its
residence and visitors. Trees benefit the city's natural environment by
protecting against wind and water erosion, providing a natural buffer between
land uses, supplying shade and insulation that increases energy conservation,
and adding to the habitat for wildlife. Further, trees are a community asset.
They improve privacy, increase livability standards among residents, and add
value to property. The city works to enhance, preserve and protect the urban
forest within its boundaries by promoting and establishing the growth of new
trees, ensuring proper and adequate tree maintenance, and monitoring the
removal all public trees. The following sections provide regulations and
standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of shade trees within the
city.
   (C)   Further the Council may by ordinance declare any vertebrate or
invertebrate animal, plant pathogen, or plant in the community threatening to
cause significant damage to a shade tree or community forest, as defined by
M.S. § 89.001, to be a shade tree pest and prescribe control measures to
effectively eradicate, control, or manage the shade tree pest, including
necessary timelines for action. Such known diseases and pests currently include
Dutch Elm Disease, Oak Wilt, Emerald Ash Borer and Gypsy Moth. It is the intent
of this section to also include any yet unknown pests and to include them
immediately when identified by the Commissioner of Agriculture. It has further
been determined that the loss of elm, ash and oak trees growing upon private
and public property would substantially depreciate the value of property within
the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of
the public. It is declared to be the intention of the Council to control and
prevent the spread of these diseases and this section is enacted for that
purpose.
(‘72 Code, § 1020:00) (Ord. 1998-871, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2002-973, passed
5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   ABATE . To put a stop to or put an end to a nuisance.
   BUFFER STRIP. A managed strip of land used to separate differing landscapes
and to minimize the impact to adjacent land uses. A buffer strip may include
low-growing vegetation and grasses less than eight inches in height, mowed
turf-grass, wood chips, rock, landscape edging, trees and shrubs.
   CITY MANAGER . The City Manager or the City Manager's designee.
   CITY TREE INSPECTOR . A person or persons appointed by the City Council who
is certified by the Minnesota Commission of Agriculture to plan, direct, and
supervise all requirements for controlling shade tree diseases throughout the
designated disease control area.
   CONTROL . To destroy the above ground growth of noxious weeds by a lawful
method that prevents the maturation of noxious weed propagating parts and their
spread from one area to another.
   DISEASE CONTROL AREA . The entirety of Brooklyn Park is designated a disease
control area in which this shade tree disease ordinance and control procedures
shall be enacted.
   DISEASED TREE.  Any tree within the disease control area diagnosed with any
of the shade tree diseases as defined by the Commissioner of Agriculture.
   ERADICATE . To destroy the above ground growth and the roots of noxious
weeds by a lawful method that prevents the maturation of noxious weed
propagating parts and their spread from one area to another.
   GRASS . Grasses commonly used in regularly cut lawn areas, such as
bluegrass, fescue, rye grass blends, or other similar grasses.
   HAZARD TREE . Any tree with a condition or in a location that constitutes a
hazard to life or property.
   MANAGED NATURAL LANDSCAPE. A planned, intentional and maintained planting of
native or non-native grasses, wildflowers, forbs, ferns, shrubs or trees,
including but not limited to rain gardens, prairie or meadow vegetation, and
ornamental plantings.
   MEADOW OR PRAIRIE VEGETATION . Grasses and flowering broad-leaf plants that
are native to, or adapted to, the State of Minnesota, and that are commonly
found in meadow and prairie plant communities, except weeds.
   NOXIOUS WEED . Any plant which is identified by the State Commissioner of
Agriculture as a noxious weed pursuant to M.S. § 18.77, Subd. 8 or as a county
noxious weed pursuant to M.S. § 18.771(e).
   ORNAMENTAL PLANTS. Grasses, perennials, annuals and groundcovers
purposefully planted for aesthetic reasons.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE . Any noxious weed as defined by M.S. § 18.77, Subd. 8,
tree, or any other vegetation which endangers public health, safety, or welfare
or which is in violation of city, county, state or federal laws.
   RAIN GARDEN. A native plant garden that is designed not only to
aesthetically improve properties, but also to reduce the amount of stormwater
and accompanying pollutants from entering streams, lakes and rivers.
   SHADE TREE DISEASE . Dutch Elm Disease caused by Ophiostoma ulmi [formally
Ceratocystis ulmi] or Oak Wilt caused by Ceratocystis fagacearum or any other
disease identified and designated as a shade tree disease by the Minnesota
State Commissioner of Agriculture.
   SHADE TREE PEST. Any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant pathogen, or
plant that is determined by the Commissioner of Agriculture to be harmful,
injurious, or destructive to shade trees or community forests.
   STREET TREE . Any tree planted in the public right-of-way.
   TREE. Any woody plant, having a single woody trunk(s) and a potential
diameter of two inches or more.
   TURF-GRASS LAWN.  A lawn comprised mostly of grasses commonly used in
regularly cut lawns or play areas (such as but not limited to bluegrass,
fescue, and ryegrass blends), intended to be maintained at a height of less
than eight inches.
   WEED . Any noxious weed, buffalobur, burdock, common cocklebur, crabgrass,
dandelions, jimsonweed, quackgrass, common and giant ragweed, field sandbur,
velvetleaf, and wild sunflower. Weeds also include anything that is
horticulturally out of place. For example, a tree seedling is a weed in a
vegetable garden.
(‘72 Code, § 1020:00) (Ord. 1998-871, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2002-973, passed
5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
§ 97.03 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The following regulatory provisions are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this code as if set out here in full, except as hereinafter provided.
A copy of said agency rules herewith incorporated is on file in the office of
the City Clerk.
   (A)   Minnesota Noxious Weed Law, M.S. §§ 18.75 to 18.88, for the control of
noxious weeds within the city.
   (B)   M.S. §§ 18.011 through 18.024 Statutes of the Minnesota Department of
Agriculture, Plant and Animal Pest Control together with amendments.
   (C)   M.S. Chapter 89, as amended, and rules promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
§ 97.20 WEED AND GRASS MAINTENANCE AND ELIMINATION; DUTY OF OWNER.
   (A)   In determining whether a violation of this chapter exists, the
following factors must be considered by the City Manager or designated agent:
      (1)   The weeds or grasses endanger the public health, safety, or welfare
including whether the weeds or grasses create a general aesthetic depreciation
of the neighborhood; or
      (2)   The weeds are noxious as defined herein.
   (B)   If a violation is declared, it is the duty of every owner of property
including property abutting any public street or alley to cause all grass and
weeds to be kept cut to the center of such platted street or alley, including
the public boulevard. If the grass or weeds in such a place are eight inches or
more in height it is prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following items are exempted from the grass and weed
requirements in this chapter:
      (1)   The portion of any privately or publicly-owned lot or tract of land
in the city that contains a ponding area, drainage way, or public water wholly
or partially within its legal boundary.
         (a)   The owner of the property described in (C)(1) may establish a
strip of vegetation between the normal water level and the high water level
along the ponding area, drainage way, or public water of not more than 20 feet.
This strip of vegetation may be allowed to grow to any height and will not be
declared a nuisance under this chapter. However, the owner of the property is
required to control or eradicate noxious weeds. No grasses or weeds below the
normal water level of the ponding area, drainage way or public water will be
declared a nuisance under this chapter.
      (2)   The portion of any privately or publicly-owned lot or tract of land
in the city that contains an area with side slopes of 25% or greater wholly or
partially within its legal boundary.
      (3)    Parks and natural areas owned by the city and rights-of-way owned
and maintained by the county and state.
      (4)   Any area established as a managed natural landscape:
         (a)   Managed natural landscapes may include plants and grasses eight
inches or more in height and which have gone to seed, but may not include any
weeds or noxious weeds and must be maintained so as to not include unintended
vegetation; and
         (b)   Managed natural landscapes may not include any plantings, which
due to location and manner of growth constitute a hazard to the public or may
cause injury or damage to persons or property when such growth is in violation
of other applicable sections of city code; and
         (c)   The area is established and maintained in accordance with
generally accepted practices; and
         (d)   Managed natural landscapes shall not include turf-grass lawns
left unattended for the purpose of returning to a natural state; and
         (e)   A buffer strip not less than three feet from side and rear
property lines must be maintained when a managed natural landscape covers more
than 25% of the landscaped area of the entire yard. A buffer strip is not,
however, required if:
            1.   A fully opaque fence at least four feet in height is installed
along the lot line adjoining the managed natural landscape area;
            2.   The adjacent property is not being used for residential
purposes; or
            3.   The adjacent residential property also contains a managed
natural landscape area covering more than 25% of the landscaped area of the
entire yard.
         (f)   That while a managed natural landscape is being established and
covers more than 25% of the landscaped area of the entire yard, a sign must be
posted on the property in a location likely to be seen by the public, advising
that a managed natural landscape is being established. The sign must be no
smaller than eight inches square and no larger than one foot square, displayed
no higher than three feet, and set back five feet from the property line. If
the managed natural landscape covers less than 25% of the landscaped area of
the entire yard a sign is not required.
      (5)   Pasture land that is currently being used for the exercise or
feeding of domestic hoofed animals and is surrounded by a permanent fence that
separates the pasture from property used for other purposes, is at least five
acres in size, and undeveloped with any habitable building.
      (6)   Vacant parcels of land larger than five acres in size, (undeveloped
with any habitable building) with a physical barrier to separate the vacant
land from developed adjacent properties. If a physical barrier does not exist,
a 15-foot transition strip of land on that property which is mowed or otherwise
maintained is required next to the developed adjacent properties. A 15-foot
transition strip must also be mowed and maintained along all public right-of-
ways, streets, trails and alleys.
      (7)   Platted lots located in subdivisions where 50% or less of the lots
have been developed provided:
         (a)   A 15-foot transition strip must be mowed and maintained along
all public right-of-ways, streets, trails and alleys.
         (b)   Vacant lots located adjacent to developed properties must comply
with this chapter.
      (8)   The portion of any privately or publicly owned lot or tract of land
in the city that contains a wooded area as determined by the City Manager or
designated agent.
(‘72 Code, § 1020:00) (Ord. 1983-439(A), passed 10-24-83; Am. Ord. 1998-871,
passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2010-1112, passed
4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.25 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF WEED ELIMINATION.
   In accordance with M.S. § 18.83, on or before May 15 of each year, and at
such other times as ordered by the City Manager, the City Clerk must publish
once in the official newspaper a notice directing owners and occupants of
property within the city to destroy all weeds declared to be a nuisance and
stating that if not so destroyed the weeds will be destroyed as directed by the
City Manager at the expense of the owner. If expenses are not paid prior to the
following September 1, the charge for such work will be made a special
assessment against the property concerned.
(‘72 Code, § 1020:05) (Am. Ord. 1998-871, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2002-973,
passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
§ 97.30 CITY TREE INSPECTOR; DUTIES AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Duties. The City Tree Inspector shall administer the shade tree
disease control programs for the city in accordance with the city code.
Official duties include inspections, diagnosis, and the supervision of the
removal of diseased or hazard trees.
   (B)   Interference with duties. It shall be unlawful for any person to
prevent, delay, or interfere with the City Tree Inspector while engaging in his
or her official duties.
   (C)   Entry upon private premises. The City Tree Inspector or his/her duly
authorized agents may enter upon private property premises at any reasonable
time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned under this
section. The City Tree Inspector will attempt to make reasonable notice to the
property owner before entry in accordance with M.S. § 89.63(B). If the City
Tree Inspector determines that a tree is a public nuisance or constitutes an
immediate threat to the public health or safety, the Inspector may proceed with
abatement of the nuisance under §
97.55(B)4).
(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
§ 97.35 PUBLIC TREE PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Public tree care. The city shall have the right to plant, prune,
maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the public right-of-ways
and on public grounds as may be necessary to insure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such right-of-ways and public
grounds. This does not prohibit the planting of "street trees" by adjacent
property owners providing that the planting and maintenance of said trees is in
accordance with Operations & Maintenance Department Forestry and Public
Easement Maintenance Policies.
   (B)   Street tree selection. The official street tree species authorized for
the city shall be as indicated in the Operation & Maintenance Department
Forestry Policy. No other species may be planted as street trees without
written permission from the City Tree Inspector. No street tree shall be
removed without permission from the City Tree Inspector.
(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
§ 97.40 PRIVATE TREE PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Utilities and drainage. Trees, plants, and shrubs shall not be placed
where they interfere with the site drainage or where they shall require
frequent pruning in order to avoid interference with overhead power lines.
Plant materials shall be located to provide reasonable access to all utilities.
   (B)   Pruning and corner clearance. Every owner of any tree, plant and shrub
overhanging or bordering any street or right-of-way including sidewalks within
the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the
sidewalk and 19 feet above the surface of the street. Said owner shall remove
all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, plants, and shrubs or broken or decayed
limbs that constitute a menace to the safety of the public. If private trees
encroach in the right-of-way, the city may trim private trees so they meet the
above listed requirements.
      (1)   All trees and landscaping is subject to Clearview Triangle
Requirements of § 152.1007.
      (2)   All trees and landscaping must maintain a five foot clear zone
around fire hydrants as stated in the Uniform Fire Code.
   (C)   Dead or damaged tree removal on private property. The city shall have
the right to cause the removal of any dead, damaged, or diseased tree or part
there of as specified in §
97.50 (Nuisances).
(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
§ 97.45 SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL, PREVENTION, PEST CONTROL AND ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Dutch Elm Disease. The City Tree Inspector shall inspect premises and
places within the designated Dutch Elm disease control area of the city as many
times as practical or necessary to determine whether the disease exists.
      (1)   Elm Trees. Dutch Elm infected trees shall be those trees that show
any stage of infection. Property owners with trees identified as infected with
Dutch Elm from March 10 through September 15 shall be made to remove these elm
trees within 20 days of the notification. Property owners issued notifications
on infected trees from September 15 through March 10, shall have elm trees
removed prior to April 1.
      (2)   Elm Wood. Dutch Elm infected wood, logs, or stumps shall be
disposed of by burning, chipping, or removal to an authorized disposal site or
if retained shall be debarked by April 1st. The stockpiling and storage of elm
logs with the bark intact shall only be allowed during the period of September
15 through April 1st.
   (B)   Oak Wilt. The City Tree Inspector shall inspect premises and places
within the designated Oak Wilt control area of the city as many times as
practical or necessary to determine whether any disease exists.
      (1)   Oak trees. All oak trees within the designated Oak Wilt control
area of the city diagnosed as having Oak Wilt should be isolated from
neighboring healthy oak trees of the same species by chemical or mechanical
disruption of common root systems to prevent root graft transmission of the Oak
Wilt fungus.
      (2)   To control overland spread of Oak Wilt, the pruning of oaks shall
be avoided during the most susceptible period of infection, from April 15 until
July 1. If wounding is unavoidable during this period, as in the aftermath of a
storm or when the tree interferes with utility lines, the person or entity
pruning shall immediately apply a non-toxic tree wound dressing.
         (a)   Red Oaks. To prevent the Oak Wilt fungus from producing spores
and to prevent overland spread of this fungus, any diseased material of the red
oak group that wilt in July and August of one year shall be removed from both
private and public property by April 1st of the following year.
            1.   Any branch greater than two inches in diameter of the red oak
group determined to be hazardous and not salvaged shall be disposed of by
burning, chipping, or removal to an authorized dump site prior to April 1st of
the year following the appearance of symptoms. Dead standing red oaks that have
advanced beyond the potential for spore production need not be removed except
where they constitute a hazard to life or property as determined by the City
Tree Inspector.
            2.   Stumps of trees of the red oak group removed due to Oak Wilt
shall be completely covered, removed or debarked to the ground line to
eliminate all possibilities of spore formation and overland disease spread.
         (b)   White Oaks. Trees of the white oak group (i.e. white oak, bur
oak, bicolor oak) diagnosed as having Oak Wilt should be isolated by root graft
disruption as stated in §
97.45(D) (Root Graft Disruption).
      (3)   Oak Wood. Any hazardous oak wood to be used as fuel wood or to be
salvaged for other purposes must be debarked or completely covered by heavy
plastic (4 mil or greater) from April 15 until July 1 of the year following the
appearance of symptoms. After July 1 the wood does not need to be covered.
   (C)   Diagnosis. Diseased shade trees shall be identified by generally
accepted field symptoms such as wilting, yellowing of leaves, and/or staining
of wood under bark. The Minnesota Department of Agriculture tree disease
laboratory or other laboratories capable of performing such services approved
by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture shall do confirmation testing,
when determined to be necessary by the City Tree Inspector.
   (D)   Root graft disruption (barriers) at property boundaries. If the City
Tree Inspector finds that Dutch Elm disease or Oak Wilt threatens to cross
property boundaries or disease control area boundaries, the City Tree Inspector
may require root graft disruption to prevent the spread of disease. If plowing
or trenching is not possible due to terrain, location or buried utilities, the
City Tree Inspector may require alternate control measures. These control
measures will be in accordance with current technology and plans as may be
recommended by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture, Pesticide and Disease
Control, M.S. Chapter 1505. If, however, after the City Tree Inspector
identifies the location for the installation of a barrier or alternate control
measure, the City Tree Inspector further determines that the installation of
the barrier or alternate control measure is impossible because of the presence
of pavement or obstructions such as a septic system or other underground
utilities, the City Tree Inspector may mark for removal all oak trees whether
living or dead, infected or not and located between an infected tree and the
marked barrier location. These marked trees must be felled and disposed of no
later than May 1 of the year following inspection. The stump from such felled
trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if taller,
must be completely debarked. Expenses related to the installation of such
barriers and/or the removal of these trees is at the expense of the property
owner.
      (1)   The charge, or any portion thereof, for any necessary root graft
barriers or other control measures may be assessed against the property on
which the root graft barriers or other control measures are placed.
      (2)   Because Oak Wilt is a community problem and because Oak Wilt
control may benefit an entire neighborhood, the City Tree Inspector will
require neighborhood participation, shall encourage cooperation, including cost
sharing, in root graft disruption and other control efforts, especially where
Oak Wilt is in danger of spreading across property boundaries.
   (E)   Transporting diseased Elm and Oak wood. Unless transporting elm wood
or red oak wood to an authorized disposal site, it is unlawful for any person
to transport within the City any bark intact elm wood or wood from the red oak
group that is determined to be hazardous.
   (F)   Emerald Ash Borer (EAB). The city has an adopted Emerald Ash Borer
Preparedness and Management Plan, (City Council Resolution 2011-158). The City
Tree Inspector shall inspect premises and places within the city limits as many
times as practical or necessary to determine whether the pest exists.
      (1)   Ash trees. EAB infested trees shall be those trees that show any
stage of infestation. Property owners with trees identified as infected with
EAB from May 1 to August 31 shall be made to remove these ash trees after
August 31 of the same year and prior to May 1 of the following year. Property
owners issued notifications on infested trees after September 1, shall have the
ash trees removed prior to May 1of the following year.
      (2)   Ash wood. EAB infected wood, logs, or stumps shall be disposed of
within Hennepin County, either by grinding to a small diameter (less than one
inch in two dimensions), burning or burying. No ash wood may be transported out
of Hennepin County due to a state ordered quarantine on transporting ash wood
to help control the spread of Emerald Ash Borer.
(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
§ 97.50 NUISANCES.
   The following are public nuisances:
   (A)   Any living or dead standing tree or part thereof within the city
boundaries, located on public or private property, constituting a hazard to
life or property.
   (B)   Any living or dead standing tree with a shade tree pest or disease as
defined in §
97.01(C).
   (C)   Any weeds or grasses eight inches or more in height as defined in §
97.20.
   (D)   The presence of any noxious weeds; or
   (E)   Any other public nuisance as defined by this chapter.
   (F)   Any tree or shrub which has become or threatens to become a hazard so
as to adversely affect the public safety, whether such tree or shrub shall be
on public or private property.
   (G)   Any insect and/or pest that threatens the health of the shade trees,
including, but not limited to, the Gypsy Moth, Asian Long-horned beetle, and
Emerald Ash Borer.
(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
§ 97.55 REMOVAL AND ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of violation; removal. It is unlawful for a person to permit a
public nuisance to remain on any premises owned or possessed by that person as
follows:
      (1)   A public nuisance as defined in §
97.50. The city may order that the tree, trees, or any part thereof be removed
by the property owner or any person who may be in possession or who has the
right to possess such property, pursuant to the nuisance abatement procedure
herein.
      (2)   A public nuisance as defined in §
97.50. The city may order that the grass or weeds be cut or removed and the
violation be corrected by the property owner or any person who may be in
possession or who has the right to possess such property, pursuant to the
nuisance abatement procedure herein.
   (B)   Abatement procedure.
      (1)   Abatement by city. If the owner, occupant, or other responsible
party does not abate the public nuisance within the time specified by the city,
the city may abate or contract the abatement of the public nuisance and recover
the costs in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   Notice and Hearing. Whenever it is determined that a public
nuisance is being maintained or exists on a property, the City Manager must
give written notice through service by regular or certified mail, by posting a
notice on the property, or by personal delivery to the owner of or person in
control of the property on which the public nuisance is located. When the
property is occupied, service upon the occupant is deemed service upon the
owner. Where the property is unoccupied or abandoned, service may be by regular
or certified mail to the last known owner of record of the property or by
posting on the property. The notice must provide:
         (a)   A description of the public nuisance;
         (b)   A public nuisance as defined in §
97.50, grass or weed maintenance and control, must be corrected within seven
days of the service of the notice, or
         (c)   A public nuisance as defined in §
97.50, tree maintenance, must be corrected within 20 days of the service of the
notice;
         (d)   That if the public nuisance is not properly removed or corrected
as ordered, the public nuisance will be abated by the city and the costs of
abatement will be specially assessed to the property;
         (e)   That the owner of or person in control of the property on which
the public nuisance is located may in writing request a hearing before the City
Manager.
      (3)   Hearing; action. If a hearing is requested during either the 7-day
or 20-day period as required by the notice, the City Manager must promptly
schedule the hearing, and no further action on the abatement of the public
nuisance may be taken until a decision is rendered. After the scheduled
hearing, the City Manager may cancel the notice to remove or correct the public
nuisance, modify the notice, or affirm the notice to remove or correct the
public nuisance. If the notice is modified or affirmed, the public nuisance
must be disposed of in accordance with the city's written order.
      (4)   Summary abatement. Prior to summary abatement, a reasonable attempt
must be made to notify the owner, occupant, or other responsible party of the
intended action and the right to appeal the abatement and cost recovery at the
next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. The City Manager may provide for
abating a public nuisance without following the procedure required in division
(B) when:
         (a)   There is an immediate threat to the public health or safety;
         (b)   There is an immediate threat of serious property damage; or
         (c)   A public nuisance has been caused by private parties on public
property.
      (5)   Cost recovery. The owner of the property on which a nuisance has
been abated by the city, is personally liable to the city for the cost of the
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, an appropriate official will prepare a bill
for the cost and mail it to the owner or other responsible party. The amount is
immediately due and payable to the city.
      (6)   Assessment. If the cost, or any portion of it, has not been paid
within 30 days after the date of the bill, the council may certify the unpaid
cost against the property to which the cost is attributable in accordance with
the process set forth in §
94.07 of this Code.
   (C)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with state law.
      (2)   Any violation of this chapter may be subject to civil penalties in
accordance with
Chapter 37 of the city code.
      (3)   This chapter is not intended to prohibit a private property owner
from seeking additional penalties or remedies.
(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)
CHAPTER 98: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
General Provisions
   
98.01   Definitions
   
98.02   Disposal of garbage
   
98.03   Collection, supervision and control
   
98.04   Pre-collection practices
   
98.05   Vehicles for hauling garbage
   
98.06   Licensing of garbage and recyclable materials haulers; fee
   
98.07   Hours and days of residential collection
   
98.08   Mandatory hauling of yard waste and source separated organics
   
98.09   Scavengers
   
98.10   Inspection
   
98.11   No vested right
   
98.12   Obligation of licensed haulers
   
98.13   Disposal of garbage
   
98.14   Storage of garbage, recyclable materials, and other waste containers
   
98.15   Incinerators
   
98.16   [Reserved]
   
98.17   Disposal and discharge of prohibited materials
Recycling
   
98.30   Definitions
   
98.31   Pre-collection and collection
   
98.32   Licensing of collectors and haulers of recyclable materials
   
98.33   Regulations for supervision and control of recycling
   
98.34   Citations
   
98.35   Remedies cumulative
   
98.36   Injunctive relief
   
98.37   Costs and special assessments
   
98.38   Establishment of recycling utility
   
98.39   Rates and charges
 
   
98.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number include the plural number. The word MUST is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
   BULKY WASTE. Has the meaning set forth in Minnesota Statutes and is a subset
of municipal solid waste. BULKY WASTE includes household items and other
discarded materials that, due to their dimensions and weight, are typically not
collected as part of the regular garbage and recycling or for which there may
be a separate fee, such as furniture, carpeting, mattresses, and appliances.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any premises where a commercial or industrial
enterprise of any kind is carried on and includes clubs, churches and
establishments of non-profit organizations where food is prepared and served or
goods are sold.
   DUMPSTERS.
      (1)   A waste container generally ranging from two to six cubic yards
that a specially designed garbage truck lifts, empties into its hopper, and
lowers, on the spot.
      (2)   A dumpster must be made of metal or other suitable material which
is rodent-proof, fire resistant or waterproof, and which will not easily
corrode and is equipped with suitable handles and tight-fitting covers and must
be kept tightly covered when there is garbage/refuse within.
   GARBAGE. See MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
   GARBAGE COLLECTION. The taking up and collecting of all mixed municipal
solid waste (MSW) accumulated at all dwelling residences, places of business
and other institutions in the city, and the transportation of MSW to a sanitary
landfill or other place of disposal licensed and pemitted by the State of
Minnesota.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Shall have the meaning set forth in Minnesota Statutes.
Household hazardous waste (HHW) is a subset. Wastes are hazardous in Minnesota
when they display one or more of these characteristics: ignitable, oxidizer,
corrosive, reactive, toxic, or lethal.
   LEGAL HOLIDAYS. For the purposes of garbage and recycling collection, legal
holidays are defined as New Year's Day (January 1), Memorial Day, Independence
Day (July 4), Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day (December 25).
   LICENSED GARBAGE COLLECTOR. A business licensed by the city to collect,
transport and dispose of mixed municipal solid waste (MSW), recyclables, or
yard waste. The term shall include the collector's duly authorized and acting
employees and agents.
   LITTER. Garbage, recyclables, and all other waste material which, if thrown
or deposited as prohibited in this code, tends to create a nuisance or danger
to public health, safety, and welfare.
   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW). Has the meaning set forth in Minnesota
Statutes and means garbage. Garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, and other solid
waste from residential, commercial, industrial, and community activities, that
the generator of the waste aggregates for collection. MSW does not include auto
hulks, street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree
and agricultural wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, motor and vehicle fluids
and filters, and other materials collected, processed, and disposed of as
separate waste streams. Also referred to as "trash" or "garbage."
   MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed or intended for occupancy by
three or more families or housekeeping units, with separate dwelling units
either designed one over another and connected by interior or exterior hallways
and/or common entries.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. The meaning set forth in §
98.30 of this chapter.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. A building surrounded by open space containing one or
two dwelling units as defined in § 152.105 of this code.
   SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC MATERIAL (SSO). Shall have the meaning set forth in
Minnesota Statutes and shall include food waste and other compostable organic
materials that are source separated for recovery. The term "organics" does not
include yard waste for purposes of this subchapter (also referred to as "food
waste/organics" and "source separated organics.").
   YARD WASTE. Organic material consisting of garden wastes, leaves, lawn
cuttings, weeds, shrubs, and tree waste and pruning.
('72 Code, § 435:00) (Am. Ord. 1981-356(A), passed 3-23-81; Am. Ord. 1989-633
(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2012-1148, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
§ 98.02 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   Every tenant, lessee, owner or occupant of every private dwelling, house,
multiple residence, store, motel, restaurant, and every other type of property
in the city which accumulates garbage on such premises must have garbage
service provided by a licensed hauler. Garbage and refuse at any commercial
establishment or multiple dwelling must be disposed of at least once each week
by a licensed garbage hauler and as often as once each business day if
necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. It is
unlawful to accumulate or permit to accumulate any garbage on any property in
the city which might constitute a nuisance by reason of appearance, odor,
sanitation, possible littering of neighboring properties, littering of the
property on which the garbage is accumulated, or a fire hazard. Residents may
share garbage service provided it does not create a nuisance (as defined in
Chapter 94 of this code). Proof of proper disposal must be provided upon
request of the city. Residents who are away from their property for extended
periods of time and not accumulating garbage at that property may suspend or
cancel garbage service during that time.
('72 Code, § 435:05) (Am. Ord. 2012-1148, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.03 COLLECTION, SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.
   (A)   The City Manager or the City Manager’s designated representative, must
prepare regulations and rules for persons licensed to collect garbage
concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers and
the responsibilities of collectors licensed pursuant to §
98.06(A) pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal of garbage.
   (B)   The City Manager must present the proposed regulations to the City
Council and the Council will call a public hearing to determine the
reasonableness of the proposed regulations. All persons licensed under §
98.06(A) of this chapter at the time of the hearing must be served by certified
mail with a notice of the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the
hearing. Any person aggrieved by any proposed regulation of the Manager has the
right to present testimony to the Council and the Council may confirm, modify
and adopt the proposed regulations. Regulations adopted in this manner are
considered a condition to holding a license to collect garbage or refuse in the
city and the city may refuse to grant a license or may revoke or suspend any
license issued pursuant to §
98.06(A) of this chapter if the licensee fails to comply with the terms of the
adopted regulations.
('72 Code, § 435:10) (Am. Ord. 1980-317(A), passed 3-24-80; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
§ 98.04 PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Yard waste. Yard waste must be placed in containers that have a secure
lid and do not exceed 96 gallons in capacity, or in bags or bundles not
exceeding three feet in any dimension and not exceeding 60 pounds in weight and
securely fastened to avoid spillage.
   (B)   Garbage, bulky waste, and hazardous waste. All garbage as accumulated
on any premises must be placed and maintained in containers with a close-
fitting cover, that is rodent- and fly-proof, nonabsorbent, and leak-proof.
Bulky waste must not be visible from any street before 3:00 p.m. the day before
the scheduled pickup day. The doors of appliances must be properly secured or
removed to prevent potential health and safety hazards. It is prohibited by
state statute to dispose of as solid waste items including household
appliances, automotive batteries, covered electronic devices, motor oil, tires,
or hazardous wastes.
   (C)   Hazardous waste must be disposed of by residents at a licensed and
permitted household hazardous waste site or by businesses through a licensed
hazardous waste disposal company.
   (D)   Contagious disease garbage. Garbage such as, but not limited to,
bedding, wearing apparel, or utensils from residential dwelling units or other
units where highly infectious or contagious diseases are present must not be
deposited for regular collection but must be disposed of as directed by the
Environmental Health Specialist or health officer at the expense of the owner
or the possessor thereof.
   (E)   Maintain containers in sanitary condition. The owner, tenant, lessee,
or occupant of the premises must keep such containers in a clean and sanitary
condition and kept free from any substance which will attract or breed flies,
mosquitos, or other insects. Containers not complying with the requirements of
this chapter must be promptly replaced upon notice as set forth in division (G)
below.
   (F)   Garbage containers. Garbage containers must be rodent- proof, fire
resistant, and waterproof with tight-fitting covers and must be kept tightly
covered when there is garbage therein.
   (G)   Defective containers. Whenever a container is in poor repair, is
corroded or otherwise defective so as to permit insects, vermin or rodents to
enter, or does not meet any other requirements of this chapter, the garbage
hauler must repair or replace the container at their expense.
   (H)   Multiple family dwelling. Multiple family dwellings must be equipped
with garbage containers and garbage pickup service as provided in this
division. Garbage containers must be at least one cubic yard in capacity, must
be conveniently located in relationship to the residence units for which they
are provided, must be watertight and rodent-proof, and must be kept in an
enclosed structure concealing them from public view. Garbage and bulky waste
materials must be inside the containers not accumulated in or near the
enclosing structures.
   (I)   Commercial - industrial property. The owner or occupant of any
commercial or industrial establishment must also comply with the provisions of
division (H) of this section.
('72 Code, § 435:15) (Am. Ord. 1980-330(A), passed 7-11-80; Am. Ord. 1989-633
(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2008-1089, passed 6-23-08; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.05 VEHICLES FOR HAULING GARBAGE.
   All persons hauling or conveying garbage over the streets of the city will
use a vehicle so operated and maintained as to prevent offensive odors escaping
therefrom and garbage from being blown, dropped or spilled from the vehicle.
Any such vehicles must be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as
possible. Each vehicle must be equipped with a broom and scoop for use in the
immediate removal of spillage. Any vehicle customarily used for such purposes
must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and must be thoroughly
disinfected at least once each week unless the same has not been used since the
last disinfection thereof.
('72 Code, § 435:25) (Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.06 LICENSING OF GARBAGE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS HAULERS; FEE.
   (A)   Licensing of garbage and recyclable materials haulers.
      (1)   It is unlawful for a person to engage in the business of recyclable
materials hauling or garbage hauling in the city unless the person first pays
the license fee herein prescribed and secures a license from the city to do so
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Any person desiring a license must make application on a form
supplied by the City Clerk or designee. The City Clerk will require on the
application such information as may be necessary for the purposes of this
chapter.
      (3)   (a)   No license is to be issued until the applicant files with the
city a certificate of insurance as proof of coverages which are not less than
the following:
            1.   Bodily injury: $500,000 each occurrence; $500,000 aggregate.
            2.   Property damage: $500,000 each occurrence; $500,000 aggregate.
            3.   Comprehensive automobile and truck liability:
               a.   Bodily injury: $500,000 each person; $500,000 each
accident.
               b.   Property damage: $500,000 each accident; $500,000 non-owned
(to include coverage for all owned, non- owned, leased and hired vehicles).
         (b)   The certificate of insurance or other form as the city may
reasonably require must name the City of Brooklyn Park as an additional insured
and state that the contractor’s coverage must be the primary coverage in the
event of a loss. Further, the certificate must provide for 30 days written
notice to the city before cancellation, expiration, or change of coverage. The
certificate of insurance cancellation clause must conform to the city’s
notification requirements.
      (4)   The license expires on the last day of June each year.
      (5)   All licensees must be given a copy of any and all regulations
adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
98.03 of this chapter and must receipt for those copies. The licensee must
agree to comply and abide by the terms of those regulations. Failure to comply
may result in suspension or revocation of the license to collect garbage or
refuse within the city.
      (6)   The city reserves the right to limit the number of licenses issued,
and in the interest of healthful and sanitary conditions, reserves the right to
license operations to designated geographic areas of the city.
      (7)   Any person desiring a garbage collection license must file with the
City Clerk, prior to issuance of the license, a schedule of proposed rates to
be charged during the license period. The schedule must include at least three
levels of service based on the volume of refuse collected from the applicant’s
proposed customers. Each garbage collection licensee must notify the City Clerk
in writing with any changes in the licensee’s schedule of rates charged within
30 days of the effective date of any rate change.
   (B)   License fee. License fees must be in the amount set by the Council
from time to time.
('72 Code, §§ 435:30 and 435:40) (Am. Ord. 1980-317(A), passed 3-24-80; Am.
Ord. 1984-449(A), passed 4-23-84; Am. Ord. 1989-633(A), passed 9-25-89; Am.
Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
Cross-reference:
   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110
§ 98.07 HOURS AND DAYS OF RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person engaged in hauling garbage for hire within
the city from residential dwelling units or from commercial or industrial uses
where the dumpsters or garbage and refuse containers are within 300 feet of
residential dwelling units to do so after 8:30 p.m. or before 6:30 a.m. on any
day and all day Sundays and on legal holidays. The City Council may authorize
the collection of yard waste, recyclable materials, and garbage in residential
areas on specified days of the week.
   (B)   Holiday collection. In order to maintain consistent garbage and
recycling collection practices, no garbage or recycling collection is allowed
on legal holidays. If a legal holiday occurs on a weekday, garbage and
recycling collection may not occur on that day and collection on the subsequent
days of the week will be one day later than the regular collection schedule. If
a legal holiday falls on a weekend day, garbage and recycling collection must
be done according to the regular Monday through Friday collection schedule.
('72 Code, § 435:45) (Am. Ord. 1984-470(A), passed 11-13-84; Am. Ord. 2012-
1148, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.08 MANDATORY HAULING OF YARD WASTE AND SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANICS.
   (A)   Each residential garbage hauler licensee must offer yard waste
collection service in which licensee will separately collect and haul away yard
waste to a licensed and permitted recycling or composting site.
   (B)   Similarly, each licensee must offer source separated organics (SSO)
recycling collection service in which the licensee will collect and haul away
SSO to a licensed and permitted recycling or composting site, or transfer site.
('72 Code, § 435:46) (Ord. 1989-633(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.09 SCAVENGERS.
   It is unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer acting in
the course of official business, to scavenge or otherwise collect garbage,
recyclable materials or yard waste at the curb or from garbage containers or
from recyclable materials containers without a license therefor from the city
and an account relationship with the owner or occupant of the premises.
Responsibility for and ownership of recyclable materials remains with the
individual resident until collected by a licensed hauler of recyclable
materials, at which time the ownership and responsibility passes to the hauler.
('72 Code, § 435:47) (Ord. 1989-633(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.10 INSPECTION.
   Each vehicle for which a license is applied for or which is licensed is
subject to inspection by the city at the annual renewal date and at all
reasonable times. Any such vehicle, while it is used by the licensee in the
city, must have the name of the licensee clearly printed on both sides and the
license for the vehicle must be kept in the vehicle at all times while it is
being so used. Each licensed vehicle must have attached a decal to be issued by
the city showing current registration. The decal must be affixed to the outside
of that portion of the truck body used to hold refuse or recyclable materials.
Each licensed recyclable material hauler must also provide appropriate
container vehicles in good condition.
('72 Code, § 435:50) (Am. Ord. 1989-633(A), passed 9-25-89)
§ 98.11 NO VESTED RIGHT.
   No person licensed pursuant to this chapter will gain a vested right in the
license. The city may, upon finding that public necessity requires, determine
to establish another means of garbage collection.
('72 Code, § 435:55) (Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
§ 98.12 OBLIGATION OF LICENSED HAULERS.
   A licensed garbage hauler must pick up any garbage of the hauler's customers
which has been deposited for collection, in the manner provided by this
chapter.
('72 Code, § 435:60) (Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.13 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   It is unlawful to dispose of garbage upon any property in the city.
('72 Code, § 435:65) (Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.14 STORAGE OF GARBAGE, RECYCLABLE MATERIALS, AND OTHER WASTE CONTAINERS.
   Garbage, yard waste, recyclable materials, and other waste containers, bags,
or bundles must not be stored or located within the front yard or any side yard
that is adjacent to a street. In addition, all garbage, yard waste, recyclable
materials, and other waste containers, bags, or bundles must be fully screened
from view from all front and adjacent side streets and from the front yards of
adjacent properties. For the purposes of this section, the phrase FULLY
SCREENED means that the containers, bags, or bundles are screened with
structurally sound opaque materials, such as a fence or other materials
designed for this purpose, which may include architectural features similar to
the home. All screening materials must be protected from deterioration. Foliage
such as shrubs, bushes, and trees do not meet the definition of FULLY SCREENED.
Waste containers must not be placed out for pickup before 3:00 p.m. the day
before the scheduled pickup day, must not be placed in the street, and must be
returned and placed in a proper location on the same day of collection.
('72 Code, § 435:70) (Am. Ord. 2008-1089, passed 6-23-08; Am. Ord. 2010-1110,
passed 1-4-10; Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.15 INCINERATORS.
   It is unlawful to operate an incinerator within the city for the burning of
garbage.
('72 Code, § 435:75) (Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.16 [RESERVED]
§ 98.17 DISPOSAL AND DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to dispose of, within the territorial land or public
water limits of the city, any garbage, oils, bilge, sludge, waste, or toxic and
hazardous waste except in the manner authorized in this chapter.
    (B)   It is unlawful to discharge from any source whatsoever such
quantities of air contaminants, smoke or other materials which cause injury,
detriment, nuisance or annoyance to a considerable number of persons or to the
public or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of any such
persons or the public or which causes or has a natural tendency to cause injury
or damage to business or property.
('72 Code, § 435:85) (Am. Ord. 2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
RECYCLING
§ 98.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED CONTAINER. A container authorized by the City Manager or the City
Manager's designee for recycling use.
   COLLECTION. The aggregation of waste or recyclable materials from the place
at which it is generated and includes all activities up to the time when
delivered to a facility.
   COMPOSTABLE MATERIAL. Organic material consisting of grass clippings,
leaves, soft-bodied plant materials and fruit and vegetable food scraps.
   FACILITY. Any materials recovery facility, transfer station, or similar
facility to which recyclable materials are delivered for processing.
   GENERATION. The act or process of producing waste (as defined in M.S. §
115A.03, Subd. 11).
   GENERATOR. Any person who generates waste (as defined in M.S. § 115A.03,
Subd. 12).
   HAULER. A collector or transporter of mixed municipal solid waste,
recyclable materials, and/or yard waste.
   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW). Shall have the meaning set forth in
Minnesota Statutes and means garbage. Garbage, rubbish, refuse and other solid
waste from residential, commercial, industrial and community activities which
is generated and collected in aggregate, but does not include auto hulks,
street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and
agricultural wastes, tires and other materials collected, processed and
disposed of as separate waste streams. Also referred to as "trash" or
"garbage."
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed or intended for occupancy by
three or more families or housekeeping units, with separate dwelling units
designed one over another and connected by interior or exterior hallways and/or
common entries.
   PERSON. Any human being, any municipality or other public agency, any public
or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association, or other
organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent or other legal
representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity.
   RECYCLABLES. Shall have the meaning set forth in Minnesota Statutes and
means materials that are separated from mixed municipal solid waste for the
purpose of recycling or composting, including paper, glass, plastics, metals,
and source-separated compostable materials and all material hereafter
designated as recyclable by the city.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS RECOVERY FACILITY. A facility established and used for
the receiving, storage, preparing and/or processing of recyclable materials for
sale or reuse.
   RECYCLING. Shall have the definition in Minnesota Statutes, and shall mean
the process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials and reusing the
materials in their original form or using them in manufacturing processes that
do not cause the destruction of recyclable materials in a manner that precludes
further use.
   RECYCLING SERVICES. Recycling collection services, walkup collection
services, and any other services provided to a dwelling unit in accordance with
this code.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. A building surrounded by open space containing one or
two dwelling units as defined in § 152.105 of this code.
   SOURCE SEPARATION. The separation of recyclable materials and yard wastes
from mixed municipal solid waste at the source of generation.
   SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC MATERIAL (SSO). Shall have the same meaning set
forth in Minnesota Statutes and shall include food waste and other compostable
organic materials that are source separated for recovery. The term "organics"
does not include yard waste for purposes of this subchapter (also referred to
as "food waste/organics" and "source separated organics.").
   WASTE TIRE. A pneumatic tire or solid tire for motor vehicles as defined in
M.S. § 169.01 and included in a Solid Waste Management Plan pursuant to M.S. §
115A.46.
   YARD WASTE. Organic material consisting of garden wastes, leaves, lawn
cuttings, weeds, shrubs, and tree waste and prunings.
('72 Code, § 437:00) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
§ 98.31 PRE-COLLECTION AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Pre-collection.
      (1)   All persons, who are owners, lessees, and occupants of any
building, commercial or residential, within the City of Brooklyn Park, which
generates mixed municipal solid waste, must separate from all solid waste the
recyclable materials and yard waste before disposal, removal or collection.
      (2)   All recyclables, source separated organics, and yard waste must be
placed in approved containers in a manner consistent with the rules,
regulations and procedures adopted by the city.
   (B)   Container and storage requirements.
      (1)   All persons who are owners, lessees, or occupants of any building,
commercial or residential must either utilize containers provided by the city
for recyclable materials, or containers provided by their recyclables hauler,
and all containers for recyclable materials must be:
         (a)   Maintained in a clean and sanitary condition in accordance with
all pertinent health statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations;
         (b)   Located in such a manner so as to prevent them from being
overturned or obstructing pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic or being in
violation of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulations; and
         (c)   Adequate and substantial enough to contain the recyclable
materials.
      (2)   Collections of recyclable materials must be of sufficient frequency
as to avoid unsightliness, odor, insect infestations, vermin infestations, and
any other public health or public safety hazards.
   (C)   Collection, hauling and processing. The collection, hauling and
processing of recyclable materials from residential properties must be
supervised by the city, which has the power to establish, by resolution, the
time, method and routes of service. Special times for special collection
projects may also be designated. Collection provisions include the following:
      (1)   Notice of dates and times of collection will be published or
otherwise made available to persons affected herein.
      (2)   The Department may establish drop-off or collection sites where any
person may deposit recyclable materials and/or yard waste at such times and
locations as determined.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person other than employees of the
Department, or authorized persons, licensed collectors or haulers to collect,
remove or dispose of recyclable materials after the materials and/or yard waste
have been placed or deposited for collection.
      (4)   Nothing in this subchapter abridges the right of any person to give
or sell their recyclable materials and/or yard waste to any recycling and
composting program lawfully operated for profit, non-profit or charitable
purposes.
      (5)   Nothing in this subchapter abridges the right of any authorized
recycling or composting program to lawfully operate within Hennepin County,
subject to such other licenses or other regulations as may be required by law.
      (6)   It is unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of mixed
municipal solid waste which consists of recyclable materials and/or yard waste
combined with other forms of mixed municipal solid waste.
   (D)   Yard waste. Yard wastes must be kept on site separate from recyclable
materials and from refuse as defined in §
98.01 of this chapter. If yard wastes are kept on site, yard wastes must be
composted or stored in an acceptable manner so as to not create an unreasonable
odor or other condition that is obtrusive or annoying to others. If yard wastes
are removed from the site, they must be taken in a sanitary manner to an
approved yard waste recycling or composting site or removed by a licensed
hauler by placing the material in bags or approved containers and set out for
collection at the time and location prescribed by a licensed hauler.
   (E)   Exception. Nothing in this section prevents persons from hauling
recyclable materials from their own residences or business properties provided
the following rules are observed:
      (1)   That all recyclable materials are securely transported to prevent
leaks, spills or material loss.
      (2)   That recyclable materials may be disposed of at a recycling
facility, an organized recyclable drive or through a licensed recyclable
materials hauler.
      (3)   Recyclable materials must be stored so as to be out of the public
view insofar as possible.
('72 Code, § 437:05) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.32 LICENSING OF HAULERS OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   Recyclable materials hauler licenses are granted only upon the condition
that the licensed hauler have appropriate container vehicles in good condition
to prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid cargo, that the vehicle be kept
as clean and free from offensive odors as possible and not allowed to stand in
any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect recyclables (see §
98.06 for other requirements).
('72 Code, § 437:10) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
Penalty, see § 98.99
Cross-reference:
   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110
§ 98.33 REGULATIONS FOR SUPERVISION AND CONTROL OF RECYCLING.
   (A)   The City Manager or designated representative, must prepare
regulations and rules for haulers concerning days and hours of collection, type
and location of containers for recyclable materials, and the responsibilities
of haulers licensed pursuant to §
98.06 pertaining to the collection, conveyance, and processing of recyclable
materials.
   (B)   The City Manager must present the proposed regulations to the City
Council and the Council must call a public hearing to determine the
reasonableness of the proposed regulation. All persons licensed under §
98.06 as haulers of recyclable materials must be served by certified mail with
a notice of the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Any
person aggrieved by any proposed regulation of the Manager has the right to
present testimony to the Council and the Council may confirm, modify, and adopt
the proposed regulations. Regulations adopted in this manner are considered a
condition to holding a license to collect recyclable materials in the city and
the city may refuse to grant a license or may revoke or suspend any license
issued pursuant to §
98.06 of the city code if the licensee fails to comply with the terms of the
adopted regulations.
('72 Code, § 437:15) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
§ 98.34 CITATIONS.
   The Department or any of its duly authorized representatives have the power
to issue citations for violations of this subchapter, but this does not permit
such representatives to physically arrest or take into custody any violator
except on warrant duly issued.
   (A)   Form of citations. Citations must contain at least the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person charged with the violation or
the owner or person in charge of the premises at which the violation occurs.
      (2)   The date and place of the violation.
      (3)   A short description of the violation followed by the section of
this subchapter violated.
      (4)   The date and place at which the person receiving the citation must
appear and a notice that if the person does not respond, a warrant may be
issued for the person's arrest.
      (5)   The name of the person issuing the citation.
      (6)   Other information as the court may specify.
   (B)   Issuance of citations. Whenever any representative of the Department
discovers any violation of this subchapter, the representative may issue a
citation to the person alleged to have committed the violation and the citation
must be in the form specified in division (A) of this section. A copy of such
citation must be issued to the person alleged to have committed the violation.
   (C)   Issuance. The citation must be issued to the person charged with the
violation or in the case of a corporation or municipality, to any officer or
agent, expressly or implicitly authorized to accept such issuance.
   (D)   Criminal complaint. In lieu of a citation the city may proceed at any
time by formal criminal complaint issued against any person who fails to comply
with this subchapter.
('72 Code, § 437:20(2)) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)
§ 98.35 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   No remedy set forth in this subchapter for violation of this subchapter is
intended to be exclusive of any other available remedy or remedies, but each
and every such remedy is cumulative and is in addition to every other remedy
given under the city code or now or hereafter existing at law or in equity or
by statute. No delay in the exercise of any remedy for any violation of this
subchapter shall later impair or waive any such right or power of the city.
('72 Code, § 437:20(4)) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)
§ 98.36 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   In the event of a violation or a threat of violation of this subchapter, the
city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings including application for
injunctive relief, action to compel performance or other appropriate action to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or threatened violations.
('72 Code, § 437:20(5)) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)
§ 98.37 COSTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   If a hauler or any person within the city collects or disposes of
recyclables in violation of this subchapter, the city may take the necessary
steps to correct such violations and the costs thereof may be recovered in a
civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction or, at the discretion of
the City Council, the costs may be certified to the County Auditor as a special
assessment against the real property owned by the hauler or person.
('72 Code, § 437:20(6)) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)
§ 98.38 ESTABLISHMENT OF RECYCLING UTILITY.
   Pursuant to Chapter 13 of the City Charter and M.S. Chapter 429, the city
hereby establishes a recycling utility and authorizes the imposition of just
and reasonable charges for the use and availability of recycling to residential
dwelling units and to multi- family dwellings.
('72 Code, § 437:25) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2021-1262,
passed 5-10-21)
§ 98.39 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Findings and determination.
      (1)   In the exercise of its governmental authority and in order to
promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, the city
will facilitate the collection, processing and recycling of recyclable
materials in accordance with this subchapter of the city code.
      (2)   It is necessary and desirable to provide a method of recovering the
costs of operating the recycling service through the imposition of charges as
provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   Billing unit. Service charges for parcels of land shall be based on
land use. The billing unit for residential parcels zoned or used as residential
shall be a dwelling unit: single-family residential unit or townhouse/two-
family residential unit or multi- family residential unit.
   (C)   Calculation of fees. The service charge to be billed each billing unit
shall be a fair and equitable share of the total costs of the system. Further,
service charges shall be apportioned to similar classes of property similarly.
From time to time the City Council shall adopt a resolution establishing a
class charge rate calculation table for all billing units. These quarterly
charges shall be listed in the City Code
 Appendix fee resolution table.
   (D)   Public hearing and notice. The city must hold a hearing prior to
adopting a resolution establishing charges for recycling services. Notice of
such hearing must be published in the official city newspaper at least ten days
prior to the date of hearing. Additional notice of such public hearings must be
mailed to subscribers or given in such manner as the City Council may
determine. The failure to give mailed notice or any defects in the notice does
not invalidate the proceedings. Additional notice of such public hearings must
be mailed to subscribers or given in such manner as the City Council may
determine.
   (E)   Payment of charges. Recycling bills will be placed on the utility
accounts of all property and are payable in the manner established for all
utilities.
   (F)   Penalties and remedies for delinquency or default in paying billings.
Any recycling service charges in excess of 90 days past due on October 1 of any
year may be certified to the Hennepin County Taxpayer Services Manager for
collection with real estate taxes as a special assessment. An administrative
charge of $25 will be added to each recycling service charge so certified. In
addition, the city may bring a civil action or take other legal remedies to
collect unpaid charges.
   (G)   Adjustment of charges. If an owner or person responsible for paying
the recycling service charge questions the correctness of such a charge, such
person may have the determination of the charge reviewed by written request to
the City Manager. Such request shall be made within 30 days of the mailing of
the bill in question. The City Manager shall have the authority to recompute
the charge.
('72 Code, §§ 437:30 - 437:65) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord.
2021-1262, passed 5-10-21)
Cross-reference:
   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Civil penalty. A violation of any provision of §§
98.30 et seq. shall result in a $25 penalty for each owner or occupant of a
single-family dwelling and two-family dwelling and a $100 penalty for each
owner of a multiple-family dwelling, commercial, industrial or institutional
property. A violator shall be given a written warning for the initial
violation. A civil penalty shall be imposed for each subsequent violation.
Penalties that remain unpaid for more than 30 days shall be charged to the
utility account of the violator. Any penalty that is placed on a utility
account may be an assessment against the violator’s property. Such amount shall
be certified to the Hennepin County Taxpayer Services Manager and collected in
the same manner as taxes and/or special assessments against the premises and
may be subject to a civil action initiated by the city.
      (2)   Misdemeanor. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of
§§
98.30 et seq. may be charged with a violation not exceeding a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
('72 Code, § 437:20(1),(3)) (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2021-
1262, passed 5-10-21)
CHAPTER 99: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
99.01   Title
   
99.02   Definitions
   
99.03   Damage
   
99.04   Inspection
   
99.05   Liability
   
99.06   Public sewer service connection
   
99.07   Prohibiting discharges into the sanitary sewer system
Connections and Permits
   
99.15   Connection charge required
   
99.16   Permit application
   
99.17   Costs
Rules and Regulations
   
99.30   Prohibited waste water discharge
   
99.31   Control manhole
   
99.32   Standards
   
99.33   Rates and charges
   
99.34   Revenues
   
99.35   Industrial user strength charge
   
99.36   Metering; installation; extra supplying
   
99.37   Information
   
99.38   Estimated bills
   
99.39   Beginning service
   
99.40   Billing
   
99.41   Unauthorized use of public sewer prohibited
   
99.42   Building sewer
   
99.43   Locating public sewer connection
   
99.44   Excavations
   
99.45   Contracts
   
99.46   Owner responsibility
   
99.47   Discontinue public sewer service
   
99.48   Claims
Sewer Installers
   
99.60   License required
   
99.61   Application
   
99.62   Bond
   
99.63   Insurance
   
99.64   Renewal
   
99.65   Refusal to renew and revocation
   
99.66   Fee
Rates and Charges
   
99.75   Rates and charges established
   
99.76   Sewer connection charges
   
99.77   Permit and inspection fee
   
99.78   Bills and meter readings
   
99.79   Late charges
   
99.80   Certification of delinquent accounts to county for collection
   
99.81   Private sewer system permit fees
   
99.82   Reinspection fee
   
99.83   Sewer service availability charge
 
   
99.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Private sewer and water systems, see §§
101.01 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.01 TITLE.
   This chapter comprises and is referred to hereinafter as the “sewer code.”
('72 Code, § 600:00) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms in
the sewer code is in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code, Chapter
4715, Plumbing Code, the Waste Discharge Rules for the Metropolitan Disposal
System (MDS), and as set forth as follows:
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. An individual sewage disposal or
treatment system other than a public sewer system, and which receives sewage
from an individual establishment.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sanitary sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and is controlled by a public authority.
('72 Code, § 600:05) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.03 DAMAGE.
   It is unlawful for an unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage
works. Any person violating this provision is guilty of a penal offense.
('72 Code, § 600:10) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.04 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The City Building Official, and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification are permitted to enter upon
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of the sewer code.
   (B)   Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the
city’s sanitary sewer system must allow an employee of the city or the city’s
designated representative to inspect the buildings to confirm that there is no
sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. In lieu
of having the city inspect their property, any person may furnish a certificate
from a licensed plumber certifying that their property is in compliance with
this section.
   (C)   Any person refusing to allow their property to be inspected or
refusing to furnish a plumber’s certificate within 14 days of the date city
employees or the city’s designated representatives are denied admittance to the
property, immediately becomes subject to the surcharge hereinafter provided
for. Any property owner found to violate this section must make the necessary
changes to comply with this section and furnish proof of the changes to the
city.
   (D)   All new homes are required to have a sump pump basket and drain tile
and be required to have their sump pump system inspected at final inspection
for certificate of occupancy and a certificate of compliance completed.
   (E)   Each sump pump or other clear water conveyance device connection
identified will be reinspected on a yearly basis in conjunction with a yearly
water meter inspection. The city reserves the right to reinspect all properties
within the city for code violations.
('72 Code, § 600:15) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 99.05 LIABILITY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of the sewer code becomes liable
to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of
such violation, including attorney's fees.
('72 Code, § 600:25) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.06 PUBLIC SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (A)   Connection required. Connection to the public sewer system is required
in accordance with the provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code, Chapter
4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code, and the ordinances of the City of Brooklyn Park.
   (B)   Private sewage treatment system repair. At such time as a public sewer
becomes available to a property served by a private sewage treatment system,
and the private system cannot be repaired or reconstructed as provided in
Chapter 101 of this title, a direct connection must be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this section, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities must be abandoned and removed or filled with
suitable material. No individual sewage treatment of disposal system is
permitted to discharge into any public sewer or natural outlet.
   (C)   Separate public sewer service connections required.
      (1)   All connections must be made in accordance with the provisions of
the Minnesota State Building Code, Chapter 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code, and
Rule 4715.0310 thereof. A separate and independently connected building sewer
must be provided for each property and for each unit contained within a
structure; i.e., a duplex must have two services from the public sewer main to
the building. Exceptions to this provision may be allowed subject to the
approval of the Building Official.
      (2)   Where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot
and no public sewer service connection can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the sewer service
connection from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one sewer service connection except for rate purposes.
      (3)   Connection of more than one property to a sewer service extension
of the public sewer that is intended for a single service connection, is
subject to the approval of the Building Official. Such a connection must be
made through a manhole constructed at the connection. The manhole, when
required, must be located at the public utility easement, right-of-way, or
sewer service extension from the public sewer, must be accessibly and safely
located, and must be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Building Official. The manhole must be installed by the owner at the owner's
expense, will become the property of the city and maintained by the city so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.
('72 Code, § 605:20) (Am. Ord. 1988-587(A), passed 1-25-88; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.07 PROHIBITING DISCHARGES INTO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Water from any roof, surface, ground water sump pump, footing tile,
swimming pool, or other natural precipitation must not be discharged into the
sanitary sewer system. Dwellings and other buildings and structures which
require, because of infiltration or water into basements, crawl spaces, and the
like, a sump pump discharge system or other device intended to convey clear
water must have a permanently installed discharge line which must not at any
time discharge water into a sanitary sewer system. A permanent installation is
one which provides for year round discharge capability to either the outside of
the dwelling, building, or structure, or is connected to the city storm sewer
or discharges through the curb and gutter to the street. It consists of a rigid
discharge line without valving or quick connections for altering the path of
discharge, and if connected to the city storm sewer line, include a check valve
and an air gap located in a small diameter structure as shown in the city's
standard plates.
   (B)   Before February 1,1999, any person having a roof, surface, ground
water sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging
into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove same. Any
disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in an
effective, workmanlike manner, as approved by designated city employee(s) or
the city’s designated representative.
(Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14-98)
CONNECTIONS AND PERMITS
§ 99.15 CONNECTION CHARGE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Connection charges. It is unlawful to make or cause to be made, any
connection to the Brooklyn Park municipal sewer system, unless the person has
first paid to the city a connection charge in amounts set by the City Council.
   (B)   Special assessments. In addition, no permit may be issued to tap or
connect with any public sewer system main, either directly or indirectly, from
any lot or tract of land, unless:
      (1)   The property has been specially assessed for the public sewer
system, or equivalent sums have been paid to the city for the cost of
construction and maintenance of the public sewer system to which the connection
is made; or
      (2)   If no assessment has been levied for such construction costs, that
proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be commenced in due
course; or
      (3)   That the cost of construction for the public sewer system has been
paid by the developer or builder platting the lot or tract of land; this does
not include lots or tracts of land served by the public sewer system and which
were not a part of the plat or tract developed; or
      (4)   If no assessment has been levied, and no assessment proceedings
will be completed in due course, and the developer or builder of the lot or
tract has not paid the cost of improving the lot or tract of land, that the
developer or builder develops must pay a sum equal to the portion of the cost
of constructing the public sewer system which would be assessable against the
lot or tract of land has been paid to the City of Brooklyn Park.
   (C)   Tax forfeited land - special assessments and reassessment. When a
parcel of tax forfeited land is returned to private ownership and the parcel is
benefitted by sanitary sewer or any other improvement for which special
assessments were canceled because of the forfeiture, the city may, upon notice
and hearing as provided for the original assessment, make a reassessment or a
new assessment as to the parcel in an amount equal to the amount remaining
unpaid on the original assessment plus interest; or the city may impose fees or
charges for the use or availability or the improvement or improvements or for
connections therewith in an amount not to exceed the amount remaining unpaid on
the canceled assessment.
   (D)   Special connection charge. If such special assessments have not been
paid, no such permit to connect to the public sewer system will be issued,
unless the applicant pays an additional connection fee which will be equal to
the portion of the cost of construction of the public sewer system which would
be assessable against the lot or tract to be served by the connection. The
assessable cost is to be determined by the City Engineer, upon the same basis
per front foot or lot unit as any assessment previously levied against other
property for the public sewer system, or if no such assessment has been levied,
upon the basis of the uniform charge per front foot or lot unit which may have
been or which will be charged for similar connections with the public sewer
system, determined on the basis of the total assessable cost of the main
allocated on a frontage or lot unit basis.
('72 Code, § 610:00) (Am. Ord. 1978-262(A), passed 4-24-78; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.16 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Permits for building sewers and connections will be granted to only plumbers
licensed by the State of Minnesota.
   (A)   Application for public sewer service connection must be made on
printed forms, must state the legal description, street and official house
numbers of the premises to be connected, and the nature of the improvement to
be done. A permit and inspection fee in the amount set by the City Council is
payable to the city at the time the application is filed.
   (B)   The charges for connection to public sewer must be paid at the time
the application is submitted and before the service is connected.
   (C)   No person except a plumber or certified pipe layer duly licensed by
the State of Minnesota or a duly authorized employee of the city will be
permitted to do any work on connections to the public sewer system.
   (D)   The sewer service extension from the public sewer system main to the
public utility easement, or right-of-way is the property of the city and all
persons are forbidden to interfere with such extension.
   (E)   The charges for tapping public sewer mains must be paid at the time
the application is submitted and before the service is installed.
('72 Code, § 610:15) (Am. Ord. 1978-262(A), passed 4-24-78; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.17 COSTS.
   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer to the public sewer system will be borne by the property owner.
The property owner must indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
('72 Code, § 610:30) (Am. Ord. 1978-262(A), passed 4-24-78; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 99.30 PROHIBITED WASTE WATER DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Storm water discharge.  
      (1)   It is unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof drainage, runoff, or sub-surface
drainage to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other such unpolluted
drainage must be discharged to such drains as are specifically designed as
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City Engineer. Potable
clear water wastes may be discharged, upon approval of the City Engineer, to a
storm sewer, or natural outlet. The use of dry wells for the purpose of storm
water disposal is prohibited. Any such unauthorized discharge to the sanitary
sewer system is considered a penal offense.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties and surcharges for such penal
offenses, the city has the right to make any disconnections or repairs
necessary to cease the prohibited use of the city sanitary sewer system; to
receive the actual costs for disconnections and repairs made from the property
owner; and to recover the actual costs of the sanitary sewer treatment and
conveyance from the property owner as estimated and determined by the City
Manager or the City Manager's designee.
   (B)   Specific waters prohibited. It is unlawful to discharge or cause to be
discharged to any public sewer, any waters or wastes prohibited by the
Minnesota State Building Code, Chapter 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code; or by the
Waste Discharge Rules for the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services and
promulgated by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services pursuant to M.S.
Chapter 473, and under the control of Metropolitan Council Environmental
Services, effective July 1, 1994.
   (C)   Storm drains. It is unlawful for a person to permit any sewage to flow
into any public storm drain from any premises owned by that person or under the
person’s control.
('72 Code, § 615:00) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.31 CONTROL MANHOLE.
   The owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes as defined in the Waste Discharge Rules for the Metropolitan Council
Environmental Services (MCES), must install a suitable control manhole in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. The manhole, when required, must be accessibly and safely located, and
must be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City Engineer. The
manhole must be installed by the owner at the owner's expense, and must be
maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
('72 Code, § 615:33) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.32 STANDARDS.
   All measurement tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and
wastes regulated by MCES, Waste Discharge Rules to which reference is made in §
99.30(B), must be determined in accordance with EPA approved methods as
specified by 40 C.F.R. Part 136, and must be determined at the control manhole
provided for in §
99.31, or upon representative samples taken at the control manhole. In the
event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole is
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected.
('72 Code, § 615:36) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.33 RATES AND CHARGES.
   Rates and charges for use and service of the sanitary sewer system are as
set by the City Council and §§
99.75 et seq. of this chapter.
('72 Code, § 615:42) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.34 REVENUES.
   All revenues derived from these rates and charges are to be credited to the
Public Utilities Revenue Accounts. Such revenue may be used only for the
purpose of paying the cost of operating and maintaining the public sewer system
and the water supply system, paying charges made by Metropolitan Council
Environmental Services, providing an adequate depreciation fund, paying costs
of meter-reading, billing, collection, and other similar or related sewer
operating expenses, provided that any surplus above such needs may be
transferred to the general funds.
('72 Code, § 615:44) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 99.35 INDUSTRIAL USER STRENGTH CHARGE.
   (A)   Recitals. Metropolitan Council Environmental Services has been
organized and existing under the laws of the State of Minnesota, and has
determined to impose an industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the
Metropolitan Disposal System (as defined in M.S. Chapter 473) to recover
operational costs of treatment works attributable to the strength of the
discharge of industrial waste, such sewer strength charge being in addition to
the base sewer volume charge.
   (B)   Administration and enforcement. Administration and enforcement of
federal and state laws pertaining to industrial user strength charges and the
discharge of industrial wastes is by Metropolitan Council Environmental
Services.
('72 Code, § 615:46) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 99.36 METERING; INSTALLATION; EXTRA SUPPLYING.
   (A)   Metering. A meter recording the use of water may be installed on any
non-residential lot, parcel or premises and thereafter the rate must be based
upon such use of water. The City Manager or the City Manager's designee may
require and order the installation of such meter on any such lot, parcel or
premises where it determines that flat charges are impractical to apply, or
result in inequitable charges because insufficient or excessive; and thereafter
the rate will be based upon such use of water.
   (B)   Meter installation. Any water meter installed for use or used as a
basis for the computation of sewer rates must be installed and maintained in
good operating condition at all times, such installation and maintenance to be
without expense to the city. Any such meter must be of a type obtained from the
city, and must accurately measure all water received on the premises.
Installation of and maintenance of such meter must be made in accordance with
plumbing regulations of this city.
   (C)   Extra meter supplying. If the lot, parcel of land, or premises
discharge normal sewage or industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system,
either directly or indirectly, and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the
Council that a portion of the water measured by the water meter does not and
cannot enter the sanitary sewerage system, then, and in that event, the Council
may permit or require the installation of other or additional meters in such
manner that the quantity of water which actually could enter the sewer system
may be determined. In such case the charges or rates will be based upon the
amount of water which can enter the sanitary sewerage system.
('72 Code, §§ 615:48 - 615:54) (Am. Ord. 1995-774, passed 2-13- 95; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.37 INFORMATION.
   The owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises must supply the
city with such information as the city may reasonably require related to use of
water, use of sewer, or sewer rates. Wilful failure to provide such information
or wilful falsification of such information constitutes a violation of this
chapter, as does wilful failure to comply with any requirement or order issued
pursuant to this chapter.
('72 Code, § 615:57) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.38 ESTIMATED BILLS.
   If the owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises fails to provide
information as provided in §
99.37 hereof, or fails or refuses to comply with any requirement of this
chapter, the proper charge for such premises will be estimated and billed in
accordance with such estimate.
('72 Code, § 615:60) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.39 BEGINNING SERVICE.
   For a fraction of a quarter the charges and rates for non-metered units will
be based upon the amount of the established flat charge, provided, however,
that the actual month of beginning will be considered as having begun on the
first or fifteenth of the month, whichever is closer.
('72 Code, § 615:63) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.40 BILLING.
   Bills for charges for the use and service of the sewerage system will be
made out by the city in accordance with the usual and customary practice. All
bills are payable to the City of Brooklyn Park and are rendered quarterly.
('72 Code, § 615:66) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 99.41 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC SEWER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to make a connection to the public sewer system without
first obtaining permits required by the city. It is unlawful to discharge into
the public sewer any wastes prohibited by this chapter. Any such unauthorized
connection or use of the public sewer system is considered a penal offense.
   (B)   In addition to penalties for such penal offense, the city has the
right to make any disconnections or repairs necessary to cease the unauthorized
use of the public sewer system, and to recover the actual costs for the
disconnections and repairs made as determined by the City Manager or the City
Manager's designee.
('72 Code, § 615:77) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.42 BUILDING SEWER.
   The building sewer and connections thereto extending from the building or
structure to the service extension of the public sewer at the public utility
easement or right-of-way are the property of the applicant and must be
protected and maintained by the applicant. In the event the applicant or any
consumer fails to make any necessary repairs to the pipes within 24 hours after
being notified to do so by a person designated by the City Manager, this person
designated by the City Manager must make such repairs and the cost thereof will
be charged to the owner of the premises or the consumer and must be collected
in the same manner as other bills for sewer services are collected.
('72 Code, § 615:80) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.43 LOCATING PUBLIC SEWER CONNECTION.
   The plumber must assist the person designated by the City Manager in making
any measurements necessary in locating the public sewer connection.
('72 Code, § 615:85) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.44 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations and backfilling of excavations made within a public easement
or public right-of-way must be made in accordance with
Chapter 96 of this code. All excavations and backfilling of excavations on
private properties within the city must be made in accordance with the State
Building Code.
('72 Code, § 615:90) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.45 CONTRACTS.
   All contracts made under the provisions of this chapter must be made by the
city with the owner of the property to be served, or the owner's duly appointed
agent or attorney, and the owner of the property is liable to the city for all
rents accruing through the use of the public sewer upon the owner's premises
whether the same be personally used by the owner or the owner's renter or
lessees or other occupants of the premises.
('72 Code, § 615:95) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 99.46 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   Each owner of premises desiring the use of the public sewer system thereon
must file with the city the name of the owner's agent, if the owner desires to
act through an agent, or the owner's address, and must direct in the instrument
the one to whom the bill is to be sent, and notices be given, and the same is
binding until a further notice differing therefrom is made in writing and filed
with the city. The contract made with the owner must provide that any
delinquencies in the payment of the public sewer service provided on the
premises are a lien and charge against the premises so served regardless of
whether the same is a homestead or not. The lien, in case of a delinquency,
must be reported to the County Auditor by the city at the same time and in the
same manner as special assessments on real estate for street improvements, and
must be collected in the same manner as taxes against real estate provided,
however, that nothing in this section is intended to prevent the city from
cutting off sewer service to premises for delinquent payments in accordance
with other provisions of this code, city policies, or other applicable state or
federal laws.
('72 Code, § 616:00) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)
§ 99.47 DISCONTINUE PUBLIC SEWER SERVICE.
   Any person desiring to discontinue the use of the public sewer must notify
the city. No person other than a plumber duly licensed by the State of
Minnesota or a duly authorized employee of the city will be permitted to make
disconnections from the public sewer system. The public sewer service extension
will be disconnected, capped and abandoned in a manner approved by the Building
Official or other designated city employee(s).
('72 Code, § 616:05) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 99.48 CLAIMS.
   No claim is to be made against the city for reason of the breaking of any
public sewer main or building sewer pipe or for any other interruption of the
public sewer service, by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for
necessary repair.
('72 Code, § 616:10) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
SEWER INSTALLERS
§ 99.60 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to engage in the business of installing, repairing, pumping
or performing percolation rate tests and soil evaluations for on-site sewage
treatment systems within Brooklyn Park, without first obtaining a license to
carry on such operation. Persons applying for the issuance of a license are
required to show evidence of their competency. Such competency may be
demonstrated by evidence of certification from the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency or other evidence acceptable to the City Health Authority.
('72 Code, § 470:00) (Am. Ord. 1984-474(A), passed 12-17-84)
Penalty, see § 99.99
Cross-reference:
   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110
§ 99.61 APPLICATION.
   Application for a license must be made annually on a form furnished by the
Clerk. The form must contain information as determined to be necessary by the
City's Health Authority.
('72 Code, § 470:05) (Am. Ord. 1984-474(A), passed 12-17-84)
§ 99.62 BOND.
   Applicants must procure and post with the City Clerk at the time of
application a bond in the amount of $2,000 in favor of the municipality and the
public, conditioned upon the faithful performance of contracts and compliance
with this chapter.
('72 Code, § 470:10)
§ 99.63 INSURANCE.
   The licensee must also file with the City Clerk a certificate showing
liability insurance coverage with a company doing business in Minnesota;
liability insurance coverage for sewer installers is required in the amounts of
$50,000 for property damage and $200,000/$600,000 for bodily injury.
('72 Code, § 470:15) (Am. Ord. 1984-474(A), passed 12-17-84)
§ 99.64 RENEWAL.
   The license is renewable annually on or before January 1.
('72 Code, § 470:20)
§ 99.65 REFUSAL TO RENEW AND REVOCATION.
   Any such license may be revoked or refused by the Clerk for cause. Any
installation, repair, pumping, percolation rate test or soil evaluation on or
for construction for an on-site sewage treatment system by a licensee in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or refusal on the part of a
licensee to correct such defective work performed by such licensee, is cause
for revocation of or refusal to renew a license. Persons licensed under this
chapter must inform the Health Authority of the location and date of service
when they pump septic tanks. If the City Clerk refuses to issue a license or to
renew a license or revokes a license, the applicant or licensee has a right to
appeal to the City Council.
('72 Code, § 470:25) (Am. Ord. 1984-474(A), passed 12-17-84)
§ 99.66 FEE.
   The annual license fee is in the amount set by the Council from time to time
and as contained in §§
99.81 and
99.82 of this chapter.
('72 Code, § 470:30) (Am. Ord. 1986-540(A), passed - - )
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 99.75 RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Rates and charges for use and service of the city sanitary sewer
system are established. Such charges and rates to be made against each lot,
parcel of land, unit or premises which may have connection directly or
indirectly into the city sanitary sewer system and which discharges only normal
sewage into such system.
   (B)   Effective on the first day of February 1999 and on the first day of
each calendar year thereafter for all sewage produced in the billing quarter by
city sanitary sewer system users, sanitary sewer charges for each quarter year
are established by the resolution establishing fees and charges as set forth in
the Appendix to this code.
   (C)   Basis of rates and charges.
      (1)   The residential rates established are to provide sanitary sewer
charges based on a service charge plus a usage charge based on the amount of
water metered during the winter quarter or actual use if less. Customers may at
their written direction be allowed to use the water meter readings for each
quarter as a basis for calculating usage.
      (2)   All metered residential units (residential means single-family,
two-family, townhouses or any complex of housing units which have individual
sewer and water connections for each unit) include a service charge per quarter
plus the usage to the nearest measured unit times the usage charge rate. Non-
metered residential units are charged a flat service charge per quarter.
       (3)   Multi-family, industrial, commercial and institutional charges are
based on the water meter reading for each quarter.
      (4)   All metered commercial, multi-family, industrial and institutional
units are the service charge per quarter times the meter equivalent plus the
usage to the nearest measured unit times the usage charge rate. Non-metered
multi-family, commercial, institutional and industrial units are charged the
appropriate service charge per quarter based on the water meter size which
would be needed if the property were to be connected to the municipal water
system plus a reasonable estimate of the water consumed per quarter.
   (D)   Meters. The city will install water meters on non-metered residential
properties at the request of the property owner, for a charge for sanitary
sewer metering only, in an amount as established by the fee resolution set
forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (E)   Surcharge for noncompliance. A surcharge in the amount established in
the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code is imposed on every
sewer bill mailed on or after February 1, 1999, to property owners who are not
in compliance with the regulations relating to clear water discharges outlined
in these code sections or who have refused to allow their property to be
inspected to determine if there is compliance. All properties found during
reinspection to have violated these code sections are subject to the $100 per
month penalty for all months between the two most recent inspections. The
surcharge will be added every month until the property is in compliance. The
surcharge will continue to be levied monthly on properties not complying with
these code sections.
('72 Code, § 510:00) (Am. Ord. 1979-301(A), passed 10-9-79; Am. Ord. 1981-375
(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 1995-774, passed 4- 24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 99.76 SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES.
   (A)   In all areas where sanitary sewer service is available, connection
charges must be paid before a building permit is issued.
   (B)   In all areas and for all uses where sanitary sewer service is
available, whenever service availability charge(s) (SAC unit/s) must be charged
and paid to Metropolitan Council Environmental Services, a sewer connection
charge must be paid to the city in the amount established in the fee resolution
set forth in the Appendix to this code except as otherwise allowed to be
deferred pursuant to the city’s Sewer Availability Charge and Water Access
Charge Payment Deferral Program.
('72 Code, § 510:05) (Am. Ord. 1986-511(A), passed 1-27-86; Am. Ord. 1993-744,
passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1197, passed 9-28-15)
§ 99.77 PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE.
   (A)   A sewer connection permit and inspection fee in the amounts
established in the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code must
be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
   (B)   Any property installing a sump pump or other devices to control clear
water discharges to the sanitary sewer is required to receive a permit from the
city to ensure compliance with these code sections. The city will issue the
permit upon receipt of an application and the fees as established by the city
from time to time. Failure to secure a permit for sump pump installation and/or
other devices intended to redirect clear water is considered a violation of
City Code and subjects the property owner to the surcharges outlined in these
code sections.
('72 Code, § 510:10) (Am. Ord. 1977-240(A), passed 2-28-77; Am. Ord. 1993-744,
passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)
§ 99.78 BILLS AND METER READINGS.
   All bills for sanitary sewage disposal as furnished and supplied by the city
are payable quarterly.
('72 Code, § 510:11) (Am. Ord. 1995-774, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)
§ 99.79 LATE CHARGES.
   There is a late charge of 10% of the unpaid balance or a minimum of $1 for
sewer billings not paid within 20 days after the billing date. Late charges
also apply to the surcharges provided for in §
99.75(E).
('72 Code, § 510:15) (Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14-98)
§ 99.80 CERTIFICATION OF DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS TO COUNTY FOR COLLECTION.
   The City Council may make any delinquent charges a lien against the property
and certify unpaid charges to the County Auditor with taxes against the
property served for collection as other taxes are collected, all pursuant to
M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3. If the delinquent charges are certified for collection
with the property taxes, the city will add a fee as established in the
resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code to each delinquent account to
cover the administrative costs incurred by the city in collecting the
delinquent charges.
('72 Code, § 510:16) (Am. Ord. 1980-346(A), passed 12-8-80; Am. Ord. 1981-375
(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 1993-744, passed 11- 22-93; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 99.81 PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM PERMIT FEES.
   At the time an application is filed for a private sewer system permit, a
permit fee for a private sewer system must be paid to the city as established
in the fee resolution as set forth in the Appendix to this code.
('72 Code, § 510:20) (Am. Ord. 1980-346(A), passed 12-8-80; Am. Ord. 1985-487
(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord. 1986-540(A), passed 8- 18-86)
§ 99.82 REINSPECTION FEE.
   In the event a reinspection is necessary, the fee is in the amount
established in the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code. This
fee also applies for reinspection regarding sump pumps and other clean water
discharge devices.
('72 Code, § 510:25) (Am. Ord. 1985-487(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord. 1986-540
(A), passed 8-18-86; Am. Ord. 1993-744, passed 11- 22-93; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 99.83 SEWER SERVICE AVAILABILITY CHARGE.
   (A)   Charge imposed. There is imposed on each new building constructed
within the city and to each existing building connecting to the municipal sewer
system a sewer service availability charge. This charge is imposed to assist
the city in meeting its obligations to the Metropolitan Council Environmental
Services pursuant to M.S. Chapter 473C.
   (B)   Amount of charge. The sewer service availability charge established by
Metropolitan Council Environmental Services is used as the basis for payments
made to Metropolitan Council Environmental Services by the city.
   (C)   Credits against charge. The sewer service availability charge(s) may
be reduced by the principal amount of any special assessment for interceptor
sanitary sewers financed in whole or in part by Metropolitan Council
Environmental Services, or their predecessors in authority, and levied against
the parcel of record upon which the building to be charged for such service is
or will be located. The city may reduce the charge by amounts previously levied
and paid or still unpaid against the parcel. There must be no reduction in the
sewer service availability charges levied against any parcel, for trunk, sub-
trunk lateral or sewer service connection. If the interceptor assessment
exceeds the amount of the sewer service availability charge, the city must not
pay out or reduce assessments by the amounts.
   (D)   Administration. An applicant for a permit for a new building
construction or for connection to the sewer system must pay the sewer service
availability charge to the city together with other fees required for the
issuance of a building permit or sewer connection permit. The Building Official
may not issue a building or sewer connection permit unless the charge is paid.
('72 Code, § 510:30) (Am. Ord. 1973-136, passed 2-12-73; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   Anyone who violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.
CHAPTER 100: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
100.01   Title
   
100.02   Definitions
   
100.03   Damage
   
100.04   Inspection
   
100.05   Liability
   
100.06   Revenues
Connections and Permits
   
100.15   Service connections
   
100.16   Charges and assessments
   
100.17   Permit application
   
100.18   Costs
Rules and Regulations
   
100.30   Inspection and waste of water
   
100.31   Lawn sprinkling
   
100.32   Unauthorized use of the municipal water supply system prohibited
   
100.33   Opening hydrants
   
100.34   Water meters
   
100.35   Water service pipe
   
100.36   Turn on
   
100.37   Locating tap and curb stop
   
100.38   Excavations
   
100.39   Contracts
   
100.40   Owner and consumer responsibility
   
100.41   Discontinue service
   
100.42   Claims
Rates and Charges
   
100.55   Rates established
   
100.56   Fire suppression and extinguishing water usage
   
100.57   Permit and inspection fee; starting service
   
100.58   Tapping charges
   
100.59   Private fire hydrant maintenance charges
   
100.60   Meter testing service
   
100.61   Meter disconnection/reconnection of service
   
100.62   Water meter installation fee
   
100.63   Water access charge (WAC charge)
   
100.64   City hydrant use charge
   
100.65   Temporary meter use charge
Cross-reference:
   Private sewer and water systems, see §§
101.01 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 100.01 TITLE.
   This chapter comprises and is referred to hereunder as the “water code.”
('72 Code, § 675:00) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 100.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms in
the water code are in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code,
Chapter 4715, Plumbing Code and as otherwise set forth as follows:
   MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. All facilities for collecting, pumping, and
distributing water, in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by this public authority.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
('72 Code, § 675:02) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 100.03 DAMAGE.
   It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal water supply
system.
('72 Code, § 675:03) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.04 INSPECTION.
   The City Building Official and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification are permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of the water code.
('72 Code, § 675:04) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 100.05 LIABILITY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of the water code becomes liable
to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of
such violation, including attorney's fees.
('72 Code, § 675:07) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 100.06 REVENUES.
   All revenues derived from these rates and charges are credited to the Public
Utilities Revenue Accounts. Such revenue must be used only for the purpose of
paying the cost of operating and maintaining the public sewer system and the
water supply system, paying charges made by Metropolitan Council Environmental
Services, providing an adequate depreciation fund, paying costs of meter-
reading, billing, collection, and other similar or related sanitary sewer and
water operating expenses, provided that any surplus above such needs may be
transferred to the general funds.
('72 Code, § 675:09) (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
CONNECTIONS AND PERMITS
§ 100.15 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Connection required. Connection to the municipal water supply system
is required in accordance with the provisions of the Minnesota State Building
Code, Chapter 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code, and the ordinances of the City of
Brooklyn Park.
   (B)   Private well water system repair. At such time as the municipal water
supply system becomes available to a property served by a private well water
system, and the private system cannot be repaired as provided in §§
101.01 et seq. of this title, a direct connection must be made to the municipal
water supply system in compliance with this chapter, and any private wells
taken out of service must be sealed in accordance with state law and §§
101.01 et seq. of this title.
   (C)   Separate water service connections required.
      (1)   All connections must be made in accordance with the provisions of
the Minnesota State Building Code, Chapter 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code, and
Rule 4715.0310 thereof.
      (2)   A separate and independently connected water service must be
provided for each property and for each unit contained within a structure;
i.e., a duplex must have two services from the municipal water supply system
main to the building. Exceptions to this provision may be allowed subject to
the approval of the City Engineer.
      (3)   Where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot
and no separate municipal water service connection can be connected to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
water service from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one water service connection except for rate purposes.
      (4)   Connection of more than one property to a water service extension
of the municipal water supply system that is intended for a single service
connection, is subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Such a connection
requires for each property, the installation of separate stop cock, box and
cover at the public utility easement, right-of-way, or water service extension
from the municipal water supply system main. Such separate stop cock, box and
cover, when required, must be accessibly and safely located, and must be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City Engineer. The stop
cock, box and cover must be installed by the owner at the owner's expense,
becomes the property of the city, and must be maintained by the city so as to
be safe and accessible at all times.
('72 Code, § 677:05) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.16 CHARGES AND ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   Connection charges. It is unlawful to make or cause to be made, any
connection to the municipal water supply system unless the person has first
paid any connection charges, charges for tapping municipal water supply system
mains and the amount of the water usage deposit hereinafter specified, in
amounts set by the City Council. No water will be turned on until all charges
against the premises are paid.
   (B)   Special assessments. In addition, no permit will be issued to tap or
connect with any municipal water supply system main, either directly or
indirectly, from any lot or tract of land, unless:
      (1)   The property has been specially assessed for the cost of
construction of the municipal water supply system with which the connection is
made; or
      (2)   If no assessment has been levied for such construction costs, that
proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be commenced in due
course; or
      (3)   That the cost of construction for the municipal water supply system
has been paid by the developer or builder platting the lot or tract of land;
this does not include lots or tracts of land served by the municipal water
supply system and which were not a part of the plat or tract developed; or
      (4)   If no assessment has been levied, and no assessment proceedings
will be completed in due course, and the developer or builder of the lot or
tract has not paid the cost of improving the lot or tract of land, that a sum
equal to the portion of the cost of constructing the municipal water supply
system which would be assessable against the lot or tract of land has been paid
to the City of Brooklyn Park.
   (C)   Tax forfeited land - special assessment and reassessment. When a
parcel of tax forfeited land is returned to private ownership and the parcel is
benefitted by the municipal water supply system or any other public improvement
for which special assessments were canceled because of the forfeiture, the city
may, upon notice and hearing as provided for the original assessment, make a
reassessment or a new assessment as to the parcel in an amount equal to the
amount remaining unpaid on the original assessment plus interest; or the city
may impose fees or charges for the use or availability of the improvement or
improvements or for connections therewith in an amount not to exceed the amount
remaining unpaid on the canceled assessment.
   (D)   Special connection charge. If such assessments have not been paid, no
such permit to tap or connect to any water municipal water supply system main
will be issued, unless the applicant pays an additional connection fee which is
equal to the portion of the cost of construction of the main which would be
assessable against the lot or tract to be served by such tapping or connection.
The assessable cost is to be determined by the City Engineer, upon the same
basis per front foot or lot unit as any assessment previously levied against
other property for the main, or, if no such assessment has been levied, upon
the basis of the uniform charge per front foot or lot unit which may have been
or which will be charged for similar connections with the main, determined on
the basis of the total assessable cost of the main allocated on a frontage or
lot unit basis.
('72 Code, § 678:00) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 100.17 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Permits for water connections will be granted to only plumbers licensed by
the State of Minnesota.
   (A)   Application for municipal water supply system service connection must
be made on printed forms, must state the legal description, street and official
house numbers of the premises to be connected, and the nature of the
improvement to be done. A permit and inspection fee in the amount set by the
City Council must be payable to the city at the time the application is filed.
   (B)   The charges for connection to the municipal water supply system mains
must be paid at the time the application is submitted and before the service is
connected.
   (C)   No person except a plumber duly licensed by the State of Minnesota or
a duly authorized employee of the city will be permitted to do any work on
connections to the municipal water supply system.
   (D)   The curb box and water service extension from the municipal water
supply system to the public utility easement or right-of-way are the property
of the city and all persons are forbidden to interfere with such extension.
   (E)   The charges for tapping municipal water service mains and the amount
of the water usage deposit must be paid at the time the application is
submitted and before the service is installed. No water will be turned on until
all charges against the premises are paid.
('72 Code, § 678:15) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 100.18 COSTS.
   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the
building water supply system to the municipal water supply system must be borne
by the property owner. The property owner must indemnify the city from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of
the building water supply system.
('72 Code, § 678:20) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 100.30 INSPECTION AND WASTE OF WATER.
   The city employees designated by the City Manager have full access, at all
reasonable hours, to premises to ascertain the location or condition of all
hose connections, pipes and plumbing fixtures which in the employee's opinion
is causing unnecessary waste of water. The employee must promptly notify the
owner or occupant of such in the event any such designated repairs are not made
within 24 hours after such notification. The person designated by the City
Manager must make such repairs or cause the same to be made and the cost
thereof will be charged to the owner or occupant of said premises and collected
in the same manner herein provided for the collection of other bills to the
city.
('72 Code, § 682:00) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-4-98)
§ 100.31 LAWN SPRINKLING.
   To protect the health and safety of the consumers and the general welfare of
the city, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may place in effect
and enforce a lawn sprinkling ban and/or restriction. The sprinkling ban shall
provide:
   (A)   All lawn sprinkling using the municipal water supply system is
prohibited as prescribed by public notice from the City Manager or the City
Manager's designee to all municipal water consumers.
   (B)   Revocation of a sprinkling ban may be made by the City Manager or the
City Manager's designee.
   (C)   At all times of the year, in case of fire in any part of the city all
sprinkling and other unnecessary use of water must be stopped.
   (D)   An odd-even sprinkling restriction based on street address numbers is
in effect May 1 - September 30. Residents with even-numbered addresses water on
even days; odd numbers water on odd days. Residents should avoid sprinkling
their lawns between the hours of 4:00 and 10:00 p.m., when demand on the water
supply system is at its peak. Newly seeded or sodded lawns and irrigation wells
are exempt from this restraint.
   (E)   Violators of this section are guilty of a petty offense.
('72 Code, § 682:05) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.32 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF THE MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to make a connection to the municipal water supply
system or to any water service pipe without first obtaining permits required by
the city. Unless authorized by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee,
it is unlawful to draw water from the municipal water supply system for any
purpose other than for fire suppression and extinguishing purposes, without
making payment as required by city for water drawn. Any such unauthorized
connection or use of the municipal water supply system is considered a penal
offense.
   (B)   In addition to penalties for such penal offense, the city has the
right to make any disconnections or repairs necessary to cease such
unauthorized use of the municipal water supply system; to recover the actual
costs for such disconnections and repairs made; and to recover the actual costs
of water consumed or the costs of water estimated to have been consumed as
determined by the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee.
('72 Code, § 682:10) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.33 OPENING HYDRANTS.
   No person except the person designated by the City Manager, or a member of
the Fire Department in case of fire, is allowed to open any fire hydrant for
any purpose whatsoever, without first securing a permit from the person
designated by the City Manager. A copy of the permit must be in the possession
of the person operating or opening the hydrant. The fees for water and supplies
are as determined by City Council.
('72 Code, § 682:15) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.34 WATER METERS.
   (A)   The city exclusively owns and controls the water meter and yoke to be
used in the water system.
      (1)   Meter location in the structure, valve types, electrical grounding,
installation and location of remote read wire and read device must be as per
requirements of the Operations and Maintenance Department/Public Utilities
Division policies.
      (2)   A domestic service and fire service must be separate and must be
controlled by separate valves outside the structure.
      (3)   Commercial, industrial and multi-family buildings must have
separate domestic and irrigation meters.
   (B)   If any meters are damaged by freezing, hot water, and the like, either
by carelessness or neglect of the owner or occupant of the premises or their
agents, the owner or occupants must pay for the repairs of such damages. The
cost of ordinary maintenance and repairs of all meters owned by the city will
be borne by the Operations Maintenance Department/Public Utilities Division.
   (C)   At the written request of any owner or consumer a person designated by
the City Manager will test or cause to be tested the meter supplying the
premises of such owner, or consumer. A deposit in the amount established by the
City Council will be required before the meter is disconnected which will be
returned to the owner or consumer if the meter is not found to be registering
correctly within ten percent, otherwise the deposit so made will be retained by
the city to cover the cost of the test. The owner or consumer may, if the owner
or consumer desires, be present at the time any such test is made. The result
of any such test must be reported to the owner or consumer in every case.
   (D)   If the testing of a meter, as hereinabove provided, indicates that it
registers in excess of 10% error, the charge to the consumer for water consumed
and used during the quarter within which the test is made shall be the
corresponding quarter of the previous year; if the consumer was not receiving
service during the corresponding quarter of the previous year, or if for any
other reason the charge for such corresponding period cannot be justly applied,
the charge so made for the quarter within which such test occurred must be
equitably adjusted by the person designated by the City Manager.
   (E)   The customer is prohibited from obstructing the meter so as to
prohibit the reading or repairing of the meter.
   (F)   It is unlawful for anyone intentionally to misread any meter so as to
avoid the payment of just charges for water, and it is unlawful for anyone to
tamper with any meter so as to avoid just charges for water.
   (G)   So as to provide uniformity throughout the municipality, no water
meter and yoke will be installed except when obtained from the municipality for
that purpose and use in single-family dwellings. Meters and yokes required for
larger users must contact the Building Official. Anyone wishing to install a
water meter must obtain the meter and yoke from the Building Official and
reimburse the city for the cost thereof as determined by §
100.62 of this chapter. Payment therefor is not construed as giving title to
anyone other than the municipality.
('72 Code, § 682:20) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.35 WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   The water service pipe and connections thereto including the outlet
connection at the curb stop or box, extending from the building or structure to
the service extension of the municipal water supply system at the public
utility easement or right-of-way are the property of the applicant and must be
protected and maintained by the applicant. In the event the applicant or any
consumer fails to make any necessary repairs to such service connections or
pipe within 24 hours after being notified to do so by a person designated by
the City Manager, this designated person must make such repairs and the cost
thereof will be charged to the owner of the premises or the consumer and must
be collected in the same manner as other bills for water consumption are
collected. Installations of water service must comply with all requirements set
forth in §
100.15(C), requiring separate services. Irrigation systems or subsystems must
have only one water service source.
('72 Code, § 682:25) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.36 TURN ON.
   It is unlawful to turn on municipal water after connection to the municipal
water supply system is made without first obtaining permission from the person
designated by the City Manager who must see that a meter has been placed on the
service and in such manner that it will register all water consumed, and that
all other parts of the plumbing and pipe fitting in and about the premises have
been in full compliance with the rules and regulations of this chapter and all
other rules and regulations which the city makes.
('72 Code, § 682:30) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.37 LOCATING TAP AND CURB STOP.
   The plumber must assist the person designated by the City Manager in making
any measurements necessary in locating the tap in the main and curb stop.
('72 Code, § 682:35) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 100.38 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations and backfilling of excavations made within a public easement
or public right-of-way must be made in accordance with Chapter 96 of this code.
All excavations and backfilling of excavations on private properties within the
city must be made in accordance with the State Building Code.
('72 Code, § 682:40) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.39 CONTRACTS.
   All contracts made under the provisions of this chapter must be made by the
city with the owner of the property to be served, or the owner's duly appointed
agent or attorney, and the owner of the property is liable to the city for all
rents accruing through the use of water upon the owner's premises whether the
same is personally used by the owner or the owner's renter or lessees or other
occupants of the premises.
('72 Code, § 682:45) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 100.40 OWNER AND CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY.
   Each owner of premises desiring the use of water thereon must file with the
city the name of the owner's agent, if the owner desires to act through an
agent, or the owner's own address, and must direct in the instrument the one to
whom the bill is to be sent, and notices be given, and the same will be binding
until a further notice differing therefrom is made in writing and filed with
the city. The contract made with the owner must provide that any delinquencies
in the payment of the water consumed on the premises are a lien and charge
against the premises so served regardless of whether the same is a homestead or
not. The lien, in case of a delinquency, must be reported to the County Auditor
by the city at the same time and in the same manner as special assessments on
real estate for street improvements, and must be collected in the same manner
as taxes against real estate provided, however, that nothing in this section is
intended to prevent the city from cutting off water service to premises for
delinquent payments in accordance with other provisions of this code, city
policies, or applicable state or federal laws.
('72 Code, § 682:50) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95 ; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.41 DISCONTINUE SERVICE.
   Any person desiring to discontinue the use of the municipal water supply
system must notify the city and the service will be shut off at the curb cock
and the water meter removed. No person other than a duly authorized employee of
the city will be permitted to make disconnections from the municipal water
supply system. A fee in the amount established by the City Council will be
required to disconnect the meter. An additional fee in the amount established
by the City Council will be required when the meter is reinstalled and water
service resumed. The municipal water supply system service extension will be
turned off, disconnected, capped and abandoned in a manner approved by the
Building Official.
('72 Code, § 682:55) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)
§ 100.42 CLAIMS.
   No claim is to be made against the city for reason of the breaking of any
water main or service pipe or fixture or for any other interruption of the
supply, by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary
repair.
('72 Code, § 682:60) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 100.55 RATES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   (1)   Effective on the first day of February, 1999 and on the first
day of each calendar year thereafter for all water consumed in the first
billing quarter by city water system users, water rates charged for each
quarter year are established by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix
to this code.
      (2)   These rates may be modified by the Council from time to time.
   (B)   (1)   All bills for water furnished and supplied by the city are
payable quarterly.
      (2)   There is a late charge of 10% of the unpaid balance or a minimum of
$1.00 for water billings not paid within 20 days after the billing date.
   (C)   At the end of each quarter from date of the notice or statement all
bills not paid become delinquent. The City Council may make any such charges a
lien against the property and certify unpaid charges to the County Auditor with
taxes against the property served for collection as other taxes are collected,
all pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3. If the delinquent charges are
certified for collection with the property taxes, the city will add $50 to each
delinquent account to cover the administrative costs incurred by the city in
collecting the delinquent charges.
   (D)   In all cases where the water has been turned off for non-payment of
water bills or for violation of any rules or regulations of the city, the water
will not be again turned on unless and until the bills have been fully paid,
all delinquencies removed and a charge in the amount established in the fee
resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code, paid into the city for
reinstating water service. The water service will be reinstated only during
regular working hours. In addition, if payment is not received by the shut-off
deadline for payments, a service charge will be imposed, in the amount
established by the fee resolution as set forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (E)   Schedule of water maintenance and fire protection charges is as
established by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code.
('72 Code, § 515:00) (Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1996-818, passed 5-28-96; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)
§ 100.56 FIRE SUPPRESSION AND EXTINGUISHING WATER USAGE.
   Water used for the purposes of suppressing or extinguishing fires is without
charge to the consumer or premises.
('72 Code, § 515:04) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 100.57 PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE; STARTING SERVICE.
   A permit and inspection fee in the amount established by the fee resolution,
set forth in the Appendix to this code, must be paid at the time of applying
for water service.
('72 Code, § 515:05) (Am. Ord. 1985-487(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord. 1993-748,
passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 1994-755, passed 4-11- 94; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed
12-14-98)
§ 100.58 TAPPING CHARGES.
   Charges for making taps for all service pipes are established by the fee
resolution as set forth in the Appendix to this code. Rates for pipes larger in
diameter than one inch will be determined by the City Manager or the City
Manager’s designee upon the basis of the actual costs to the city.
('72 Code, § 515:10) (Am. Ord. 1977-240(A), passed 2-28-77; Am. Ord. 1985-487
(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12- 14-98)
§ 100.59 PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT MAINTENANCE CHARGES.
   (A)   The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee has the authority to
enter into agreements with private property owners to maintain private fire
hydrants.
   (B)   Effective January 1, 1993, an annual maintenance fee will be charged
for such maintenance in the amounts established by the fee resolution as set
forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (C)   The charges will be billed in first billing quarter of 1994 and in the
first billing quarter of each year thereafter.
('72 Code, § 515:12) (Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 100.60 METER TESTING SERVICE.
   A deposit in an amount as established by the fee resolution, set forth in
the Appendix to this code, will be made for disconnecting, testing and repair
of a meter.
('72 Code, § 515:15) (Am. Ord. 1985-477(A), passed 2-11-85; Am. Ord. 1985-487
(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12- 20-93; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 100.61 METER DISCONNECTION/RECONNECTION OF SERVICE.
   A fee in an amount as established by the fee resolution, set forth in the
Appendix to this code, must be paid for disconnecting a water meter or
connecting a meter.
('72 Code, § 515:20) (Am. Ord. 1985-477(A), passed 2-11-85; Am. Ord. 1993-748,
passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)
§ 100.62 WATER METER INSTALLATION FEE.
   Upon application for water service, a fee must be paid for the city to
supply and install water meters. The fee will be determined by the City Manager
or the City Manager’s designee on the basis of the actual costs to the city.
('72 Code, § 515:25) (Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)
§ 100.63 WATER ACCESS CHARGE (WAC CHARGE).
   (A)   In all areas and for all uses where city water service is available,
at the time an application is filed with the city for a new or enlarged water
service, or fire suppression system water service, a water access charge (WAC)
must be paid to the city except as otherwise allowed to be deferred pursuant to
the city’s Sewer Availability Charge and Water Access Charge Payment Deferral
Program. This charge does not apply to water service maintenance work unless
the water service is enlarged.
   (B)   Effective on the first day of June of each calendar year beginning
June 1, 1999, the WAC is established in the amounts as established by the fee
resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code. A credit for previously
paid WAC may be given when a building is remodeled or demolished.
('72 Code, § 515:30) (Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 1996-800,
passed 3-25-96; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed
8-20-07 Am. Ord. 2015-1197, passed 9-28-15)
§ 100.64 CITY HYDRANT USE CHARGE.
   As set forth in §
100.33 of this chapter, a permit is required to open any fire hydrant and fees
are to be charged for water and supplies. A meter deposit must be made and a
per day charge for rental of the meter must be paid by the permit holder during
the first 30 days and a per day amount thereafter, with a minimum rental, all
in amounts as established by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to
this code. All water used will be billed at the current irrigation rate per
1,000 gallons used.
('72 Code, § 515:35) (Am. Ord. 1996-800, passed 3-25-96)
§ 100.65 TEMPORARY METER USE CHARGE.
   As set forth in §
100.32 of this chapter, a permit is required to request a temporary meter for
uses such as a construction trailer. A meter deposit must be made and fees for
connecting and disconnecting a meter paid, all in amounts as established by the
fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code. All water used will be
billed at the current multi-family, commercial, industrial and institutional
meter charge and rate per 1,000 gallons used.
(Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)
CHAPTER 101: PRIVATE SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS
Section
   
101.01   Water well construction
   
101.02   Individual sewage treatment standards adopted
   
101.03   Enforcement
   
101.04   Administration
   
101.05   Permits
§ 101.01 WATER WELL CONSTRUCTION.
   Water well construction is regulated by the Minnesota Department of Health.
('72 Code, § 620:01) (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-83; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95)
§ 101.02 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT STANDARDS ADOPTED.
   Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Chapter 7080.0060 through 7080.0315,
individual sewage treatment systems, is adopted by reference and made a part of
this title except as amended below:
   (A)   Amendments.
      (1)   Whenever the word “agency” appears, it will be deleted and “City”
inserted. Whenever the word “Executive Director” or “director” appears, it will
be deleted and “Building Official” inserted.
      (2)   Sections C1 and C3 are deleted.
      (3)   Section F26(1) delete 2 or less 750; change 3 or 4 to 4 or less. E
Table 11 in Section H2a(2) is amended by deleting Columns II, III, and IV.
   (B)   Additional standards. The following standards will also apply:
existing nonconforming systems may be utilized as long as:
      (1)   The system serves an existing, single family dwelling that is owner
occupied.
      (2)   The system may be required to be brought into conformity when the
finished living space is increased or the house is sold.
      (3)   No nuisance, surface discharge or ground water contamination occur
as a result of the operation of the system.
('72 Code, § 620:06) (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 101.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to the criminal penalties for violation of this ordinance, any
dwelling served by a well or individual sewage system not in conformity with
this ordinance is considered to be a dangerous building under Minnesota
Statutes and must be dealt with accordingly. No building not served by a
municipal sewer and/or water system may be occupied nor will any certificate of
occupancy be issued by the Building Official unless the provisions of this
ordinance are complied with.
('72 Code, § 620:11) (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)
§ 101.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   This ordinance will be administered by the Building Official.
('72 Code, § 620:16) (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)
§ 101.05 PERMITS.
   It is unlawful to repair, install, construct, pump or modify any individual
sewage treatment or disposal system unless the person has first obtained a
permit from the Building Official. It is the responsibility of the permittee to
obtain the necessary inspections before doing the work.
('72 Code, § 620:21) (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 102: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
102.20   Findings, purpose, and intent
   
102.21   Election to manage the public rights-of-way
   
102.22   Definitions
   
102.23   Administration
   
102.24   Utility Coordination Committee
   
102.25   Registration and right-of-way occupancy
   
102.26   Registration information
   
102.27   Reporting obligations
   
102.28   Permit requirement
   
102.29   Permit applications
   
102.30   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
102.31   Permit fees
   
102.32   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
102.33   Joint applications
   
102.34   Supplementary applications
   
102.35   Other obligations
   
102.36   Denial of permit
   
102.37   Installation requirements
   
102.38   Inspection
   
102.39   Work done without a permit
   
102.40   Supplementary notification
   
102.41   Revocation of permits
   
102.42   Mapping data
   
102.43   Undergrounding
   
102.44   Location and relocation of facilities
   
102.45   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
102.46   Interference by other facilities
   
102.47   Right-of-way vacation; reservation of right
   
102.48   Indemnification and liability
   
102.49   Abandoned facilities
   
102.50   Appeal
§ 102.20 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   This subchapter imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and
maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within the city's rights-of-
way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement
the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this subchapter,
persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial
responsibility for their work through the recovery of out-of-pocket and
projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   This subchapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session
Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163,
237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and the other laws governing applicable
rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This subchapter shall also be
interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules 7819.0050, et seq. where possible. To
the extent that any provision of this subchapter cannot be interpreted
consistently with the Minn. Rules, the interpretation most consistent with the
Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.21 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city elects pursuant M.S. §
237.163, Subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.22 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   CITY. The City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the
city or other governmental unit.
   COMMISSION. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, Subd. 3, over a continuous length in excess
of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee's option:
      (1)   Individual project bond, including a “license and permit” bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73;
      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules 7819.1100, the cost to achieve a
level of restoration as determined by the city at the time the permit is
issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set
forth in Minn. Rules 7819.9900, et seq.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established
by permit.
   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this subchapter.
   DIRECTOR. The City Manager, or his or her designee.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement
of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION PERMIT
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in §
102.31.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Tangible asset in the public right-of-way required
to provide utility service. The term does not include FACILITIES to the extent
the location and relocation of such FACILITIES are preempted by M.S. § 161.45,
governing utility facility placement in state trunk highways.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN or CIP. Projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years under the Capital Improvement Plan (“CIP”).
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions
for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this subchapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless
facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-
way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct
the work; and revoking right- of-way or small wireless facility permits.
Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way
user for the use of the right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party
contractor used by the city including fees tied to or based on customer counts,
access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the
fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session
Laws 1997, Chapter 123; M.S. § 237.162 or § 237.163 or any ordinance enacted
under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken
pursuant to §
102.50.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein, including a blanket permit for a period of
time and for types of work specified by the Director, if deemed appropriate in
his or her discretion.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in §
102.28.
   PATCH or PATCHING. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate
base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch is
considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city's
five-year project plan.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with paver blocks, bituminous,
concrete, aggregate, or gravel.
   PERMIT. Same as “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this subchapter.
   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Same as M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 3.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or
facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or
seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment
in the right-of-way.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit,
or both, depending on the context, required by this subchapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. (1) A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by
M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 4; or (2) a person owning or controlling a facility in
the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility
service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the
public right-of-way.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. (1) Services provided by a public utility as
defined in M.S. § 216B.02, Subd. 4 and Subd. 6; (2) services of a
telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice or data
information; (3) services of a cable communications system as defined in M.S. §
238.02, Subd. 3; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by a local government unit; (5) services provided by a
cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Chapter 308A; and (6)
water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer's premises.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet
in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already
been issued.
   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless
service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information.
For purposes of this subchapter, a cable communication system defined and
regulated under M.S. Chapter 238, and telecommunication activities related to
providing natural gas or electric energy services whether provided by a public
utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power
agency organized under M.S. Chapters 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric
association organized under M.S. Chapter 308A, are not telecommunications
right-of-way users for purposes of this subchapter, except to the extent such
entity is offering wireless service.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city's CIP, in which case it is considered full
restoration.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision
of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver,
antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and a
small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures,
wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless
support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly
associated with a specific antenna.
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless
service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way
designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by the city.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.23 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.24 UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.
   The city may create an advisory Utility Coordination Committee.
Participation on the committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and by making
recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the process
of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the size of
such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants that have
expressed a desire to assist the city.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.25 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will
consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any
part thereof in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal or
amend the provisions of a city ordinance establishing the rights of and
limitations placed on persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or
gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street
curb. Persons carrying out or requesting the following work shall not be deemed
to use or occupy the right-of-way within the meaning of this section, and shall
not be governed by this section. Such work by non-right-of-way users shall be
regulated under the City Code chapter noted below, unless provided otherwise.
      (1)   Other surface landscaping works;
      (2)   Planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens;
      (3)   Construction and maintenance of driveways, sidewalks, curb and
gutter, or parking lots, except repairs or restoration necessitated by utility
cuts or other work;
      (4)   Construction or maintenance of street furnishings, bus stop
benches, shelters, or posts and pillars;
      (5)    Construction and maintenance of irrigation systems provided that
the system does not connect directly to water mains in the right-of-way.
      (6)   Privately owned courtesy benches are not required to be registered,
but must be licensed per Chapter 125.
   (D)   Gopher One Call. Nothing herein relieves a person from complying with
the provisions of M.S. Chapter 216D, Gopher One Call Law.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17; Am. Ord.
2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 96
   Grass, weed and tree regulations, see
Ch. 97
§ 102.26 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at the time
of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Each registrant's name, Gopher One Call facility owner code number
or other One Call identifier, address and e-mail address, and telephone and
facsimile numbers;
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be accessible for consultation at all times. Current information
regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be
provided at the time of registration;
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities and collapse of property;
         (c)   Either naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages or otherwise providing evidence
satisfactory to the Director that the city is fully covered and will be
defended through registrant's insurance for all actions included in Minn. Rule
7819.1250;
         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers’ compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this section;
         (f)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies if
necessary to ensure the Director that the policy provides adequate third-party
claim coverage and city indemnity and defense coverage for all actions included
in the indemnity required by Minn. Rule 7819.1250;
         (g)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate
required to be filed under Minnesota law as recorded and certified by the
Secretary of State;
         (h)   Such evidence as the Director may require that the person is
authorized to do business in Minnesota;
         (i)   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or
approval from the applicable state or federal agency to lawfully operate, where
the person is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from
said commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge
of any change.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.27 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December
1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground
facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using a format
designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city
to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency
of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way. If by December 1 the
registrant has not developed its construction and maintenance information for
the coming year, the registrant shall file such information with the city
thereafter as soon as it is developed. The plan shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information:
         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of
all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
“next-year project”); and
         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated
beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years
following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five-year project”).
      (2)   The term “project” in this section shall include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
      (3)   By March 1 of each year and subject to the Minnesota Data Practices
Act the city will have available for inspection in the city's office a
composite list of all projects of which the city has been informed of the
annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed
of the current status of this list. Thereafter, by March 1, each registrant may
change any project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city
and all other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another
registrant listed by the other registrant.
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.28 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.
      (1)   An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that
part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open
passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities
described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
      (2)   An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free
and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
      (3)   A small wireless facility permit is required by a registrant to
erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small wireless
facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified
portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified therein, provided that
such permit shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in
use, unless lawfully revoked.
      (4)   Other permits may be required for persons in accordance with
Chapter 96. (See §
102.25(C)).
      (5)   Permits for installation, repair or otherwise work on above-ground
facilities within the meaning of M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 6(b)(4) will be
obstruction permits, notwithstanding the need for excavation, provided the
excavation is augered or hand-dug for the purpose of placing a pole-type
structure.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person makes a
supplementary application for another right- of-way permit before the
expiration of the initial permit, or requests a verbal extension, and (ii) a
new permit or permit extension is granted. Verbal extensions may be granted by
the Director for a period no greater than 48 hours or for emergencies.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rule 7819.1000, Subp. 3, the
city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay
penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council resolution. A
delay penalty will not be imposed for delays due to force majeure, including
inclement weather, civil strife, acts of God, or other circumstances beyond the
control of the applicant.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
   (E)   Routine maintenance not requiring excavation. Routine obstructions are
permitted without separate notice and separate compensation for such projects.
Projects that do not involve excavation and that last less than eight hours in
duration may, in the Director's discretion, be considered routine maintenance
and include by way of example, switching, replacing fuses, replacing
transformers, placing line guards, animal protection, leak surveys and
inspections.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.29 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Registration with the city pursuant to this subchapter;
   (B)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities
owned or operated by the applicant;
   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city;
   (D)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 100% of the amount
owing;
   (E)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.30 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this subchapter, the city shall issue a permit within five business days of
receiving a completed application.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use.
      (1)   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to division (B)
above, the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the
collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small
wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following
conditions: A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the
particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications,
and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application.
      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way
shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written authorization,
provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit
to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way
and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an
existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a
structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may
be imposed in the applicable permit.
      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its
wireless support structure.
      (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements
between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other
facilities in and around the right-of-way.
      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless
support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure.
      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support
structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.
   (C)   Notification. The permittee shall notify in writing in a form approved
by the Director all residents specified by the Director whose property is
adjacent to the right-of-way where the proposed work is to be done indicating
start and completion dates. Written notification is not required for routine
obstruction and maintenance projects described in §
102.28(E).
   (D)   Small wireless facility agreement. A small wireless facility shall
only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by
the city, or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has
executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the
city. The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the following:
      (1)   Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure;
      (2)   $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation;
      (3)   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
         (a)   $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts;
         (b)   $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or
         (c)   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the
foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the
applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise
in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not
supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the city and
applicant.
   (E)   Action on small wireless facility permit applications.
      (1)   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small
wireless facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such
application. The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building
permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or
deny the application within the review periods established in this section.
      (2)   Consolidated applications. An applicant may file a consolidated
small wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation
of up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a
local government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the
application:
         (a)   Are located within a two-mile radius;
         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support
structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may
approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial
of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the
application.
      (3)   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
         (a)   The city receives applications from one or more applicants
seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a
seven-day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such
applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of such
extension.
         (b)   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or
information and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the
applicant within 30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of
additional documents or information, the city shall have ten days to notify the
applicant in writing of any still-missing information.
         (c)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in
writing to toll the review period.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.31 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Fee schedule and fee allocation. The city's permit fee schedule shall
be available to the public and established in advance where reasonably
possible. The permit fees shall be designed to recover the city's actual costs
incurred in managing the right-of-way and shall be based on an allocation among
all users of the right-of- way, including the city.
   (B)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   City management costs;
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (C)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management
costs.
   (D)   Small wireless facility permit fee.  The city shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
      (1)   City management costs;
      (2)   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated
with collocation of small wireless facilities.
   (E)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing, or on some
other payment plan agreed to by the Director at his or her discretion.
   (F)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in §
102.41 are not refundable.
   (G)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.32 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
102.35.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee must patch its own work. The city may
choose either to have the permittee restore the surface and subgrading portions
of right-of-way or to restore the surface portion of right-of-way itself in
which the city will be reimbursed through the permittees bond. Patching must be
completed within 48 hours of the excavation within the street.
      (1)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule
7819.3000.
      (2)   City restoration. If the city restores the surface portion of
right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing.
If, following such restoration, the pavement settles or otherwise fails for
reasons not caused by city's failure to properly restore, the permittee shall
pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with
correcting the defective work.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for replacing and compacting the
subgrade and aggregate-based material in the excavation and the degradation fee
shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and
shall comply with Minn. Rule 7819.1100.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching, or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Upon
notification from the city, permittee shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Unless otherwise
agreed to by the Director, said work shall be completed within 14 calendar days
of receipt of the notice from the city, not including days during which work
cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when
work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
102.35.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and promptly complete all restoration required by the city, the
city shall notify the permittee in writing of the specific alleged failure or
failures and shall allow the permittee 48 hours from receipt of said written
notice to cure said failure or failures, unless otherwise extended by the
Director. In the event the permittee fails to cure, the city may at its option
perform the necessary work and permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days
of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay
as required, the city may exercise its rights under the construction
performance bond.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.33 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on their applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.34 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
(i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
Except in the case of verbal extensions, if a permittee does not finish the
work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional
time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit
before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary
application must be submitted before the permit end date.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.35 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses,
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable
rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state and federal laws, including M.S. §§ 216D.01, et seq. (Gopher One
Call Excavation Notice System). A permittee shall perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations,
and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who does the work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, or with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with, unless otherwise approved
by the Director. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may
not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance
with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done
solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the
permit.
   (D)   Traffic control. A permittee shall implement traffic control measures
in the area of the work and shall use traffic control procedures in accordance
with the most recent manuals on uniform traffic control, traffic control
devices and traffic zone layouts published by the State of Minnesota, the city
may require a traffic control plan prior to issuance of a permit.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.36 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this subchapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.37 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
7819.1100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100 and other applicable local requirements such
as the Brooklyn Park Standard Specifications, in so far as they are not
inconsistent with the M.S. § 237.162 and § 237.163. Installation of service
laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn. Rules, Chapter 7560 and
these ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those
requirements and conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits
and/or agreements.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.38 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work site available to the
city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (B)   Authority of director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee to correct any
work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions, or code. If the work failure is a “substantial breach”
within the meaning of M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 4(c), the order shall state that
failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit
after a specified period determined by the Director. The permittee shall
present proof to the Director that the violation has been corrected within the
time period set forth by the Director in the order. Such proof shall be
provided no later than the next business day following the day of completion.
If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the Director may
revoke the permit pursuant to §
102.41.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.39 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the
Director of any event regarding its facilities that the registrant considers to
be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are
necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, unless the Director allows a longer time, the
registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated
therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself
into compliance with this subchapter for the actions it took in response to the
emergency. If the Director concludes that a registrant is required to perform
work at the facility solely because of an emergency created by another
registrant and the work is performed in the immediate area of the emergency
work, the Director may waive the permit otherwise required by the registrant(s)
called to the emergency created by another party. If the city becomes aware of
an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the city will contact the
registrant's emergency phone number as registered with the city or listed in
the phone directory. The city will make the area safe, as necessary. If there
is no response from the registrant, the city may take whatever action it deems
necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
permittee or registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay an unauthorized work permit
fee in an amount established from time to time by the City Council, deposit
with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and
comply with all of the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.40 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.41 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right to revoke any right-
of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the
terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any
material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee's control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to § 120.30.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city to place additional or
revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within a time established by the
Director following permittee's receipt of notification of the breach, permittee
shall provide the city with a plan to cure the breach, acceptable to the city.
Permittee's failure to submit a timely and acceptable plan, or permittee's
failure to timely implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate
revocation of the permit.
   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.42 MAPPING DATA.
   Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information in a form
required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.43 UNDERGROUNDING.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the public and is intended to foster (i) safe travel
over the right-of-way, (ii) non-travel related safety around homes and
buildings where overhead feeds are connected and (iii) orderly development in
the city. Location and relocation, installation and reinstallation of
facilities in the right-of-way or in or on other public ground must be made in
accordance with this section. This section is intended to be enforced
consistently with state and federal law regulating right-of-way users,
specifically including but not limited to M.S. §§ 161.45, 237.162, 237.163,
300.03, 222.37, 238.084 and 216B.36 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47
U.S.C. § 253.
   (B)   Undergrounding of facilities. Facilities newly installed, constructed
or otherwise placed in the public right-of-way or in other public property held
in common for public use must be located and maintained underground pursuant to
the terms and conditions of this section and in accordance with applicable
construction standards, subject to the exceptions below. Above-ground
installation, construction, modification, or replacement of meters, gauges,
transformers, street lighting, pad mount switches, capacitor banks, re-closers
and service connection pedestals shall be allowed. The requirements of this
section shall apply equally outside of the corporate limits of the city
coincident with city jurisdiction of platting, subdivision regulation or
comprehensive planning as may now or in the future be allowed by law.
   (C)   Undergrounding of permanent replacement, relocated or reconstructed
facilities. If the city finds that one or more of the purposes set forth in
division (A) would be promoted, the city may require a permanent replacement,
relocation or reconstruction of a facility of more than 300 feet to be located,
and maintained underground, with due regard for seasonal working conditions.
For purposes of this section, reconstruction means any substantial repair of or
any improvement to existing facilities. Undergrounding may be required whether
a replacement, relocation or reconstruction is initiated by the right-of-way
user owning or operating the facilities, or by the city in connection with (1)
the present or future use by the city or other local government unit of the
right-of-way or other public ground for a public project, (2) the public health
or safety, or (3) the safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.
   (D)   Exceptions to undergrounding. The following exceptions to the strict
application of this section shall be allowed upon the conditions stated:
      (1)   Transmission lines. Above-ground installation, construction, or
placement of those facilities commonly referred to as “high voltage
transmission lines” shall be allowed unless the Council requires undergrounding
of the facilities after providing the right-of-way user notice and an
opportunity to be heard. This provision shall not be construed as waiving the
requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of the city as the same may
apply to any such proposed project.
      (2)   Technical/economic feasibility; promotion of policy. Above-ground
installation, construction, or placement of facilities shall be allowed in
residential, commercial and industrial areas where the Council, following
consideration and recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds that:
         (a)   Underground placement would place an undue financial burden upon
the landowner, ratepayers, or right-of-way user or would deprive the landowner
of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; or,
         (b)   Underground placement is impractical or not technically feasible
due to topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions which adversely
affect underground facilities placement; or
         (c)   The right-of-way user clearly and convincingly demonstrates that
none of the purposes under division (A) would be advanced by underground
placement of facilities on the project in question, or the city determines on
its own review that undergrounding is not warranted based on the circumstances
of the proposed undergrounding.
      (3)   Temporary service. Above-ground installation, construction, or
placement of temporary service lines shall only be allowed:
         (a)   During new construction of any project for a period not to
exceed 24 months;
         (b)   During an emergency in order to safeguard lives or property
within the city;
         (c)   For a period of not more than seven months when soil conditions
make excavation impractical.
   (E)   Developer responsibility. All owners, platters, or developers are
responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and prior to
final approval of any plat or development plan, shall submit to the Director
written instruments from the appropriate right-of-way users showing that all
necessary arrangements with said users for installation of such facilities have
been made.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.44 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the
Act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and
7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available
to cities.
      (1)   Relocation notification procedure. The Director shall notify the
utility owner at least three months in advance of the need to relocate existing
facilities so the owner can determine if relocation or replacement is required
and plan any required work. The Director shall provide a second notification to
the owner one month before the owner needs to begin the relocation. The utility
owner shall begin relocation of the facilities within one month of the second
notification. To the extent technically feasible, all utilities shall be
relocated within one month or in a time frame determined by the Director. The
Director may allow a different schedule if it does not interfere with the
city's project. The utility owner shall diligently work to relocate the
facilities within the above schedule.
      (2)   Delay to city project. The Director shall notify the utility owner
if the owner's progress will not meet the relocation schedule. If the owner
fails to meet the relocation schedule due to circumstances within the utility's
control, the city may charge the utility owner for all costs incurred by the
city because the relocation is not completed in the scheduled timeframe.
      (3)   Joint trenching. All facilities shall be placed in appropriate
portions of right-of-way so as to cause minimum conflict with other underground
facilities. When technically appropriate and no safety hazards are created, all
utilities shall be installed, constructed or placed within the same trench.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, gas and electric lines shall be placed in
conformance with Minn. Rules 7819.5100, Subd. 2, governing safety standards.
   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-
way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facilities that are or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other
permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. A
typical crossing section of the location for utilities may be on file at the
Director's office. This section is not intended to establish “high density
corridors.” Any registrant who has facilities in the right- of-way in a
position at variance with the corridors established by the city may remain at
that location until the city requires facilities relocation to the corridor
pursuant to relocation authority granted under Minn. Rules 7819.3100 or other
applicable law.
   (C)   Limitation of space. To protect the public health, safety, and welfare
or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall
strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users
of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the
public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.
   (D)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules 7560.0150,
Subp. 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of establishing
the horizontal locations of installed service laterals and the service lateral
vertical locations in those cases where the director reasonably requires it.
Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the director evidence
satisfactory to the director of the installed service lateral locations.
Compliance with this subdivision and with applicable Gopher State One Call law
and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after December 31,
2005 shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for:
      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project
including those under M.S. Chapter 429; and
      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other subdivision or
site plan approval under M.S. Chapter 462. The director shall reasonably
determine the appropriate method of providing such information to the city.
Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals
installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or
future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.45 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01, et seq.
(One Call Excavation Notice System) before the start date of any right-of-way
excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be
excavated shall be responsible to mark the horizontal placement of all said
facilities, to the extent technically feasible. To the extent its records
contain such information, each registrant shall provide information regarding
the approximate vertical location of their facilities to excavators upon
request. Nothing in this section is meant to limit the rights, duties and
obligations of the facility owners or excavators as set forth in M.S. §
216D.01, et seq.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.46 INTERFERENCE BY OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way in its governmental right-of-way
management function and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a
registrant's facilities to carry out the work without damaging registrant's
facilities, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is
reasonably possible. The city costs associated therewith will be billed to that
registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each
registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the
right-of-way which it or its facilities damages.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.47 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION; RESERVATION OF RIGHT.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minn. Rules 7819.3200.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.48 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this
subchapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city
in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.1250.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.49 ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has decided to discontinue
all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide information
satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its facilities
in the right-of-way under this subchapter have been lawfully assumed by another
registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove them from that right-of-way pursuant to Minn. Rule 7819.3300,
unless the requirement is waived by the Director.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
§ 102.50 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been
denied a permit; (3) has had permit revoked; or (4) believes that the fees
imposed are not in conformity with M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 6 may have the denial,
revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the City
Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the
denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)
CHAPTER 103: BUILDING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
103.01   Building Code
   
103.02   Fees and charges
   
103.03   Public utilities; underground installation
   
103.04   Parking lot permits
   
103.05   Temporary residences
Plumbing Standards
   
103.10   Plumbing Code
   
103.11   Review of plumbing plans
   
103.12   Plumbing inspections and code enforcement
Dangerous Buildings
   
103.60   Dangerous buildings defined
   
103.61   Standards for repair, vacation or demolition
   
103.62   Notice
Mechanical and Plumbing Contractor Licenses
   
103.75   License requirements
   
103.76   Application
   
103.77   License fee
   
103.78   Surety bond
   
103.79   Insurance provisions
Cross-reference:
   Board of Appeals and Adjustment, see §§
31.15 et seq.
   Planning Commission, see §§
31.60 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 103.01 BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Codes adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Building Code
(“MSBC”), as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry pursuant to M.S.
§§ 326B.101 - 326B.16, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations
established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and Standards
Unit, is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional
chapters, unless specifically adopted in this section. The Minnesota State
Building Code is hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out in
full.
   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement. The application,
administration and enforcement of the building code shall be in accordance with
Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be enforced within the
extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.082, if so established by this
section. The code enforcement agency of the city is the Building Inspection
Division. The building code shall be enforced by the city’s Certified Building
Official, as designated by M.S. § 326B.133.
   (C)   Permits and fees.  The issuance of permits and the collection of fees
shall be as authorized in M.S. § 326B.151. Permit fees shall be assessed for
work governed by the code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the
City Council. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by this code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148.
      (1)   Building valuation. Building valuation for the purpose of
establishing building permit fees is as set forth by the most current Building
Valuation Data published by the International Code Council (ICC).
      (2)   Residential contractor license check. As provided by M.S. §
326B.805, for any residential building contractor required to be licensed by
the state, the applicant for a building permit for residential work must pay a
fee for a building permit for administration and review of residential
contractor licenses. The fee is in an amount as established by the fee
resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (D)   Violations and penalties. It is unlawful to perform any work subject
to the building code for which a permit is required without obtaining the
permit and having paid the fees required herein. Permits, inspections, and
collections of fees are as authorized in M.S. § 326B.151. A violation of the
building code is a misdemeanor.
   (E)   Building code optional chapters. The Minnesota State Building Code,
established pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.16, allows cities to adopt by
reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most current edition of
the Minnesota State Building Code. The following optional provisions identified
in the most current edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and
incorporated as part of the building code for the city:
      (1)   Chapter 1306 - Special Fire Protection Systems option,
incorporating subpart 2 (Existing and New Buildings).
('72 Code, § 315:00) (Am. Ord. 1993-744, passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1996-830, passed 12-16-96; Am. Ord. 1998-891, passed
12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2003-999, passed 6-2-03; Am. Ord. 2007-1075, passed 8-20-07;
Am. Ord. 2021-1267, passed 11-22-21; Am. Ord. 2022-1285, passed 11-14-22)
§ 103.02 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Basic fees.  
      (1)   The fee for any building permit is determined by the Building
Official in accordance with the provisions of §
103.01. The fees established and set forth therein or in other sections of the
city code must be collected where applicable by the Building Official before
the issuance of any permits. The Building Official must not issue any such
permits for which the payment of a fee is required by the schedules until the
fee is paid. Applications must be filed as required by this code or as
established by the Building Official. All fees collected must be paid to the
Finance Director by the Inspection Division daily, or as soon after collection
as practicable.
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit which requires on-site
improvements, including but not limited to the construction of parking
facilities, garbage refuse pickup stations, lighting, landscape, fencing, or
items spelled out in a conditional use permit, the City Council or the Building
Official must require a contract and a surety bond guaranteeing to the city the
actual construction and installation of the improvements within the period
specified in the contract and bond, not exceeding two years.
('72 Code, § 505:00) (Am. Ord. 1980-346(A), passed 12-8-80; Am. Ord. 1981-351
(A), passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 1993-744, passed 11- 22-93)
   (B)   Miscelaneous fees required. The Building Official must not issue
permits for any construction, maintenance, reconstruction, improvements, or
uses governed by the MSBC without collecting the fees as established in the
schedule set forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (C)   Moving and routing. Moving of any structure and the routing thereof
must be cleared through the City Engineer with notification to the Police
Department for approval of the route and time of the move. All permits must
comply with
Chapter 152 and the provisions of the city code and M.S. § 221.81, as amended.
   (D)   Demolition and moving of buildings; fees required. Before issuing any
building moving permit or a permit for the demolition of any building or
structure, the Building Official must require the payment, by the applicant, of
fees in accordance with the schedule established by the fee resolution, set
forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (E)   Underground liquid storage system permit fees. Fees for the
installation, alteration, reconstruction, removal, or repair of any underground
liquid storage system are computed and based upon valuations in accordance with
the schedule set forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (F)   Fire suppression system/fire alarm system permit; fees required. The
installation of any fire suppression sprinkler equipment or system requires the
payment by the applicant of fees in the amount provided by the fee resolution,
set forth in the Appendix to this code. No permit for the installation of any
fire suppression equipment or system or installation of any fire alarm
equipment or system will be issued until the applicant files with the Building
Official a complete set of plans for such system and approval obtained by the
Fire Chief.
   (G)   False statements, violations, and penalties. It is unlawful to make
any false statement in connection with the securing of any permit from the
Inspection Department. It is unlawful to violate any provision of §§
103.02, 93.30 et seq., 93.50 et seq.,
99.75 et seq.,
100.55 et seq.,
92.37(B),
151.014,
99.01 et seq.,
99.15 et seq., or
99.30 through
99.41, or make any false statement in the affidavit as sworn statement made, as
required by this code, in connection with the securing of any permit from the
Inspection Department. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the Building Inspector or by a court of competent jurisdiction,
within the time fixed herein, severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively is guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of one
penalty for any violation does not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons are required to correct or remedy the violations
or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten
days that prohibited conditions are maintained constitute a separate offense.
The application of the above penalty is not held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
('72 Code, § 505:10) (Ord. 1977-237(A), passed 2-28-77; Am. Ord. 1989-630(A),
passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord. 1990-660(A), passed 10-8-90; Am. Ord. 1993-744, passed
11-22-93; Am. Ord. 2003-999, passed 6-2-03; Am. Ord. 2021-1267, passed 11-22-
21; Am. Ord. 2022-1285, passed 11-14-22)
§ 103.03 PUBLIC UTILITIES; UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Applicability of provisions. The section applies to all buildings in
the process of being erected on and after its effective date.
   (B)   Underground installation. Utility lines for telephone, cable
television, streetlights or other exterior lighting, and all electrical service
from existing above-ground trunk systems to the structure must be placed
underground. The building official may make appropriate allowance for
appurtenances and associated equipment including, but not limited to, surface-
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, and meter cabinets. All
such installation must be made in conformance with the Minnesota State Building
Code, city ordinances, and standards supplemental to this section as deemed
necessary by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Intent. It is the intent of this section to supplement the provisions
of §
151.086(J) and (K) by requiring underground installation of electrical and
other utility service from existing above-ground trunk systems to the structure
in all new building construction in the city. Areas of residential housing
which are clearly serviced by existing overhead wires and onto which a new
building is being constructed are exempt from the provisions of this section.
('72 Code, § 315.60) (Ord. 1974-161(A), passed 2-11-74; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95)
§ 103.04 PARKING LOT PERMITS.
   (A)   In all zoning districts in the city it is illegal to expand or create
new parking areas in excess of 3000 square feet without first obtaining a
permit from the City Planning Director, unless the parking area has been
approved as part of a new or amended conditional use permit or has received
approval as part of the building permit process.
   (B)   All plans for new or expanded parking areas in excess of 3000 square
feet must be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and must adhere to
all applicable provisions contained in the Zoning Code relative to off-street
parking areas. A person must not begin work to construct such a parking area
for which a permit is required without obtaining the permit and having paid the
fees required herein. Fees collected for the permit are in accordance with a
fee schedule established by the City Council by resolution set forth as an
Appendix to this code.
('72 Code, § 315.75) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 103.05 TEMPORARY RESIDENCES.
   (A)   Special approval permit. Temporary special approval permits may be
issued by the City Council for the use of a recreational vehicle or
manufactured home as a principal residence when it can be demonstrated by the
applicant that the main residence is uninhabitable due to either manmade or
natural disasters. The purpose of this section is to allow temporary housing
for residents on their property while the main residence is being repaired or
rebuilt. This subsection does not apply to on-site construction offices or
construction related trailers used in residential development or utility or
industrial building projects.
   (B)   Permit application. Application for a special approval permit must be
made to the Community Development Department under the provisions of this
section, and must be forwarded to the City Council. An administrative decision
may be allowed to be made regarding the temporary occupancy of a trailer,
recreational vehicle, or manufactured home prior to City Council action if a
situation is deemed to be an emergency and within the scope of this section.
   (C)   Information required. The application for a temporary special approval
permit must be accompanied by the following items:
      (1)   A letter stipulating the proposed length of occupancy in the
temporary residence.
      (2)   The type, size, and facilities of the trailer, recreational
vehicle, or manufactured home to be occupied.
      (3)   A description of how on-site septic disposal will be treated.
      (4)   A map showing the location of where the temporary residence is to
be located.
      (5)   A statement setting forth the cause of disaster and extent of
damages to the residence.
   (D)   City Council action. Any affirmative City Council action must
stipulate a maximum period of time that the permit will be in effect,
sanitation concerns, and any special conditions that will provide protection
for the applicant or surrounding landowners relevant to their health, safety,
or general welfare.
('72 Code, § 315.80) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
PLUMBING STANDARDS
§ 103.10 PLUMBING CODE.
   The Minnesota State Plumbing Code ("MSPC"), latest revision, as published by
the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and
published by the Office of the Revisor of Statutes as Minn. Rules Ch. 4714, is
hereby adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Plumbing Code is hereby fully
incorporated in this section.
(Ord. 2025-1312, passed 5-2-25)
§ 103.11 REVIEW OF PLUMBING PLANS.
   (A)   Review. Plumbing plans and specifications for any plumbing
infrastructure proposed for installation in the city must be submitted to the
city for review and must be approved by the city prior to implementation.
   (B)   Exceptions. This requirement does not apply to the following types of
projects, which will be forwarded to the state for review:
      (1)   State-licensed facilities as defined in M.S. § 326B.103, Subd. 13;
      (2)   Public buildings as defined in M.S. § 326B.103, Subd. 11; and
      (3)   Projects of a special nature for which additional review is
requested by either the city or the state.
(Ord. 2025-1312, passed 5-2-25)
§ 103.12 PLUMBING INSPECTIONS AND CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Inspections. The city is authorized to perform plumbing inspections as
required by the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.
   (B)   Enforcement. The city is authorized to enforce the Minnesota State
Plumbing Code in its entirety, except that the city shall not revoke, suspend,
or place restrictions on any plumbing license issued by the state.
(Ord. 2025-1312, passed 5-2-25)
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 103.60 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DEFINED.
   (A)   Any building or structure which has any or all of the following
defects may be deemed a dangerous building:
      (1)   Those whose walls or other structural members list, lean or buckle
to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls
outside of the middle third of its base.
      (2)   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more, of
damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50% of damage
or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
      (3)   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs, or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
      (4)   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and
welfare of the occupant or the people of this municipality.
      (5)   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause
sickness or disease, or to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general
welfare of those occupying or using the same.
      (6)   Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are
inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human
beings who live or may live therein.
      (7)   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic.
      (8)   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may
be dangerous to and injure members of the public or the property of others.
      (9)   Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of
this city.
      (10)   Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of any
ordinance of the city relating to the construction of buildings, or the
installation therein or thereon of heating, plumbing or electrical equipment,
appliances or devices.
   (B)   All dangerous buildings within the terms of this section are hereby
declared to be public and private nuisances and they must be repaired, vacated
or demolished as hereinafter provided.
('72 Code, § 1005:00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 103.61 STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION.
   The following standards must be followed in substance by the Building
Official and the Council in ordering, repair, vacation or demolition:
   (A)   If the “dangerous building” can reasonably be repaired so that it will
no longer constitute a dangerous building under this subchapter, it will be
ordered repaired.
   (B)   If the “dangerous building” is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants,
it will be ordered to be vacated.
   (C)   Any “dangerous building” ordered to be vacated must also be ordered to
be either repaired or demolished.
   (D)   In all cases where a “dangerous building” cannot be repaired so that
it will no longer exist as a “dangerous building” under the terms of this
subchapter, it must be ordered to be demolished in accordance with the
provisions of M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.261.
   (E)   In any case where a “dangerous building” is 50% damaged, decayed or
deteriorated from its original condition and construction, it must be ordered
to be demolished in accordance with the provisions of M.S.Chapter 463.
   (F)   In each case when a “dangerous building” is ordered to be repaired,
vacated and repaired, vacated and demolished, or demolished if already vacant,
a reasonable time must be specified within which the ordered action may readily
be accomplished.
('72 Code, § 1005:10) (Ord. 2021-1267, passed 11-22-21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 103.62 NOTICE.
   In the event that any “dangerous building” is found within this city, the
Council or such officer as may be designated by the Council, must notify in
writing by mail, the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other
persons having an interest in the building as shown by the records of the
County Auditor of the County of Hennepin, of any building so found. The notice
must state the requirement that the owner must vacate or demolish the building
in accordance with the terms of the notice and this subchapter; the occupant or
lessee must vacate said building, or may have it repaired in accordance with
the notice and remain in possession, or the mortgagees, agents or other persons
having an interest in said building may at their own risk, repair, vacate or
demolish the building or have the work or act done, and the notice must state
that such persons must be given such reasonable time as may be necessary to do
or have done the work or act required by the notice provided for herein.
('72 Code, § 1005:15)
MECHANICAL AND PLUMBING CONTRACTOR LICENSES
§ 103.75 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   It is unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to engage in businesses
regulated by the Minnesota State Building Code (MSBC), Chapter 1346, or Chapter
4714, Minnesota Plumbing Code, for any purpose whatsoever in this city without
first having procured a license therefor as herein provided.
   (A)   Mechanical contractor license. It is unlawful for a person to engage
in any businesses regulated by MSBC Chapter 1346, without first having procured
a license therefore from the City Building Official. The license will be issued
only to persons who show a thorough understanding of the laws and regulations
governing such work and who demonstrate sufficient knowledge, skill and
training as to enable them to carry on the work covered by their license.
   (B)   Plumbing contractor license. Persons engaged in businesses regulated
by MSBC Chapter 4714, Minnesota Plumbing Code, must be licensed by the State of
Minnesota pursuant to M.S. Chapter 326B.
('72 Code, § 323:00) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 2003-999, passed
6-2-03; Am. Ord. 2021-1267, passed 11-22-21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   General business licenses, see
Ch. 110
§ 103.76 APPLICATION.
   Application for a license must be made to the Building Official and the
license will be granted on proof of the applicant's qualifications therefor.
The term of a license is from January 1 through December 31 of each calendar
year.
('72 Code, § 323:10) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
§ 103.77 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee is in the amount set by the City Council in the schedule set
forth in the Appendix to this code. No license fee is charged for plumbing
contractors licensed by the State of Minnesota.
('72 Code, § 323:15) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 2003-999, passed
6-2-03)
§ 103.78 SURETY BOND.
   (A)   The applicant for a license or permit must furnish a surety bond to
the city in the total penal sum of $25,000 for mechanical, for pipe layers and
plumbers, which is conditioned upon the faithful and lawful performance of all
work entered upon within the city. The bond is for the benefit of persons
injured or suffering financial loss by reason of failure of performance. The
term of the bond must be concurrent with the term of the license. The bond must
be written by a corporate surety licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota.
   (B)   The bond must be filed with the city prior to licensure, except that
the applicant may provide to the city a certificate evidencing that the
applicant has given bond to the State of Minnesota, pursuant to M.S. §§ 326.40,
326B.46 and 326B.197, and that the bond is in force and on file with the
Secretary of State. If said certificate is provided, a separate bond is not
required by the city.
('72 Code, § 323:20) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 2022-1285, passed
11-14-22)
§ 103.79 INSURANCE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No license or permit will be issued unless and until the applicant
first provides evidence to the city of public liability insurance, including
products liability insurance with limits of at least $50,000 per person and
$100,000 per occurrence and property damage insurance with limits of at least
$10,000. The insurance must be written by an insurer licensed to do business in
the State of Minnesota and each licensee must maintain on file with the city a
certificate evidencing the insurance and providing that the insurance must not
be cancelled without the insurer first giving 15 days written notice to the
city. The term of the insurance must be concurrent with the term of the
license.
   (B)   The certificate evidencing insurance must be filed with the city prior
to licensure, except that the applicant may provide to the city a certificate
evidencing that the applicant has filed evidence of insurance with the State of
Minnesota, pursuant to M.S. § 326B.46, Subd. 2 and that the evidence of
insurance is in force and on file with the State Commissioner of Health. If the
certificate is provided, then separate evidence of insurance is not required by
the City of Brooklyn Park.
('72 Code, § 323:25) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 2021-1267, passed
11-22-21; Am. Ord. 2022-1285, passed 11-14-22)
CHAPTER 104: ILLICIT DISCHARGE
Section
   
104.01   Purpose
   
104.02   Definitions
   
104.03   Applicability
   
104.04   Responsibility for administration
   
104.05   Severability
   
104.06   Ultimate responsibility
   
104.07   Lawn fertilizer restrictions
   
104.08   Discharge prohibitions
   
104.09   Watercourse protection
   
104.10   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
104.11   Monitoring of discharges
   
104.12   Best management practices
   
104.13   Notification of spills
   
104.14   Enforcement
   
104.15   Appeal of notice of violation
   
104.16   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
104.17   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
104.18   Injunctive relief
   
104.19   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
104.20   Deicer storage requirements
§ 104.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the City of Brooklyn Park through the
regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit process.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user.
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The City of Brooklyn Park.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPS also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
   DEICER. Any substance used to melt snow and ice or used for its anti-icing
effects.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency
or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use
to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in this chapter.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as
defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm
water, and is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342 (b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual group, or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and action as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.  Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17; Am. Ord. 2022-1278, passed 7-25-22)
§ 104.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
the City of Brooklyn Park.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The City of Brooklyn Park shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon city may
be delegated in writing by the City Engineer to persons or entities acting in
the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.05 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.06 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter and
minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.07 LAWN FERTILIZER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Timing of fertilizer application. No lawn fertilizer shall be applied
when the ground is frozen and in no event during the period of November 15
through April 1 of the succeeding year.
   (B)   Impervious surfaces. Lawn fertilizer shall not be applied, spilled or
otherwise deposited on any impervious surfaces. Any lawn fertilizer applied,
spilled or deposited, either intentionally or accidentally, on impervious
surface shall be immediately and completely picked up.
   (C)   Buffer zones. No lawn fertilizer shall be applied within any
established wetland buffer zone or within 20 feet of the edge of any wetland,
pond, river, creek or lake.
   (D)   Lawn fertilizer content and application rate. No lawn fertilizer
containing any amount of phosphorus or other compounds containing phosphorus,
such as phosphate shall be applied to any turf within the city except when the
following conditions apply:
      (1)   Newly established turf areas for the turf's first growing season;
or
      (2)   In turf areas which a soil test confirms that the turf area is
below phosphorus levels established by the University of Minnesota Extension
Service. The fertilizer to be applied shall not contain an amount of phosphorus
that exceeds the amount of phosphorus and the appropriate application rate
recommended in the soil test evaluation.
   (E)   Notice requirement. Retail businesses selling lawn fertilizer
containing phosphorus shall post a notice in a conspicuous location near the
lawn fertilizer notifying customers of the limitation on the use of lawn
fertilizer containing phosphorous contained in this section.
   (F)   Violations. For the first 12 months following the effective date of
this section, no penalty shall attach to its violation. Thereafter, a person
violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties imposed by Minnesota
Statutes for petty misdemeanor offenses.
(Ord. 2-17-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.08 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any
materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
      (1)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
dechlorinated swimming pools, and any other water source not containing
pollutants.
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized by the city as
being necessary to protect public health and safety.
      (3)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the city agency prior to the time of the test.
      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Environmental Protection
Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
      (4)   Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval from the city.
      (5)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system,
shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of
written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the
location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or
conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or that the outfall
location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer
system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations
are to be documented and provided to the city.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.09 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.10 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City
Council prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.11 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The city or their designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devises as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge.
      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devises used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility are a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this chapter.
A person who is the operator of the facility with a NPDES permit to discharge
storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the city reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
      (7)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.12 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices
(BMPs) of any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of
the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-
structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise,
which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the
NPDES permit.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.13 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. said
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials
said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-
hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person or by phone or
facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city
within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of
the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.14 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of violation. 
      (1)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. The notice of violation
shall contain:
         (a)   The name and address of the alleged violator;
         (b)   The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
         (c)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
         (d)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore
compliance with this chapter in a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action;
         (e)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
         (f)   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed
to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of
notice of violation; and
         (g)   A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore
compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by the
city or their designee and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.
      (2)   Such notice may require without limitation:
         (a)   The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;
         (b)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
         (c)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
         (d) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
         (e)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
         (f)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties,
and remedies authorized by this chapter, the city may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory action, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
   (C)   Suspension of MS4 access.
      (1)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United
States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.
      (2)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The
violator may petition the city for reconsideration and a hearing. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city.
   (D)   Criminal prosecution. Any person that has violated or continues to
violate this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest
extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $1,000 per
violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90
days. The city may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring
expenses.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.15 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the city. The notice of appeal must be received within 15 days from the date of
the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority
or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of
the notice of appeal. The decision of the city or their designee shall be
final.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.16 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation had not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days
of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the city,
then representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject private property
and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the
purposes set forth above.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.17 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner
as determined by the decision of the municipal authority, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on
the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such
violation.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.18 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
and continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city may petition
for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from
activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to
perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.19 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this Chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 104.20 DEICER STORAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all indoor and outdoor bulk
deicer storage facilities (temporary and permanent) including salt piles, salt
bag storage, sand piles and other storage of deicing materials. BULK STORAGE,
as regulated by this chapter, is defined as storage of any material used for
deicing and/or traction during winter conditions that is more than five tons in
solid form (or 1,000 gallons in liquid form).
   (B)   General requirements.
      (1)   Indoor operations for the storage of deicing materials must be
provided wherever possible in order to prevent such materials from being
affected by rain, snow and melt water.
      (2)   All salt, sand and other deicing materials stored outdoors must be
covered at all times.
      (3)   Designated salt and deicer storage areas must be located on an
impervious surface.
      (4)   Implementation of practices to reduce exposure when transferring
material in designated salt and deicer storage areas (e.g., sweeping,
diversions and/or containment).
(Ord. 2022-1278, passed 7-25-22)
CHAPTER 105: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
105.01   Public swimming pools
   
105.02   License required
   
105.03   Permits required
   
105.04   Fencing of swimming pools
   
105.05   Inspections
   
105.06   Additional provisions
Cross-reference:
   General business licenses, see
Ch. 110
§ 105.01 PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS.
   Public swimming pools, spas and hot tubs must be installed and maintained in
accordance with rules and regulations of the Minnesota Department of Health
relating to public swimming pools and entitled Public Swimming Pools, Chapter
4717.
('72 Code, § 432:00) (Ord. 1972-106, passed 5-8-72; Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed
4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 105.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   All public swimming pools in the city as defined in the regulations must be
licensed annually and inspected by the city.
   (A)   Application. Application for a license must be made to the Licensing
Division. The term of a license is from May 1 through April 30 of each calendar
year.
   (B)   License fee. The license fee is in the amount set by the City Council
in the fee resolution as set forth in the Appendix to this code.
   (C)   No person may construct or operate a public swimming pool without
first having obtained a license from the city under this chapter and without
first having received plan review approval from the Minnesota Department of
Health.
('72 Code, § 432:02) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 2012-1135, passed
3-26-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 105.03 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Unless exempt under the provisions of Minnesota State Building Code, it is
unlawful to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, or locate any swimming pool, spa
or hot tub on any property within the city or cause the same to be done without
first obtaining a building permit from the City Building Official. This
requirement applies to any public swimming pool, and to any private swimming
pool constructed above or below ground level if the depth of the pool is in
excess of 24 inches.
('72 Code, § 432:05) (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 105.04 FENCING OF SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   Barrier required. Every person in possession of land within the city
either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon
which is situated a swimming pool including permanent swimming pools, portable
pools, spas and hot tubs must at all times provide and maintain barriers for
swimming pools, spas and hot tubs as required herein.
   (B)   Public pool barriers. For public pools, barriers must be installed and
inspected and approved in accordance with Rule 4717.1550, “Pool Access
Restriction; Fencing,” as authorized by M.S. Chapter 144.05.
   (C)   Private pool barriers. For private pools in excess of 24 inches in
depth, barriers must be installed in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The barrier must be constructed of corrosion and decay resistant
materials or other materials approved by the City Building Official. The
barrier must not be less than four feet in height and must have no intermediate
openings through which a four inch sphere may pass. The bottom of the barrier
must be not more than four inches above the sidewalk or finished grade. For
barriers constructed eight feet in height or taller, the City Building Official
may require that the barrier be designed or certified by a Minnesota Licensed
Professional Engineer to Minnesota State Building Code.
      (2)   Gates and doors through the barrier must not exceed four feet in
width unless approved by the City Building Official. A gate serving a driveway
must not be used to meet the barrier requirements of this section. All gates or
doors opening through the barrier must be equipped with self-closing and self-
latching devices capable of keeping the doors or gates securely closed at all
times; provided, however, that doors accessing the pool area from a dwelling
and forming any part of the barrier need not be so equipped. Gates and doors
through the barrier must be capable of being securely locked when the pool is
not in use. All latches or locking devices on doors and gates required by this
section must be installed not less than four feet above the adjoining walks,
steps, or ground level.
      (3)   Where an above ground pool structure is used as a barrier, or when
the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the barrier must comply
with subdivisions (1) and (2) above. Where the means of access is by ladder or
steps, then the ladder or steps must be capable of being secured, locked or
removed to prevent access or the ladder or steps must be surrounded by a
barrier which meets the requirements of subdivisions (1) and (2) above. When
the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created must be
protected by a barrier complying with subdivisions (1) and (2) above.
      (4)   The requirements of this section requiring a barrier or other solid
structure surrounding a swimming pool on all sides, may be waived to the extent
that the topographical features of the land upon which the pool is constructed
or is proposed to be constructed are such as to make the pool area inaccessible
and unapproachable from outside the pool area.
('72 Code, § 432:10) (Ord. 1972-115, passed 7-10-72; Am. Ord. 1985-496(A),
passed 9-23-85; Am. Ord. 1996-830, passed 12-16-96; Am. Ord. 2022-1285, passed
11-14-22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 105.05 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The city will inspect each public swimming pool in connection with:
      (1)   New construction;
      (2)   Remodeling;
      (3)   A complaint investigation; or
      (4)   A routine inspection.
   (B)   Access to premises. The person operating the public swimming pool
must, upon request of the Health Authority and after proper identification,
permit access to all parts of the swimming pool, its related equipment to
ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Removal and correction of violations. The owner or operator of a
public swimming pool, upon receipt of a report giving notification of
violations with the provisions of this chapter, must correct or remove each
violation in a reasonable length of time as determined by the city. Failure to
remove or correct each violation within the time period noted on the inspection
report constitutes a violation of this chapter. The city may issue enforcement
actions to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-1135, passed 3-26-12)
§ 105.06 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   Except as otherwise modified in this chapter, the following provisions,
including all future revisions to them, in Minnesota Statutes and Minnesota
Rules, are adopted by reference into this chapter:
   (A)   M.S. § 144.1222, except Subdivisions 1 and 1a; and
   (B)   MN. Rule 4717.0150 through 4717.3970, except 4717.0450, 4717.7000,
subp. 1(H).
(Ord. 2012-1135, passed 3-26-12; Am. Ord. 2022-1277, passed 7-25-22)
CHAPTER 106: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
106.01   Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code
   
106.02   Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code
§ 106.01 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), as promulgated by
the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference and incorporated
into the city code in whole as if it was set out in full, subject to the
amendments contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-955, passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2009-1104, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord.
2016-1207, passed 9-12-16; Am. Ord. 2025-1313, passed 6-9- 25)
§ 106.02 AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The following amendments are made to the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code:
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Brooklyn Park, hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
   (B)   Section 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or
alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy shall be done in accordance
with the procedures and provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code (MSBC),
established pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194, as adopted by the city.
Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any
provision of the MSBC or the City of Brooklyn Park Zoning Code.
   (C)   Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code shall be those listed in Chapter 8, those listed in the
MSBC, and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of
this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply
to the extent permitted by law and regulation and as further regulated in §
102.7.1 and § 102.7.2.
   (D)   Section 103.1 General. The Building Official or his or her designee is
responsible for administering the provisions of this code, and the executive
official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Official.
   (E)   Section 103.2 Appointment. The Code Official shall be appointed by the
chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction.
   (F)   Section 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed in
carrying out responsibilities under this code shall be in amounts set forth by
the City Council.
   (G)   Section 106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state
or local laws. Each day a violation continues after due notice has been served
may be deemed a separate offense.
   (H)   Section 106.6 Execution of compliance orders by public authority. Upon
failure to comply with a compliance order within the time set therein (and no
appeal having been taken), or upon failure to comply with a modified compliance
order within the time set therein, the criminal penalty established hereunder
notwithstanding, the City Council, after due notice to the owner, may by
resolution cause the cited deficiency to be remedied as set forth in the
compliance order. The cost of such remedy is a lien against the subject real
estate. Such a lien may be levied and collected as a special assessment in the
manner provided by M.S. Chapter 429. It may be levied for any of the reasons
set forth in M.S. § 429.101, Subd. 1, and specifically for the removal or
elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property. However,
the assessment must be payable in a single installment. It is the intent of
this section to authorize the city to utilize all of the provisions of M.S. §
429.101 to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (I)   Section 107.3 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served if a copy thereof is: delivered personally, sent by email after
a rental dwelling inspection, or sent by certified or first-class mail
addressed to the last known address. If the notice is returned showing that the
letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in or about the structure affected by such notice.
   (J)   Section 108.4 Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person
responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the
Code Official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard
and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating
the equipment or removing the placard.
   (K)   Section 110.1 General. The Code Official shall order the owner or
owner's authorized agent of any premises upon which is located any structure,
which in the Code Official's or owner's authorized agent judgment after review
is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being
made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and
hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or
where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a
period of more than one year, the Code Official shall order the owner or
owner's authorized agent to demolish and remove such structure, or board up
until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not
extend beyond one year, unless approved by the Building Official.
   (L)   Section 111. Not adopted.
   (M)   Section 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be liable to a fine of not less than collectable by the city charter but less
than 100%.
   (N)   Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not
defined in this code and are defined in the MSBC and the City of Brooklyn Park
Zoning Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those
codes.
   (O)   Section 202 General definitions.
      CODE OFFICIAL. The official charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative. For the
purpose of administration and enforcement of this code, the Building Official
shall be the CODE OFFICIAL.
      COST OF SUCH DEMOLITION OR EMERGENCY REPAIRS. The costs shall include the
actual costs of the demolition or repair of the structure less revenues
obtained if salvage was conducted prior to demolition or repair. Costs shall
include, but not be limited to, expenses incurred or necessitated related to
demolition or emergency repairs, such as asbestos survey and abatement if
necessary; costs of inspectors, testing agencies or experts retained relative
to the demolition or emergency repairs; costs of testing; surveys for other
materials that are controlled or regulated from being dumped in a landfill;
title searches; mailing(s); postings; administrative fees, recording; and
attorney fees expended for recovering of the cost of emergency repairs or to
obtain or enforce an order of demolition made by a code official, the governing
body or board of appeals.
      HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS. A situation which creates an immediate or potential
danger to the public health or safety or to the environment.
      REPAIR. To restore to a sound acceptable state of operation,
serviceability, or appearance.
      REPLACE. To remove an existing item or portion of a system and to
construct or install a new item of similar or new quality as an existing item
when repair of the item is impractical.
      UNSANITARY. Failure to maintain a property in such a manner that creates
a danger or hazard to the health of persons occupying or frequenting it.
Conditions caused by deterioration or improper installation, methods or
materials of construction, equipment, lighting, heating, ventilation, or
plumbing, or from existing conditions related to trash, debris, or moisture
that may cause infestation or mold.
   (P)   Section 302.4 Weeds. Not adopted.
   (Q)   Section 302.8 Motor vehicles. Not adopted.
   (R)   Section 302.9 Defacement of property. Not adopted.
   (S)   Section 304.1.1 Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be
determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the MSBC
or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:
      1.   The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal
loads, the load effects or the required strength;
      2.   The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls
and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or
load effects;
      3.   Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
      4.   Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building
envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained,
weather resistant or water tight;
      5.   Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are
not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects;
      6.   Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are
not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or
are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
      7.   Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported
elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or
rotting materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting
all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
      8.   Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain,
roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that
is not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue or without proper
anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
      9.   Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect
serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or
fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects;
      10.   Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
      11.   Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to,
trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and
exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not
capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
      12.   Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar
appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not
structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections
not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or
      13.   Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not
structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects.
      Exceptions:
         1.   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
         2.   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved
by the code official.
   (T)   Section 304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved
address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the
street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall: contrast with their
background, be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall not be less
than six inches (102 mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch
(12.7 mm). Commercial building identification are a minimum of 12 inches (304
mm) in height. Section 505.1 Minnesota State Fire Code.
   (U)   Section 304.14 Insect screens. During the period from May 15 to
October 15, every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or
any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied
with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch. Every
swinging door shall also have a self-closing device in good working condition.
   (V)   Section 304.15.1 Apartment Security System. For the purpose of
providing a reasonable amount of safety and general welfare for persons
occupying apartment dwellings, an approved security system shall be maintained
for each apartment building to control access. The security system shall
consist of locked building entrance or foyer doors and lock doors leading from
hallways into individual dwelling units. Dead-latch type door locks shall be
provided with lever knobs on the inside of the building entrance doors and with
key cylinders on the outside of building entrance doors. Building entrance door
latches shall be of a type that is permanently locked from the outside and
permanently unlocked from the inside.
   (W)   Section 304.19 Gates. In accordance with the MSBC and the Brooklyn
Park Zoning Code, gates required to be self-closing and self-latching shall be
maintained such that, when released, they will positively close and latch.
   (X)   Section 305.1.1 Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be
determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the MSBC
or the Minnesota Conservation Code as required for existing buildings:
      1.   The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal
loads, the load effects or the required strength;
      2.   The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls
and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or
load effects;
      3.   Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
      4.   Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and
load effects;
      5.   Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces,
including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly
anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects;
      6.   Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not
plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are
not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
      Exceptions:
         1.   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
         2.   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved
by the code official.
   (Y)   Section 305.3 Interior surfaces. Interior surfaces, including windows
and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling,
chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, replaced, or removed.
Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions
shall be corrected.
   (Z)   Section 305.4 Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing,
balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound
condition, good repair, and free from hazardous conditions.
   (AA)   Section 306.1.1 Unsafe conditions. Where any of the following
conditions cause the component or system to be beyond its limit state, the
component or system shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or
replaced to comply with the MSBC or the Minnesota Conservation Code as required
for existing buildings:
      1.   Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Collapse of footing or foundation system.
         (b)   Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural
element due to soil expansion.
         (c)   Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation,
concrete or other structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil.
         (d)   Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation.
         (e)   Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt.
         (f)   Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other
structural element due to the ground water table.
      2.   Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Deterioration.
         (b)   Ultimate deformation.
         (c)   Fractures.
         (d)   Fissures.
         (e)   Spalling.
         (f)   Exposed reinforcement.
         (g)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      3.   Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Deterioration.
         (b)   Corrosion.
         (c)   Elastic deformation.
         (d)   Ultimate deformation.
         (e)   Stress or strain cracks.
         (f)   Joint fatigue.
         (g)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      4.   Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Deterioration.
         (b)   Ultimate deformation.
         (c)   Fractures in masonry or mortar joints.
         (d)   Fissures in masonry or mortar joints.
         (e)   Spalling.
         (f)   Exposed reinforcement.
         (g)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      5.   Steel that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Deterioration.
         (b)   Elastic deformation.
         (c)   Ultimate deformation.
         (d)   Metal fatigue.
         (e)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      6.   Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Ultimate deformation.
         (b)   Deterioration.
         (c)   Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin.
         (d)   Fire damage beyond charring.
         (e)   Significant splits and checks.
         (f)   Horizontal shear cracks.
         (g)   Vertical shear cracks.
         (h)   Inadequate support.
         (i)   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
         (j)   Excessive cutting and notching.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Where substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
         2.   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted where approved
by the code official.
   (BB)   Section 307.1 General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs
having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and
every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other
walking surface that is more than 30 inches (762mm) above the floor or grade
below shall have guards. Handrails shall be not less than 32 inches (812mm) in
height or more than 38 inches (965 mm) in height measured vertically above the
nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking
surfaces. Guards shall be not less than 30 (762 mm) inches in height above the
floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
      Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted
building code.
   (CC)   Section 309.3 Single occupant. Not adopted.
   (DD)   Section 401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural
light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical
ventilation complying with the MSBC shall be permitted.
   (EE)   Section 403.4 Process ventilation. In accordance with the MSBC and
the State Fire Code (SFC), where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes,
gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall
be provided to remove the contaminating agent at its source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be re-circulated to any space.
   (FF)   Section 403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems
shall be independent of all other systems, and shall be exhausted in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions and the State Mechanical Code (SMC).
   (GG)   Section 502.3 Hotels. Not adopted.
   (HH)   Section 502.5 Public toilet facilities. Public toilet facilities
shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and working condition in accordance
with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or
cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at
all times during occupancy of the premises.
   (II)   Section 504.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly
installed and maintained in working order. They shall be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects, capable of performing the functions for which
they were designed. In accordance with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code
(MSPC), all plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and
functional condition.
   (JJ)   Section 505.1 Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking
fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to
either a public water system or an approved private water system. In accordance
with the MSPC, all kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and
showers shall be supplied with cold and hot or tempered running water in
accordance with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.
   (KK)   Section 505.5.1 Abandonment of systems. Where a nonpotable water
reuse system or a rainwater collection and distribution system is not
maintained or the owner ceases use of the system, the system shall be abandoned
in accordance with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.
   (LL)   Section 602.1 Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be
provided in structures as required by this section and the MSBC.
   (MM)   Section 602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided
with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F in
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. This is based on the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in the Minnesota State
Energy Code (MSEC). Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall portable
unvented fuel-burning space heaters be used, as a means to provide required
heating.
   Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-
1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
   (NN)   Section 602.3 Heat supply. During the period from September 15 to May
15, every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (18°C) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
      Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required, provided that the heating system is
operating at its full design capacity.
   (OO)   Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. When occupied during the period
from September 15 to May 15, indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied
with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (18°C) shall be
maintained.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
         2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
   (PP)   Section 603.5 Combustion air. In accordance with the Minnesota State
Mechanical Code (MSMC), a supply of air shall be provided for complete fuel
combustion and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning
equipment.
   (QQ)   Section 604.1 Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be
provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this
section, Minnesota State Electrical Code, and Section 605.
   (RR)   Section 604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment
shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in
accordance with the Minnesota State Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be
served by a three-wire, 120/240-volt, single-phase electrical service with a
rating of not less than 60 amperes.
   (SS)   Section 604.3.1.1 Electrical equipment. Electrical distribution
equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible
cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit interrupters, surge protectors,
molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses, luminaires, ballasts, motors
and electronic control, signaling and communication equipment that have been
exposed to water shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the
MSBC and the Minnesota Electrical Code.
      Exception: The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired where
an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer's
representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that
requires replacement:
      1.   Enclosed switches, rated not more than 600 volts or less.
      2.   Busway, rated not more than 600 volts.
      3.   Panelboards, rated not more than 600 volts.
      4.   Switchboards, rated not more than 600 volts.
      5.   Fire pump controllers, rated not more than 600 volts.
      6.   Manual and magnetic motor controllers.
      7.   Motor control centers.
      8.   Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers.
      9.   Low-voltage power circuit breakers.
      10.   Protective relays, meters and current transformers.
      11.   Low- and medium-voltage switchgear.
      12.   Liquid-filled transformers.
      13.   Cast-resin transformers.
      14.   Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends
have not been exposed to water.
      15.   Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for wet
locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water.
      16.   Luminaires that are listed as submersible.
      17.   Motors.
      18.   Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment.
   (TT)   Section 604.3.2.1 Electrical equipment. Electrical switches,
receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and
power distribution circuits, that have been exposed to fire, shall be replaced
in accordance with the provisions of the MSBC and the Minnesota Electrical
Code.
      Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures that shall be
allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment
manufacturer or approved manufacturer's representative indicates that the
equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.
   (UU)   Section 606.1 General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be
maintained in compliance with Minnesota Elevator and Related Devices Code. The
most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within
the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be available for
public inspection in the office of the building operator or be posted in a
publicly conspicuous location approved by the code official. The inspection and
tests shall be performed at not less than the periodic intervals listed in the
Minnesota Elevator and Related Devices Code, except where otherwise specified
by the authority having jurisdiction.
   (VV)   Section 701. Scope. The provisions of this chapter, under the
Minnesota SFC shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety
relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities
and equipment to be provided.
   (WW)   Section 702.1 General. A safe continuous and unobstructed path of
travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the
public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Minnesota State Fire Code.
   (XX)   Section 702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with
the Minnesota State Fire Code shall be unobstructed.
   (YY)   Section 702.3 Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be
readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need
for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms
to that permitted by the MSBC.
   (ZZ)   Section 703.2 Unsafe conditions. Where any components are not
maintained and do not function as intended or do not have the fire resistance
required by the code under which the building was constructed or altered, such
components or portions thereof shall be deemed unsafe conditions in accordance
with the Minnesota State Fire Code. Components or portions thereof determined
to be unsafe shall be repaired or replaced to conform to that code under which
the building was constructed or altered. Where the condition of components is
such that any building, structure or portion thereof presents an imminent
danger to the occupants of the building, structure or portion thereof, the Fire
Code Official shall act in accordance with Minnesota State Fire Code.
   (AAA)   Section 703.3.2 Smoke barriers and smoke partitions. Required smoke
barriers and smoke partitions shall be maintained to prevent the passage of
smoke. Openings protected with approved smoke barrier doors or smoke dampers
shall be maintained in accordance with Minnesota State Fire Code.
   (BBB)   Section 703.3.3 Fire walls, fire barriers, and fire partitions.
Required fire walls, fire barriers and fire partitions shall be maintained to
prevent the passage of fire. Openings protected with approved doors or fire
dampers shall be maintained in accordance with Minnesota State Fire Code.
   (CCC)   Section 703.4 Opening protectives. Opening protectives shall be
maintained in an operative condition in accordance with Minnesota State Fire
Code. The application of field-applied labels associated with the maintenance
of opening protectives shall follow the requirements of the approved third-
party certification organization accredited for listing the opening protective.
Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed, or
otherwise made inoperable. Fusible links shall be replaced whenever fused or
damaged. Fire door assemblies shall not be modified.
   (DDD)   Section 703.7 Vertical shafts. Interior vertical shafts, including
stairways, elevator hoistways and service and utility shafts, which connect two
or more stories of a building shall be enclosed or protected as required in
Minnesota State Fire Code. New floor openings in existing buildings shall
comply with the MSBC.
   (EEE)   Section 704.1 Required fire protection systems. Fire protection
systems required by this code, the Minnesota State Fire Code or the MSBC shall
be installed, repaired, operated, tested and maintained in accordance with this
code. A fire protection system for which a design option, exception or
reduction to the provisions of this code, the Minnesota State Fire Code or the
MSBC has been granted shall be considered to be a required system.
   (FFF)   Section 704.1.2 Required fire protection systems. Fire protection
systems required by this code, the Minnesota State Fire Code or the MSBC shall
be installed, repaired, operated, tested and maintained in accordance with this
code. A fire protection system for which a design option, exception or
reduction to the provisions of this code, the Minnesota State Fire Code or the
MSBC has been granted shall be considered to be a required system.
   (GGG)   Section 704.1.3 Fire protection systems. Fire protection systems
shall be inspected, maintained and tested in accordance with the following
Minnesota State Fire Code requirements.
      1.   Automatic sprinkler systems.
      2.   Automatic fire-extinguishing systems protecting commercial cooking
systems.
      3.   Automatic water mist extinguishing systems.
      4.   Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems.
      5.   Carbon monoxide alarms and carbon monoxide detection systems.
      6.   Clean-agent extinguishing systems.
      7.   Dry-chemical extinguishing systems.
      8.   Fire alarm and fire detection systems.
      9.   Fire department connections.
      10.   Fire pumps.
      11.   Foam extinguishing systems.
      12.   Halon extinguishing systems.
      13.   Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms.
      14.   Smoke and heat vents and mechanical smoke removal systems.
      15.   Smoke control systems.
      16.   Wet-chemical extinguishing systems.
   (HHH)   Section 704.2 Standards. Fire protection systems shall be inspected,
tested and maintained in accordance with the referenced standards listed in
Table 704.2 and as required in this section and the Minnesota State Fire Code.
TABLE 704.2
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
SYSTEM STANDARD
SYSTEM                                   STANDARD
Portable fire extinguishers              NFPA 10
Carbon dioxide fire-extinguishing system NFPA 12
Halon 1301 fire-extinguishing systems    NFPA 12A
Dry-chemical extinguishing systems       NFPA 17
Wet-chemical extinguishing systems       NFPA 17A
Water-based fire protection systems      NFPA 25
Fire alarm systems                       NFPA 72
Smoke and heat vents                     NFPA 204
Water-mist systems                       NFPA 750
Clean-agent extinguishing systems        NFPA 2001
 
   (III)   Section 704.3 Systems out of service. Where a required fire
protection system is out of service, the fire department and the fire code
official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code
official, either the building shall be evacuated or an approved fire watch
shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shutdown until the
fire protection system has been returned to service. Where utilized, fire
watches shall be provided with not less than one approved means for
notification of the fire department and shall not have duties beyond performing
constant patrols of the protected premises and keeping watch for fires. Actions
shall be taken in accordance with Minnesota State Fire Code to bring the
systems back in service.
   (JJJ)   Section 704.3.1 Emergency impairments. Where unplanned impairments
of fire protection systems occur, appropriate emergency action shall be taken
to minimize potential injury and damage. The impairment coordinator shall
implement the steps outlined in Minnesota State Fire Code.
   (KKK)   Section 704.4.2 Removal of existing occupant-use hose lines. The
Fire Code Official is authorized to permit the removal of existing occupant-use
hose lines where all of the following apply:
      1.   The installation is not required by the Minnesota State Fire Code or
the MSBC.
      2.   The hose line would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire
department.
      3.   The remaining outlets are compatible with local fire department
fittings.
   (LLL)   Section 704.4.3 Termination of monitoring service. For fire alarm
systems required to be monitored by the Minnesota State Fire Code, notice shall
be made to the fire code official whenever alarm monitoring services are
terminated. Notice shall be made in writing by the provider of the monitoring
service being terminated.
   (MMM)   Section 704.5.1 Fire department connection access. Ready access to
fire department connections shall be maintained at all times and without
obstruction by fences, bushes, trees, walls or any other fixed or movable
object. Access to fire department connections shall be approved by the Fire
Chief.
      Exception: Fences, where provided with an access gate equipped with a
sign complying with the legend requirements of Minnesota State Fire Code and a
means of emergency operation. The gate and the means of emergency operation
shall be approved by the Fire Chief and maintained operational at all times.
   (NNN)   Section 704.6.4 Smoke detection system. Smoke detectors listed in
accordance with UL 268 and provided as part of the building's fire alarm system
shall be an acceptable alternative to single- and multiple-station smoke alarms
and shall comply with the following:
      1.   The fire alarm system shall comply with all applicable requirements
in the Minnesota State Fire Code.
      2.   Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit shall
initiate alarm notification in the dwelling or sleeping unit in accordance with
the Minnesota State Fire Code.
      3.   Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit shall
not activate alarm notification appliances outside of the dwelling or sleeping
unit, provided that a supervisory signal is generated and monitored in
accordance with Minnesota State Fire Code.
   (OOO)   Section 705.1 General. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed in
dwellings in accordance with the Minnesota State Fire Code, except that alarms
in dwellings covered by the Minnesota Residential Code shall be installed in
accordance with that code.
   (PPP)   705.2 Carbon monoxide alarms and detectors. Carbon monoxide alarms
and carbon monoxide detection systems shall be maintained in accordance with
Minnesota State Fire Code. Carbon monoxide alarms and carbon monoxide detectors
that become inoperable or begin producing end-of-life signals shall be
replaced.
   (QQQ)   Section A102 Materials. Not adopted.
   (RRR)   Section A103 Installation. Not adopted.
   (SSS)   Section A104 Referenced standard. Whenever this code refers to the
International Codes, such references shall be deemed to be to the comparable
applicable code as adopted by the State of Minnesota. Whenever this code refers
to the International Zoning Code, such references shall be deemed to be the
City of Brooklyn Park Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 2001-955, passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2009-1104, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord.
2016-1207, passed 9-12-16; Am. Ord. 2025-1313, passed 6-9- 25)
CHAPTER 107: GRAFFITI
Section
   
107.01   Findings and purpose
   
107.02   Definitions
   
107.03   Prohibited acts
   
107.04   Graffiti as nuisance
   
107.05   Removal of graffiti
   
107.06   Abatement procedure
 
   
107.99   Penalties
§ 107.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council of the city is enacting this chapter to help prevent
the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of
graffiti from public and private property.
   (B)   The Council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive
of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community.
Graffiti perpetrators are often associated with other criminal activities,
including violent crimes. Unless the city acts to remove graffiti from public
and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then
become the target of graffiti and entire neighborhoods are affected and become
less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city.
   (C)   The City Council intends, through the adoption of this chapter, to
provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property
from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement of public and private property.
The council does not intend for this chapter to conflict with any existing
anti-graffiti state laws or "criminal damage to property" laws.
(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)
§ 107.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words will have the meaning
provided to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER . Any aerosol container that is adapted or made for
the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing
property.
   BROAD-TIPPED MARKER . Any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement
with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater
than one-fourth of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is
not water soluble.
   ETCHING EQUIPMENT . Any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make
permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface.
   GRAFFITI . Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting, symbol, or
other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was
not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or despite
advance authorizations otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the City Council.
   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT . An aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum
label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other
device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or man-made
surface.
   PAINT STICK OR GRAFFITI STICK . Any device containing a solid form of paint,
chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a
surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-fourth of an inch in
width.
(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)
§ 107.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Defacement. It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any
natural or man-made surface on any publicly owned property or, without the
permission of the owner or occupant, on any privately owned property.
   (B)   Possession of graffiti implements. Unless otherwise authorized by the
owner or occupant, it is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti
implement while:
      (1)   Within 200 feet of any graffiti located in or on a public facility,
park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, bridge, or other public
building or structure owned or operated by a governmental agency; or
      (2)   Within 200 feet of any graffiti located in any public place or on
private property, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)
Penalty, see § 107.99
§ 107.04 GRAFFITI AS NUISANCE.
   (A)   Declaration. The existence of graffiti on public or private property
in violation of this chapter is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and,
therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this
chapter.
   (B)   Duty of property owner. It is the duty of both the owner of the
property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in
possession or who has the right to possess such property to at all times keep
the property clear of graffiti.
   (C)   Repeat violations. If a property is subject to three or more
occurrences of graffiti within a year, application of anti-graffiti material of
a type and nature that is acceptable to the city may be required for each of
the publicly viewable surfaces after notification by the city, or imposed
during improvements or construction activities to the site as determined by the
city.
(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)
Penalty, see § 107.99
§ 107.05 REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.
   (A)   By perpetrator. The city may require any person applying graffiti on
public or private property to either remove or pay for all costs for removal of
the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or property owner. The
removal must be performed in a manner prescribed by the city, with materials
and colors compatible with existing surfaces, and to a comparable or improved
condition before the graffiti application as determined by the city. Where
graffiti is applied by a person under 18 years old, the parents or legal
guardian will also be responsible for such removal or for payment for the costs
of removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal
will constitute an additional violation of this chapter.
   (B)   By property owner or city. In lieu of the procedure set forth in
division (A), the city may order that the graffiti be removed by the property
owner or any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess
such property, pursuant to the nuisance abatement procedure herein. Graffiti
removal and corrections must be performed with materials and colors compatible
with existing surfaces as determined by the city. If the property owner or
responsible party fails to remove offending graffiti within the time specified
by the city, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for
the graffiti removal in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)
§ 107.06 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Abatement by city. If the owner, occupant, or other responsible party
does not comply with the notice within the time specified, the city may abate
the public nuisance.
   (B)   Notice and Hearing. The following notification must be conducted prior
to city abatement of the public nuisance. Whenever it is determined that a
public nuisance is being maintained or exists on a property, the Manager or
authorized designee must give ten day's written notice through service by mail,
by posting a notice on the property, or by personal delivery to the owner of or
person in control of the property on which the public nuisance is located. When
the property is occupied, service upon the occupant is deemed service upon the
owner. Where the property is unoccupied or abandoned, service may be by mail to
the last known owner of record of the property or by posting on the property.
The notice must state:
      (1)   A description of the public nuisance;
      (2)   That the public nuisance must be corrected within ten days of the
service of the notice;
      (3)   That if the public nuisance is not properly removed or corrected as
ordered, the public nuisance will be abated by the city and the costs of
abatement will be specially assessed to the property taxes;
      (4)   That the owner of or person in control of the property on which the
public nuisance is located may in writing request a hearing before the City
Manager or authorized designee.
   (C)   Hearing, action. If a hearing is requested during the ten-day period,
the City Manager or authorized designee must promptly schedule the hearing, and
no further action on the abatement of the public nuisance may be taken until
the manager's decision is rendered. At the conclusion of the scheduled hearing,
the manager or authorized designee may cancel the notice to remove or correct
the public nuisance, modify the notice, or affirm the notice to remove or
correct the public nuisance. If the notice is modified or affirmed, the public
nuisance must be disposed of in accordance with the city's written order.
   (D)   Summary abatement. The enforcing officer may provide for abating a
public nuisance without following the procedure required in division (B) when:
      (1)   There is an immediate threat to the public health or safety;
      (2)   There is an immediate threat of serious property damage;
      (3)   A public nuisance has been caused by private parties on public
property; or
      (4)   Any other condition exists that violates state or local law and
that is a public health or safety hazard.
   A reasonable attempt must be made to notify the owner, occupant, or other
responsible party of the intended action and the right to appeal the abatement
and cost recovery at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
   (E)   Cost recovery. The owner of property on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city, or a person who has caused a public nuisance on property
not owned by that person, is personally liable to the city for the cost of the
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, an appropriate official will prepare a bill
for the cost and mail it to the owner or other responsible party. The amount is
immediately due and payable to the city.
   (F)   Assessment. If the cost, or any portion of it, has not been paid
within 30 days after the date of the bill, the council may certify the unpaid
cost against the property to which the cost is attributable in accordance with
the process set forth in §
94.07 of this Code.
(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)
§ 107.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with state law.
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter may be subject to civil penalties in
accordance with
Chapter 37 of the city code.
   (C)   This chapter is not intended to prohibit a private property owner from
seeking additional penalties or remedies.
(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)
CHAPTER 108: STORM SEWER UTILITY
Section
   
108.01   Statutory authority
   
108.02   Findings and purpose
   
108.03   System established
   
108.04   Rates and charges
   
108.05   Use of revenues
§ 108.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   M.S. § 444.075 ("the Act"), authorizes cities to impose just and reasonable
charges for the use and availability of storm sewer facilities ("charges"). By
this chapter, the city elects to exercise such authority.
(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)
§ 108.02 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   In providing for such charges, the following findings and determinations are
made:
   (A)   In the exercise of its governmental authority and in order to promote
the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, the city has
constructed, operated and maintained a storm sewer system (the "system"). This
chapter is adopted in the further exercise of such authority.
   (B)   The system, as constructed, heretofore has been financed and paid for
through the imposition of special assessments and ad valorem taxes. Such
financing methods were appropriate to the circumstances at the time they were
used. It is now necessary and desirable to provide an alternative method of
recovering some or all of the future costs of operating, maintaining and
improving the system through the imposition of charges as provided in this
section.
   (C)   In imposing charges, it is necessary to establish a methodology that
undertakes to make them just and equitable. Taking into account the status of
completion of the system, past methods of recovering system costs, and other
relevant factors, it is determined that it would be just and equitable to
assign responsibility for some or all of the future costs of operating,
maintaining and improving the system on the basis of the expected storm water
runoff from the various parcels of land within the city.
   (D)   Assigning costs and making charges based upon expected typical storm
sewer runoff cannot be done with mathematical precision but can only be
accomplished within reasonable and practical limits based upon use.
(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)
§ 108.03 SYSTEM ESTABLISHED
   A city storm sewer system is hereby established. The system consists of all
storm sewer conduits, manholes and catch basins, ditches and ponds within the
public right-of-way and storm sewer conduits, manholes and catch basins in
public purpose easements as of January 1, 2003, and any additional storm sewer
facilities acquired by the city in the future.
(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)
§ 108.04 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Land use rate calculation. Rates and charges for the use and
availability of the system are to be determined through the use of a
"residential equivalent factor" which is defined as the ratio of the average
volume of surface water runoff coming from one acre of land subjected to a
particular use, to the average volume of runoff coming from one acre of land
subject to typical single-family residential use within the city during a
standard rainfall event. All developed single-family parcels shall be
considered to have an acreage of one-third acre per unit. Calculations for
stormwater utility rates for various land uses are based upon their residential
equivalent factor (REF). The REF values for various land uses are as follows:
 
Land Use Class                              REF
Single Family Residential                   1.00
Townhouse/Two-Family Residential            1.20
Multi-Family Residential (Four-plex and up) 1.30
Business                                    2.10
Industrial                                  2.40
School/Church                               1.00
 
   (B)   Calculation of fees. The service charge to be billed each billing unit
shall be a fair and equitable share of the total costs of the system. Further,
service charges shall be apportioned to similar land uses of property
similarly. From time to time the City Council shall adopt a resolution
establishing a class charge rate calculation table for all billing units. These
quarterly charges shall be listed in the City Code Appendix fee resolution
table.
   (C)   Other land uses. Other land uses not listed in the City Code Appendix
class charge rate calculation table are to be classified by the City Manager or
authorized designee, by assigning them to the classes most nearly like the
listed uses, from the standpoint of probable hydrologic response. Appeals from
the City Manager or authorized designee's determination of the proper
classifications may be made to the City Council in the same manner as other
appeals from administrative determinations.
   (D)   Adjustment of charges. The City Council may by resolution, from time
to time, adopt policies providing for the adjustment of charges for parcels or
grounds of parcels, based upon data supplied by affected property owners,
demonstrating an actual runoff volume substantially different from the
calculation being used for the class of parcel or parcels. The adjustment may
be made only after receiving the recommendation of the City Manager or
authorized designee and may not be made effective retroactively. If the
adjustment would have the effect of changing the calculation for all or
substantially all of the land uses in a particular classification, however,
such adjustment must be accomplished by amending the class charge rate
calculation table found within the City Code Appendix.
   (E)   Excluded lands. A charge for system availability of service will not
be made against land which is either (i) public streets right-of-way, or
railroad road right-of-way or (ii) vacant and unimproved, or fallow, with
substantially all of its surface having vegetation as ground cover, and (iii)
city owned land.
   (G)   Supplying information. The owner, occupant or person in charge of any
premises must supply the city with such information as the city may reasonably
request related to the use, development and area of the premises. Willful
failure to provide such information or to falsify it is a violation of this
subsection.
   (H)   Estimated charges. If the owner, occupant or person in charge of any
premises fails or refuses to provide the information requested, as provided
above, the charge for such premises must be estimated and billed in accordance
with such estimate, based upon information then available to the city.
   (I)   Billings and collections. Storm sewer service charges shall be placed
on the utility accounts of property for the use and availability of the system
and are payable quarterly in accordance with usual and customary practices in
rendering of water and sanitary sewer bills.
   (J)   Penalties and remedies for delinquency or default in paying billings.
Penalties and remedies for late payments or non-payment of billings are the
same as those applicable to billings rendered for water and sanitary sewer
service. In the event a bill becomes delinquent, the City Council may cause the
delinquent charges to become a lien against the property served by certifying
to the Hennepin County Taxpayers Services Division the amount of such
delinquent bill in accordance with the Act.
(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)
§ 108.05 USE OF REVENUES
   Revenues received from charges are to be placed in a separate storm sewer
utility enterprise fund and used to pay the normal, reasonable and current
costs of operating, maintaining, and improving water quality within the system.
Revenues from time to time received in excess of such costs may be used to
finance improvements to and betterments of the storm sewer utility and other
utility enterprise funds.
(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)
CHAPTER 109: STREET/SIGNAL LIGHTING SYSTEM
Section
   
109.01   Statutory authority
   
109.02   System established
   
109.03   Rates and charges
109.01   STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   M.S. Chapter 429 ("the Act"), authorizes cities to impose charges for the
operation of a street/signal lighting system. By this chapter, the city elects
to exercise such authority.
(Ord. 2002-983, passed 11-25-02)
109.02   SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.
   A city street/signal lighting system is established. The system consists of
all street lighting facilities, whether owned by the city or other, for which
the city purchases and supplies electrical energy. A street/signal lighting
service district is hereby established. The district includes all property
within the city.
(Ord. 2002-983, passed 11-25-02)
109.03 RATES AND CHARGES:
   (A)   Billing unit. Service charges for parcels of land shall be based on
land use. The billing unit for residential parcels zoned or used as residential
shall be a dwelling unit; single-family residential unit or townhouse/two
family residential unit or multi-family residential unit. The billing unit for
parcels zoned or used as other zoning classifications shall be street front
lineal foot.
   (B)   Calculation of fees. The service charge to be billed each billing unit
shall be a fair and equitable share of the total costs of the system. Further,
service charges shall be apportioned to similar classes of property similarly.
From time to time the City Council shall adopt a resolution establishing a
class charge rate calculation table for all billing units. These quarterly
charges shall be listed in the City Code Appendix fee resolution table.
   (C)   Billings and collections. Street/signal lighting service charges shall
be placed on the utility accounts of all property and are payable quarterly in
accordance with usual and customary practices in rendering of water and
sanitary sewer bills.
   (D)   Adjustment of charges. If an owner or person responsible for paying
the street/signal lighting service charge questions the correctness of such a
charge, such person may have the determination of the charge reviewed by
written request to the City Manager. Such request shall be made within 30 days
of the mailing of the bill in question. The City Manager shall have the
authority to recompute the charge.
   (E)   Penalties and remedies for delinquency or default in paying billings.
Any street/signal lighting service charges in excess of 90 days past due on
October 1 of any year may be certified to the Hennepin County Taxpayer Services
Manager for collection with real estate taxes as a special assessment. An
administrative charge of $25 shall be added to each street/signal lighting
service charge so certified. In addition, the city may bring a civil action or
to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid charges.
(Ord. 2002-983, passed 11-25-02)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
         
111.   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES
         
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND ESTABLISHMENTS
         
113.   AMUSEMENTS AND THEATRICAL ENTERTAINMENT
         
114.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
         
115.   [RESERVED]
         
116.   [RESERVED]
         
117.   LODGING AND HOUSING ESTABLISHMENTS
         
118.   EXCAVATIONS AND EARTH MOVING
         
119.   PAWNBROKERS AND PEDDLERS
         
120.   SAUNAS
         
121.   [RESERVED]
         
122.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS
         
123.   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
         
124.   MASSAGE THERAPY
         
125.   BUSINESS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF- WAY
         
126.   TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL (THC) PRODUCTS
         
127.   CANNABIS BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Application of regulations
   
110.02   Application for licenses
   
110.03   Fees; bonds and insurance
   
110.04   License bonds
   
110.05   Procedure for issuance of licenses
   
110.06   Certified copies
   
110.07   Unlawful licenses
   
110.08   Contents of license
   
110.09   License period
   
110.10   Renewal license procedure
   
110.11   Duplicate and replacement license procedure
   
110.12   Rebate of fee
   
110.13   Duties of licensee
   
110.14   Change of location of licensed premises
   
110.15   Transfer of license
   
110.16   Enforcement
   
110.17   Termination of license
   
110.18   Hearing
   
110.19   [Reserved]
   
110.20   Revocation of licenses
Fees, Charges and Rates
   
110.35   Fees, charges and rates authorized and defined
   
110.36   Priority of application
   
110.37   Business license and permit fee schedule
   
110.38   Late payment
   
110.39   Pro rate fees; refunds
Cross-reference:
   Mechanical and plumbing contractors, see §§
103.75 et seq.
   Public and private swimming pools, see
Ch. 105
   Sewer installers, see §§
99.60 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance required. It is unlawful for a person either directly or
indirectly to engage in any business or to use in connection therewith any
vehicle, premises, machine or device, in whole or in part, for which a license
or permit is required by any provision of this title or any other law or
ordinance of this municipality, without a license or permit therefor being
first procured and kept in effect at all times as required by any such
provision of this title or any other law or ordinance of this municipality.
   (B)   One act constitutes doing business. For the purpose of this title a
person is deemed to be engaged in any business for which a license or permit is
required, and thus subject to the requirements of this title when that person
does within this municipality one act of:
      (1)   Selling any goods or service for which a license is required;
      (2)   Soliciting such business or offering such goods or services for
sale or hire;
      (3)   Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in this municipality
for such business purposes.
   (C)   Agents responsible for obtaining license. The agents or other
representatives of non-residents of this municipality who are doing business in
this municipality shall be personally responsible for the compliance with the
provisions of this title by their principals and of the businesses they
represent.
   (D)   Separate license for branch establishments. A license must be obtained
in the manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or location of
the business engaged in, as if each such branch establishment or location were
a separate business; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in
connection with and incidental to a business licensed under any provision of
this title are not be deemed to be a separate place of business or branch
establishment.
   (E)   No license required for mere delivery. No license is required of any
person for any mere delivery of any property purchased or acquired in good
faith from the person at that person’s regular place of business outside the
corporate limits of this municipality where no intent by such person is shown
to exist to evade the provisions of this title.
('72 Code, § 400:00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.
   A person required to procure any permit, license, or transfer under the
provisions of this title or any other law or ordinance of this municipality
must submit an application for the license to the City Manager or Manager’s
designee in writing. The application must conform to the following provisions:
   (A)   Be a written statement upon forms provided by the City Manager or
Manager’s designee such form to include an affidavit to be sworn to by the
applicant before a person authorized to administer an oath.
   (B)   Contain all information necessary to comply with this title under
which the license is required and any other information required by the City
Manager or Manager’s designee.
   (C)   Contain, in addition to all other matters required by ordinance or by
law to be shown, the following facts:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant.
      (2)   Purpose for which license or permit is asked.
      (3)   As to license any occupation or permit the doing of any act, the
place where such occupation or act is to be carried on or done.
      (4)   The length of time the licenses or permits are to cover.
   (D)   All questions on the application blank must be answered and all
information required must be furnished. Any application for a license made by
an individual owner must be signed and sworn to by such owner; if made by a
partnership, it shall be signed and sworn to by one of the partners; and if by
a corporations by one of the duly elected officials of the corporation.
('72 Code, § 400:03)
§ 110.03 FEES; BONDS AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   Generally. An applicant for any permit, license or transfer of a
license to be issued or granted by this municipality must pay the full amount
of the permit fee, license fee, or transfer fee required by this code and other
ordinance of this municipality, and must file with the Clerk the bond,
insurance policy, or certificate therefor, and certified copy of a state
license, if required for license.
('72 Code, § 400:06)
   (B)   Fees. Except as otherwise specifically stated in the regulations for
specific licenses or permits, the fees for the various licenses, permits and
transfers are as fixed or estimated in this title or as otherwise provided in
this code.
('72 Code, § 400:09)
   (C)   No split fee. The fee for each license issued is the full amount
provided in this code or other applicable ordinance and no reduction in the
amount of the fee is to be made because part of the license year has elapsed
prior to the date the license is issued, unless specifically stated.
('72 Code, § 400:12)
   (D)   Permit fee doubled. Should any person, firm or corporation begin any
construction, installation, alteration or repair for which a permit from this
municipality is required, without having secured the necessary permit therefor,
either previous to or during the day of the commencement of any such work, or
on the next succeeding day when such work is commenced an a Saturday afternoon
or on a Sunday or a holiday, that person, firm or corporation will, when
subsequently securing such permit be required to pay double the fee provided
for such permit, and shall be subject to all the penal provisions of this code
or other applicable ordinances.
('72 Code, § 400:15)
§ 110.04 LICENSE BONDS.
   If the provisions under which any license is to be issued require the
licensee to furnish a bond, the bond must be duly executed by the licensee and
a corporate surety, and must be furnished to the City Clerk at the time the
application is filed or as soon thereafter as the Clerk requests. The bond must
be in such amount and with such penalty provisions as required by the provision
and must be approved as to form and execution by the Attorney and as to surety
and amount by the City Clerk. Such bonds may be in form as to terminate with
the annual license period or may be in form so as to provide for automatic
renewal in the event the license is renewed.
('72 Code, § 400:18)
§ 110.05 PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.
   (A)   On receipt of an application for a license the City Manager or
Manager's designee must transmit the same together with license bond and copy
of receipt for license fee to the Chief of Police or other department
responsible therefor, who must cause investigation to be made of the
qualifications of the applicant and the City Manager or Manager's designee must
determine: (1) whether the premises where the licensed activity is located is
in compliance with all laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to the
property; and (2) whether the applicant has complied with all requirements of
the ordinance under which the license is to be issued and which requirements
are prerequisites to the issuance of the license. For purposes of this section,
the term PREMISES means the address of the location where the licensed activity
takes place. Unless the subdivision of the ordinance pursuant to which the
license is to be issued requires issuance of the license by the Council, the
City Manager or Manager's designee shall issue the license upon determination
that the prerequisites have been complied with, but if the City Manager or
Manager's designee shall have determined that the prerequisites have not been
complied with the City Manager or Manager's designee shall deny the application
for issuance of the license. If any ordinance requires issuance of a license by
the Council, the application must be referred, together with a report of the
investigation and determination with respect to the applicant and the
applicant's compliance with the requirements of the ordinance, to the Council.
The Council must thereupon consider the report and findings and may grant or
deny the license. The applicant for any license which has been denied by the
City Manager or Manager's designee may appeal the decision of the City Manager
or Manager's designee to the Council by filing, with the City Manager or
Manager's designee, within ten days after receipt of notice of the denial, a
request for review by the Council of such determination by the City Manager or
Manager's designee. The City Manager or Manager's designee shall thereupon
refer the request to the Council at its next regular meeting, at which time the
Council shall hear the applicant and review the determination of the City
Manager or Manager's designee and may grant or deny the license.
   (B)   Upon determination of the Council that a license is to be issued the
determination must be transmitted to the City Manager or Manager's designee who
shall issue the license certificate in duplicate under the municipal corporate
seal and deliver one copy to the applicant and retain the other in the license
book as a part of the official records.
('72 Code, § 400:21) (Am. Ord. 2004-1014, passed 5-10-04)
§ 110.06 CERTIFIED COPIES.
   A record or a certified copy thereof is prima facie evidence to the person
therein named and all others, as to the information therein contained.
('72 Code, § 400:24)
§ 110.07 UNLAWFUL LICENSES.
   A license or permit issued in any other manner than that herein prescribed
is of no effect.
('72 Code, § 400:27)
§ 110.08 CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Each license issued under this title must state upon its face the following:
   (A)   Name of the licensee and any other name under which the business is to
be conducted.
   (B)   The name and address of each business so licensed as well as mailing
address if different from business address.
   (C)   The amount of license fee.
   (D)   The date of issuance and expiration thereof.
   (E)   Other information as the City Manager or Manager’s designee
determines.
('72 Code, § 400:30)
§ 110.09 LICENSE PERIOD.
   All permits, licenses, or transfers issued under any provision of this title
shall terminate on December 31 of the calendar year in which issued unless a
different termination date with respect to specific licenses is specifically
provided with respect to the permit, license or transfer.
('72 Code, § 400:33)
§ 110.10 RENEWAL LICENSE PROCEDURE.
   Applications for renewal of any license must be made to the City Manager or
Manager’s designee on forms provided by the City Manager or Manager’s designee,
and must contain any information required for renewal of the license by this
title under which the license is to be issued, and additional information as
the City Manager or Manager’s designee requires.
('72 Code, § 400:36)
§ 110.11 DUPLICATE AND REPLACEMENT LICENSE PROCEDURE.
   A duplicate license certificate or tag must be issued by the City Manager or
Manager’s designee to replace any license certificate or tag previously issued
which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed, without any wilful conduct
on the part of the licensee, upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit
attesting to that fact and paying to the City Manager or Manager’s designee the
required fee.
('72 Code, § 400:39)
§ 110.12 REBATE OF FEE.
   No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made by
reason of non-use of the license, or by reason of a change in location or
business rendering the use of the license ineffective, provided that the City
Manager or Manager’s designee has authority to refund a license fee collected
through an error, or in cases where the application is denied by the City
Manager or Manager’s designee or the Council.
('72 Code, § 400:42)
§ 110.13 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   Every licensee and permittee under any provision of this title or other
applicable ordinances has the duties set forth in the divisions which follow:
   (A)   Permit inspection. Permit all reasonable inspections of the licensee’s
or permittee’s business and examinations of the licensee’s or permittee’s books
and records by such authorities so authorized by law.
   (B)   Comply with governing law. Ascertain and at all times comply with all
laws, ordinances, and regulations applicable to such business.
   (C)   Cease business. Refrain from operating the licensed business after
expiration of licensee’s license and during the period the license is revoked
or suspended.
   (D)   License displayed. All licenses, tags, plates, or other method of
identification authorized by this title or other applicable ordinances must be
kept on display at a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, vehicles, or
device, or where neither premises, vehicle or device are licensed, on the
person of the licensee, or in the case of licenses for billboards or
signboards, at the place of business of the licensee.
   (E)   Unlawful possession. Must not loan, sell, give, or assign, to any
other person, nor allow any other person to use or display or to have in the
person’s possession any license or insignia which has been issued to the
licensee.
   (F)   Inspections. All persons licensed hereunder are subject to proper
periodic inspections; so far as to give the police officers and other duly
authorized inspectors of this municipality the right and power at all times to
enter upon their premises for the purpose of ascertaining the manner in which
the business is being conducted.
('72 Code, § 400:45) (Am. Ord. 1992-696, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2004-1013,
passed 5-10-04)
§ 110.14 CHANGE OF LOCATION OF LICENSED PREMISES.
   A licensee or permittee does not have the right to change the location of
the licensed premises except upon the approval of the City Manager or Manager’s
designee if the license is issued by the Manager or Manager’s designee, or upon
the approval of the Council if the license is issued by the Council.
Application for renewal must be made in writing in such form as is prescribed
by the City Manager or Manager’s designee and must be accompanied by the
required removal fee.
('72 Code, § 400:48)
§ 110.15 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee does not have the right to transfer the licensee’s license to any
other person unless specifically authorized by this title or pursuant to which
the license was issued.
('72 Code, § 400:51)
§ 110.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Inspections. It is the duty of the municipal Health Office or the
Environmental Health Specialist to inspect all premises licensed hereunder for
the purpose of determining any violation of law relating to health. It is the
duty of the municipal police officers to inspect and examine all premises,
businesses and enterprises subject to license, or which have been licensed
hereunder, and the City Manager has the right to direct the Health Officer, any
police officer, or any other appropriate officer to make such inspections at
all reasonable times.
   (B)   Sealing of unlicensed, defective, or unsafe machines or devices and
affixing license insignia. A food vending machine, cigarette vending machine,
pinball machine, childrens' amusement device, mechanical amusement device, or
other amusement device which is defective or unsafe, or which is licensed and
has no license tag or other license insignia affixed as required by law, or is
required to be licensed hereunder and such machine or device is not currently
licensed, may be sealed by a tape or wire to prevent its continued use. The
tape or tag attached to the seal must state that the machine or device is not
to be used.
   (C)   Removing seal, using machine prohibited. It is unlawful to remove or
deface a seal affixed under these provisions except under the direction of an
authorized agent of this municipality. It is unlawful to use any machine or
device on which a seal has been affixed under the provisions hereof.
('72 Code, § 400:54)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.17 TERMINATION OF LICENSE.
   At any time that the City Manager determines that a person licensed under
this title or other ordinance of the municipality has failed to comply with any
requirement of law or with any provision of this title, the City Manager must
request the City Clerk to notify the licensee in writing of the violation. The
notice is to be delivered by the U.S. Mail or personally as the City Manager
may determine and deposit of the notice in the U.S. Mail, addressed to the
address stated on the license application, constitutes service of the notice.
If the person cannot be otherwise found the notice may be posted on the
premises licensed. The notice must require compliance with the provision of
law, code, or ordinance specified within a reasonable time to be specified by
the City Manager. Upon expiration of the time, unless the licensee has
requested a hearing in writing, the City Manager, in the event that the license
involved has been issued by the City Manager or Manager’s designee, may
terminate the license, or in the event that the license has been issued by the
Council, the City Manager must report the matter to the Council and the Council
may thereafter terminate the license, subject to compliance with any procedure
prescribed by the provisions of the ordinance pursuant to which the license or
permit was issued.
('72 Code, § 400:57)
§ 110.18 HEARING.
   In the event that a hearing is requested by the licensee the City Manager
must set a time for the hearing not less than ten days and not more than 20
days after request, at which time the City Manager is to hear all testimony
offered by the licensee, and must inform the licensee of all information upon
which alleged violation of law by the licensee has been determined. If the
license has been issued by the Council the hearing must be conducted by the
Council. On completion of the hearing the City Manager or Council, as the case
may be, may make a final order suspending or terminating the license in
question. Upon the entry of any such order by the City Manager, the licensee
may appeal the determination of the City Manager to the Council by filing
request for such appeal with the City Clerk within ten days after receipt of
notification of the order of the City Manager, and the Council must thereupon
promptly hear the licensee and review the determination of the City Manager and
make its final order sustaining or modifying the determination of the City
Manager.
('72 Code, § 400:60)
§ 110.19 [RESERVED].
§ 110.20 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Violation by a licensee of any provision of this code or state law,
regulating, prescribing conditions, or establishing requirements relative to
licenses held by such a licensee is grounds for revocation of the license.
('72 Code, § 1110:00)
FEES, CHARGES AND RATES
§ 110.35 FEES, CHARGES AND RATES AUTHORIZED AND DEFINED.
   The fees, charges and rates for the purposes set forth in this title of this
code for licenses, permits and municipal services shall be in the amounts
established in the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code.
Reference to the amounts set forth therein in other portions of this code or in
other ordinances of the city may be made in such terms as “required fee,”
“established fee,” “required license fee,” “license fee,” and “license fee in
the required amount,” without specific reference to this chapter, in which
event the amounts set forth in the fee resolution are applicable.
('72 Code, § 500:00)
§ 110.36 PRIORITY OF APPLICATION.
   If fees, charges and rates are set forth specifically in parts of this code
other than this title or in other ordinances of the city which are now in
effect, but have not been set forth in this title, in that event, the fees,
charges and rates thereby specifically set forth shall be effective for all
purposes. In the event that such amounts shall appear in other places in this
code or in other ordinances of the city, but shall appear in this title, the
amounts appearing in this title shall supersede the others.
('72 Code, § 500:05)
§ 110.37 BUSINESS LICENSE AND PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.
   The fees, charges and rates for business licenses and permits, the duration
or term thereof, and the conditions applied thereto, shall be as established by
the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code.
('72 Code, § 500:10) (Am. Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 1997-845,
passed 4-28-97; Am. Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98)
§ 110.38 LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   No penalty. No penalty for the late payment of any license shall be
incurred by any licensee provided the owner or the owner's agent makes
application for the renewal of the existing license to the City Clerk or
Clerk’s designee and includes therein the payment of the required fee therefor
prior to the expiration date of the license.
   (B)   Penalty for late payment. Every person whose licensed trade, business,
profession, activity or privilege is licensed by the city, other than one who
has been closed down and who has not operated such activity in the city after
expiration of the licensing year, shall pay to the City Clerk the regular
license fee and in addition thereto the following penalty for late application
for a license.
      (1)   One to 15 days late a 50% penalty;
      (2)   Sixteen to 30 days late a 100% penalty;
      (3)   After expiration of 30 days from the due date, the activity for
which a license is required shall cease and the City Manager may recommend that
no new license or permit for such activity shall be considered until the owner
of the business personally appears before the City Council. If a new license or
permit is approved, the fee will consist of the amount set forth for new
licenses and permits, plus the late penalty fee.
   (C)   Late payment of the license fee with penalty is no bar to prosecution
for operating without a license. The late payment of the license fee along with
the penalty set forth therein is no bar to any prosecution by the city for
operating any licensed trade, business, profession, activity or privilege
within the city without a license therefor.
('72 Code, § 500:15) (Ord. 1975-181(A), passed 1-27-75; Am. Ord. 1986-540(A),
passed 8-18-86)
§ 110.39 PRO RATE FEES; REFUNDS.
   Licenses issued for a stated period of one year or for some other stated
period of time shall be pro rated over the period of the license. The pro
ration of the fee shall be on a quarterly basis and any unexpired fraction of a
quarter will be counted as a complete quarter. In no event shall there be any
proration if the prorated fee charged would be less than $25.
('72 Code, § 500:20) (Ord. 1989-623(A), passed 3-6-89)
CHAPTER 111: ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
111.01   Licenses required
   
111.02   Issuance of license
   
111.03   Investigation fee
   
111.04   License fees
   
111.05   Inspection
   
111.06   Expiration of license
   
111.07   Suspension
   
111.08   Revocation
   
111.09   Transfer of license
§ 111.01 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   An establishment, including a business operating at the time this chapter
becomes effective, operating or intending to operate an adult only
entertainment business, must apply for and obtain a license from the city:
   (A)   A person is in violation of the city code if they operate an adult
only entertainment business or other sections of the city code without a valid
license, issued by the city.
   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
city. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches.
   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
the law by the Environmental Health Division, Fire Department, and Building
Official.
   (D)   (1)   Application for license shall be made only on the forms provided
by the city. Four complete copies of the application shall be furnished to the
office of the City Clerk containing the address and legal description of the
property to be used; the names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner and
lessee, if any, and the operator or manager; the name, address, and phone
number of two persons who are residents of the State of Minnesota, and who may
be called upon to attest to the applicant's and manager's-operator's character;
whether the applicant, manager, or operator has ever been convicted of a crime
or offense other than a traffic offense and, if so, complete and accurate
information as to the time, place, and nature of such crime or offense
including the disposition thereof; the names and addresses of all creditors of
the applicant, owner, lessee, or manager insofar as and regarding credit which
has been extended for the purposes of construction, equipping, maintaining,
operating, or furnishing or acquiring the premises, personal effects,
equipment, or anything incident to the establishment, maintenance, and
operation of the business.
      (2)   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, joint
business venture, partnership, or any legally constituted business association,
it must submit along with its application, accurate and complete business
records showing the names and addresses of all individuals having an interest
in the business, including partners, officers, owners, and creditors furnishing
credit for the establishment, acquisition, maintenance, and furnishings of said
business and, in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of all
officers, general managers, and members of the board of directors as well as
any creditors who have extended credit for the acquisition, maintenance,
operation, or furnishing of the establishment including the purchase or
acquisition of any items of personal property for use in said operation.
      (3)   All applicants must furnish to the city, along with their
applications, complete and accurate documentation establishing the interest of
the applicant and any other person having an interest in the premises upon
which the building is proposed to be located or the furnishings thereof,
personal property thereof, or the operation or maintenance thereof.
Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed, contract for deed,
mortgage deed, mortgage credit arrangement, loan agreements, security
agreements, and any other documents establishing the interest of the applicant
or any other person in the operation, acquisition, or maintenance of the
enterprise.
('72 Code, § 422:00) (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.02 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and City Clerk may recommend approval of the
issuance of a license by the city to an applicant within 90 days after receipt
of an application unless they find one or more of the following to be true:
      (1)   Applicant(s) or manager is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   Applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
      (3)   Applicant(s) or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating
an adult only entertainment business without a license, within two years
immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect.
      (4)   Applicant(s) is residing with a person who has been denied a
license by the city or any other Minnesota municipal corporation to operate an
adult only entertainment business within the preceding 12 months, or residing
with a person whose license to operate an adult only entertainment business has
been revoked within the preceding 12 months.
      (5)   The premises to be used for the adult only entertainment business
has not been approved by the Environmental Health Division, Fire Department,
Zoning/Planning Department and the Building Official as being in compliance
with applicable laws and ordinances; such inspections must be completed within
30 days from the date the application was submitted, provided that the
application contains all of the information required by this chapter. If the
application is deficient, the inspections shall be completed within 30 days
from the date the deficiency has been corrected.
      (6)   The license fee required by §
110.37 has not been paid.
      (7)   Applicant(s) has been employed in an adult only entertainment
business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has
demonstrated that they are unable to operate or manage an adult only
entertainment business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus
necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
      (8)   Applicant(s) or applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime
involving any of the following offenses:
         (a)   Any sex crimes as defined by M.S. §§ 609.29 through 609.352
inclusive or as defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith.
         (b)   Any obscenity crime as defined by M.S. §§ 617.23 through 617.229
inclusive, or as defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith
for which:
            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24 month
period.
   (B)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse.
   (C)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted
of an offense listed in division (A) of this section may qualify for an adult
only entertainment business license only when the time period required by
division (A) of this section has elapsed.
   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address
of the adult only entertainment business. The license must be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult only entertainment
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
   (E)   The City Council must act to approve or disapprove the license
application within a reasonable time after receipt of all information relating
to zoning and after completion of all code requirements, provided that the
application contains all of the information required by this chapter. If the
application is deficient, the Council must act on the application within 120
days from the date that the deficiency has been corrected.
('72 Code, § 422:05) (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 2004-1013, passed
5-10-04)
§ 111.03 INVESTIGATION FEE.
   (A)   At the time of each original application for a license, the applicant
must pay a minimum investigating fee. This minimum fee shall be $500 per person
on the application, and additional direct costs associated with the
investigation will be billed to the applicant(s). The minimum investigating fee
shall not be subject to refund. If the expenses of the investigation relating
to any application exceed the minimum investigating fee, the city shall notify
the applicant(s) of this fact and shall require the applicant(s) to pay an
additional investigating fee which the City Manager deems necessary to complete
its investigation of the applicant(s). The applicant(s) must pay such an
additional investigating fee within five days of being so notified. If the
additional investigating fee is not paid within the five-day period, the city
shall discontinue consideration of the application.
   (B)   Each application must contain a provision on the application in bold
print indicating that any withholding of information or the providing of false
or misleading information will be grounds for denial or revocation of a
license. Any changes in the information provided on the application or provided
during the investigation must be brought to the attention of the City Council
by the applicant or licensee. If the changes take place during the
investigation, the data must be provided to the Chief of Police or the City
Clerk in writing and they must report the changes to the City Council. Failure
to report the changes by the applicant(s) or the licensee may result in a
denial or revocation of a license.
('72 Code, § 422:10) (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)
§ 111.04 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   All license fees as established by the Council from time to time in
the Appendix to this code, must be paid at the time of filing the application.
   (B)   In the case of licenses granted for premises wherein construction is
not yet completed, the Council may grant the license but the Clerk must not
issue the license until the construction is completed in accordance with the
plans and specifications approved by the Council. The fee for the license shall
be one-half of the license fee from the date of approval until business
operations actually commence on the licensed premises. When business operations
commence, the full fee shall become effective pro rated on a quarterly basis.
In no event shall a reduced fee apply for a licensed establishment under
construction for a period of longer than 12 months from the date of Council
approval, but the full fee must be paid for the balance of the construction
period.
('72 Code, § 422:15) (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)
§ 111.05 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Applicant(s) or licensee(s) must permit representatives of the Police
Department, Environmental Health Division, Fire Department, and Housing and
Building Inspection Department to inspect the premises of an adult only
entertainment business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at
any time it is occupied or open for business.
   (B)   A person who operates an adult only entertainment business or their
agent or employee commits an offense if they refuse to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises by a representative of the Police, Environmental
Health Division, Building or Fire Department at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
('72 Code, § 422:20) (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.06 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license expires one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §
111.01. Application for renewal should be made at least 60 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 60 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected.
   (B)   If the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant must not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if a least 90
days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
('72 Code, § 422:25) (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)
§ 111.07 SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if
it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   Engaged in use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult only
entertainment business premises.
      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult only entertainment
business premises as authorized by this code.
      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult only
entertainment business premises.
      (5)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage an adult only
entertainment business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.
   (B)   A suspension by the city must be preceded by written notice to the
licensee and a public hearing. The notice must give at least ten days notice of
the time and place of the hearing and must state the nature of the charges
against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee personally, or
by leaving the same at the licensed business premises with the person in charge
thereof.
('72 Code, § 422:30) (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)
§ 111.08 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The city may revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
111.07 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
   (B)   The city may revoke a license if it determines that:
      (1)   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the city during the application process.
      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises.
      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises.
      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult only
entertainment business during a period of time when the licensee's license was
suspended.
      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
111.02 for which the time period required has not elapsed.
      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12 month period, a person or
persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a
crime listed in §
111.02 for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were
employees of the adult only entertainment business at the time the offenses
were committed.
      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or on the
licensed premises.
   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
revocation of the license.
   (D)   Subdivision (B)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for
revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact
to occur in a public place or within public view.
   (E)   If the city revokes a license, the revocation must continue for two
years and the licensee must not be issued an adult only entertainment business
license for two years from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent
to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days
have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
   (F)   A revocation by the city must be preceded by written notice to the
licensee and a public hearing. The notice must give at least ten days notice of
the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges
against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee personally, or
by leaving the same at the licensed premises with the person in charge thereof.
('72 Code, § 422:35) (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 2004-1013, passed
5-10-04)
§ 111.09 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee must not transfer the license to another, nor must a licensee
operate an adult only entertainment business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.
('72 Code, § 422:40) (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.001   Liability insurance for sellers of intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent
malt liquor and wine
   
112.002   Inspection of premises
   
112.003   Maintenance of order and conduct on licensed premises
Intoxicating Liquors
   
112.030   Definitions
   
112.031   License required
   
112.032   Application for licenses
   
112.033   Regulation
   
112.034   Bond required
   
112.035   Bond conditions
   
112.036   License fees
   
112.037   Granting of license
   
112.038   New license hearing
   
112.039   Application referred to Police Chief
   
112.040   Notice; granting
   
112.041   Conditions of license
   
112.042   Hours of operation
   
112.043   Restrictions on consumption
   
112.044   Revocation
   
112.045   Serving set-ups in unlicensed places
   
112.046   Prohibited sales
   
112.047   Drinking prohibited
   
112.048   Sale of intoxicating liquor - restaurants
   
112.049   Licenses available
3.2 Percent Malt Liquor
   
112.055   Definitions
   
112.056   License required
   
112.057   Sales by manufacturer
   
112.058   Off-sale licenses
   
112.059   Limited licenses for bona fide clubs
   
112.060   Municipal operations exempt
   
112.061   Application
   
112.062   Fees
   
112.063   Granting of license
   
112.064   Conditions of licenses
   
112.065   Hours of sale
   
112.066   Term of license
   
112.067   Non-transferable
   
112.068   Food license
   
112.069   Mixing drinks
On-Sale Wine License
   
112.095   Definitions
   
112.096   Application
   
112.097   Fees
   
112.098   Hours
   
112.099   Bond
   
112.100   Zoning location
   
112.101   Sale of intoxicating malt liquor
Brewer Taproom Licenses
   
112.200   Definition
   
112.201   Issuance of license
   
112.202   Conditions of license
Brewpub Licenses
   
112.210   Off-sale permitted
   
112.211   Packaging requirements
Temporary Licenses
   
112.300   Temporary on-sale permitted
Microdistilleries
   
112.400   Definitions
   
112.401   Issuance of license
   
112.402   Fees
   
112.403   Conditions on licenses
Enforcement
   
112.998   Compliance checks and inspections
   
112.999   Violations and penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.001 LIABILITY INSURANCE FOR SELLERS OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR, 3.2 PERCENT
MALT LIQUOR AND WINE.
   (A)   Every person licensed to sell at retail intoxicating liquor, 3.2
percent malt liquor or wine at on-sale in the city must, after March 1, 1983,
demonstrate proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability imposed
by M.S. § 340A.409, to the City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee and to the
Commissioner of Public Safety as a condition of the issuance or renewal of the
person's license.
   (B)   Proof of financial responsibility may be given by filing:
      (1)   (a)   A certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy or
pool providing the following minimum coverages:
            1.   $50,000 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one
occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of $100,000
because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence and in
the amount of $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others
in any one occurrence. Hotels and motels having 200 rooms or more are required
to have minimum coverage of $500,000 because of bodily injury for one or more
persons.
            2.   $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person, any
one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, $100,000 for loss of
means of support of two or more persons in any one occurrence. Hotels and
motels having 200 or more are required to have minimum coverage of $500,000
because of bodily injury for one or more persons.
            3.   The certificate must provide that no payment of any claim by
the insurance company shall in any manner decrease the coverage provided for in
respect to any other claim or claims brought against the insured or company
thereafter.
         (b)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as provided in
subsection (a); or
         (c)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has
deposited with the State Treasurer $100,000 in cash or securities which may be
purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market value of
$100,000.
      (2)   The licensee must provide the certificate and proof to the City
Clerk or designee at the time of application for a new license or renewal of
the existing license. The certificate of insurance must show that all coverages
meet or exceed the requirements of M.S. § 340A.409 and that the insurance
company cannot cancel the insurance until at least ten days written notice of
the cancellation has been served upon the city. If a new certificate of
insurance is not filed with the City Clerk during the ten day period after
notice of cancellation, the license to sell at retail intoxicating, 3.2 percent
malt liquor or wine is to be suspended until a new certificate of insurance is
filed with the City Clerk and the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.
      (3)   The City Clerk is authorized to waive the foregoing insurance
requirements for 3.2 percent malt liquor and wine licenses if the licensee
files an affidavit from a certified public accountant to show that sales are
less than the amounts set forth in M.S. § 340A.409, Subd. 4. The licensee must
also file a written commitment with the City Clerk or designee that if sales
exceed such amounts, the licensee will not continue to sell 3.2 percent malt
liquor or wine until the licensee has filed a certificate of insurance meeting
the requirements set forth in this section.
('72 Code, §825:00) (Ord. 1983-420(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord. 1986-535(A),
passed 7-28-86; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 2005-1052, passed
11-28-05)
§ 112.002 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   The applicant must at all times permit the health officers and
representatives of the Police and Fire Departments to inspect and examine the
place of business described in the application, together with all appliances,
instruments or equipment used or to be used in the conduct of the business for
which the license is sought, and any refusal on the part of the applicant to
permit such inspection or any false statement in the application is sufficient
ground for the refusal to issue such license or to revoke the same after
issuance thereof.
('72 Code, § 810:50)
§ 112.003 MAINTENANCE OF ORDER AND CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   The City Council finds that the serving and consumption of alcoholic
beverages in any establishment holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor license,
an on-sale wine license, or an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license can
contribute to increased acts of disorderly conduct. These acts of disorderly
conduct result in a greater demand on city services, negatively impact the
livability of the city, and have an adverse impact on the health, safety and
welfare of city residents. The City Council further finds that the holders of
on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses and on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor
licenses need to be responsible for managing their establishments in a manner
that does not contribute to acts of disorderly conduct by their customers,
employees, or agents. For the purposes of this chapter, the term ESTABLISHMENT
means the licensed premises and all portions of the property where the licensed
premises is located, and the term LICENSEE means the holder of an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license or the holder of an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor
license.
   (B)   Maintenance of order. Each licensee must comply with the following
provisions.
      (1)   A licensee is responsible for the conduct at its establishment and
the conditions of sobriety and order of all persons at the establishment. The
act of any employee or agent of the licensee is deemed to be the act of the
licensee, and the licensee is liable for all penalties set forth in this
chapter or state law equally with the employee. The licensee is deemed to have
knowledge of any acts of disorderly conduct identified in this section
occurring at the establishment.
      (2)   No licensee or any other person shall sell, give, barter, furnish
or dispose of in any manner, directly or indirectly, any alcoholic beverage or
3.2 percent malt liquor, in any quantity, for any purpose whatsoever, to any
obviously intoxicated person. An obviously intoxicated person shall not be
allowed to enter a licensed premise. For purposes of this section, OBVIOUSLY
INTOXICATED PERSON means a person who is presently impaired, mentally,
physically, or emotionally, as a result of the presence of alcohol in the
person's body and such impairment is obvious to a reasonable person. Evidence
of an obviously intoxicated person includes, but is not limited to, the odor of
intoxicants on the person's breath, bloodshot eyes, dilated pupils, stumbling,
staggering, slurred speech, or other symptom commonly associated with
intoxication.
      (3)   A licensee must require that all of its employees or agents who
serve alcoholic beverages or who provide security at the establishment
successfully complete an annual program of server and security training. Such
program of server and security training must be approved by the Brooklyn Park
Police Department. A licensee must annually submit proof to the Brooklyn Park
Police Department that an approved program was successfully completed by each
employee or agent who serves alcoholic beverages or who provides security at
the establishment.
      (4)   Employees or agents of licensees must not consume alcoholic
beverages while working, or work while obviously intoxicated.
      (5)   A licensee or any of its employees or agents shall not sell, offer
to sell, or deliver to any person more than two alcoholic beverages for a
single price or increase the volume of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt
liquor in an alcoholic beverage without proportionately increasing the price
charged for the alcoholic beverage. Special pricing on drinks, commonly
referred to as "happy hour," may only be offered between the hours of 12:00
noon and 11:00 p.m. Temporary promotional pricing; i.e., pricing associated
with a specific event, is allowed after 11:00 p.m. as long as the temporary
promotional pricing is also offered during other hours of operation on the same
day. Beer, wine, or liquor samplings are allowed as permitted by state law.
      (6)   A licensee or any of its employees or agents must engage in
responsible serving practices. Sales of pitchers of alcoholic beverages are
allowed, provided there are at least two persons intending to consume the
pitcher of alcoholic beverages. The sale of a single serving of an alcoholic
beverage which, when consumed, would, by itself, result in an alcohol
concentration of .08 or more is not allowed.
      (7)   (a)   A licensee or any of its employees or agents must not:
            1.   Encourage or permit customers to conduct games or contests
that involve drinking;
            2.   Award prizes to customers based on alcohol consumption; or
            3.   Award prizes of alcohol to customers.
         (b)   Alcoholic beverages must not be included as part of a charge for
admission to the licensed premises.
      (8)   A licensee or any of its employees or agents must require patrons
and occupants of the establishment to conduct themselves in such a manner as to
not cause any portion of the establishment to be disorderly, as defined in
division (C) of this section or defined elsewhere in the city code or in state
law.
      (9)   Employees or agents of a licensee or any person providing
entertainment or working for or on behalf of a licensee, whether compensated or
not, must act in accordance with federal, state and local laws, statutes,
ordinances, regulations and rules, including any conditions associated with the
liquor license. Conduct by any of those persons at the establishment will be
considered to be, and treated as, the act or conduct of the licensee for the
purpose of imposing penalties or other sanctions against a licensee.
   (C)   A licensee is responsible for acts of disorderly conduct by persons
occupying its establishment when a licensee knows or has reason to know of acts
of disorderly conduct by persons occupying its establishment or when a licensee
manages its establishment in a manner that contributes to acts of disorderly
conduct by persons occupying its establishment. For purposes of this section,
the following types of conduct at an establishment are disorderly:
      (1)   Unlawful possession, delivery, or purchase of a controlled
substance, as set forth in M.S. §§ 152.01 et seq. and
Chapter 135 of this code;
      (2)   Disorderly conduct, as set forth in M.S. § 609.72 and §
134.15 et seq. of this code;
      (3)   Unlawful sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor as
set forth in M.S. Chapter 340A and §§
112.030 through
112.069 of this code;
      (4)   Homicide and suicide, as set forth in M.S. §§ 609.18 through
609.215;
      (5)   Criminal sexual conduct, as set forth in M.S. §§ 609.342 through
609.3451;
      (6)   Prostitution or acts relating to prostitution including housing
individuals engaged in prostitution as set forth in M.S. §§ 609.321,
Subdivision 9, and 609.324;
      (7)   Unlawful use or possession of a firearm at an establishment as set
forth in M.S. §§ 609.66 et seq. and
Chapter 136 of this code;
      (8)   Assault as set forth in §
134.01 of this code;
      (9)   Contributing to the delinquency of a minor as defined in M.S.
Chapter 260B;
      (10)   Sexual and labor trafficking crimes as set forth in M.S. §§
609.281 through 609.284;
      (11)   Interference with a police officer as set forth in M.S. § 609.50;
      (12)   Terroristic threats as set forth in M.S. § 609.713;
      (13)   Unlawful assembly as set forth in M.S. § 609.715;
      (14)   Riots as set forth in M.S. § 609.71;
      (15)   Interfering with phone calls for emergency assistance as set forth
in M.S. § 609.78;
      (16)   Gambling as set forth in M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.76;
      (17)   Crime committed for the benefit of a gang as set forth in M.S. §
609.229;
      (18)   Racketeering as set forth in M.S. § 609.903; or
      (19)   Any other conduct deemed disorderly by the city or other law
enforcement agency.
   (D)   Upon a determination by the City Manager that any act or conduct
described in divisions (B) or (C) of this section, or any other act of
disorderly conduct as provided for elsewhere in the city code or in state law,
has occurred at an establishment, the City Manager will provide notice of the
conduct to the owner of the establishment and to the licensee directing them to
take action to prevent future incidents.
   (E)   If another act or conduct described in divisions (B) or (C) of this
section, or any other act or conduct prohibited elsewhere in the city code or
in state law, occurs within 12 months after an incident for which notice was
provided under division (D) of this section, the owner and licensee will be
notified and will be required to participate in a Problem Solving Conference
(PSC). The PSC will be scheduled and conducted by the City Manager. The purpose
of the PSC is to develop a plan of action to ensure that a future incident does
not occur at the establishment. The PSC must be approved by the City Manager. A
licensee must participate in the PSC within five business days of the notice.
   (F)   If a third act or conduct described in divisions (B) or (C) of this
section, or any other act or conduct prohibited elsewhere in the city code or
in state law, occurs within 12 months after either of the two previous
incidents, the City Manager will notify the owner and licensee of the third
incident and will require the owner and licensee to submit a written report of
the actions taken, and proposed to be taken, to prevent further incidents. The
written report must be submitted to the City Manager no later than ten business
days after notice of the third incident is mailed or delivered to the licensee.
The written report must also detail all actions taken by the licensee in
response to all previous incidents for which notices were sent to the licensee.
   (G)   After the third act or conduct described in divisions (B) or (C) of
this section, or any other act or conduct prohibited elsewhere in the city code
or in state law, the City Council may deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew the
license, or may apply any other sanction provided by law. The owner and
licensee shall be provided with written notice of a hearing before the City
Council to consider such denial, revocation, suspension, non-renewal, or
sanction. Such written notice must specify all incidents of disorderly conduct
and violations under this section, and must state the date, time, place and
purpose of the hearing. The hearing must be held no less than ten business days
and no more than 30 days after giving such notice.
   (H)   Upon a decision to revoke, deny or not renew a license, the owner or
licensee will not be eligible to apply for any new license for a period of one
year. Any person who has had two or more licenses revoked, suspended, denied or
not renewed will not be eligible to apply for any new licenses for a period of
two years.
   (I)   A determination that an act or conduct described in divisions (B) or
(C) of this section, or any other act or conduct prohibited elsewhere in the
city code or in state law, has occurred at an establishment must be made based
upon a fair preponderance of the evidence. It is not necessary that criminal
charges be brought in order to support a determination by the City Council that
any such act or conduct has occurred at the establishment. The fact of
dismissal or acquittal of any such criminal charge does not operate as a bar to
an adverse license action under this section.
   (J)   Enforcement actions provided in this section are not exclusive, and
the City Council may take any action with respect to a licensee as is
authorized by the city code or state or federal law. This may include a PSC as
well as an immediate license suspension where there has been a determination by
the City Council that continued operation poses a risk to public safety. If the
City Council finds that a licensee failed to participate in a PSC, then this
failure is grounds for a license suspension.
   (K)   The City Council may postpone or discontinue any enforcement action,
including an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license, if the
owner and licensee have taken appropriate measures to prevent further
violations or instances of disorderly conduct.
   (L)   All notices given by the city under this section must be personally
served on the owner and licensee or sent by first class mail to the owner and
licensee's last known addresses.
   (M)   Any person whose license is denied, revoked, suspended, or not renewed
under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision by petitioning
the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari pursuant to M.S.
Chapter 606.
(Ord. 2009-1097, passed 4-6-09)
INTOXICATING LIQUORS
§ 112.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLUB. 
      (1)   An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state
for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual
improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered
veterans' organization, which:
         (a)   Has more than 30 members;
         (b)   Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more
than one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its
members;
         (c)   Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or
other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose.
      (2)   No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit
from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their
guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the
governing body.
   HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to
transients and which has a dining room serving the general public at tables and
having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time; and at least 25
guest rooms.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented,
spirituous, vinous and malt liquors containing in excess of 3.2 percent of
alcohol by weight.
   MINOR. Any person who has not attained the age of 21.
   OFF-SALE. The sale of liquor in original package in retail stores for
consumption off or away from the premises where sold.
   ON-SALE. The sale of liquor by the glass for consumption on the premises
only.
   PACKAGE or ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle holding liquor,
which container or receptacle is corked or sealed.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a
proprietor or manager, having appropriate facilities for the serving of meals
to not less than 30 guests at one time and where meals are regularly furnished
at tables to the general public and which employs an adequate staff to provide
the usual and suitable service to its guests, and the principal part of the
business of which is the serving of foods.
   SALE, SELL and SOLD. All barters, and all manners or means, of furnishing
intoxicating liquor and including such furnishing in violation or evasion of
law.
   SUNDAY SALE. The sale of liquor by the glass for consumption on the
premises, in conjunction with the serving of food by the licensee, pursuant to
a special license therefore issued by the city as authorized by state law.
   THEATER. A building containing an auditorium in which live dramatic,
musical, dance, or literary performances are regularly presented to holders of
tickets for those performances.
('72 Code, § 805:00) (Ord. 1976-225(A), passed 8-9-76; Am. Ord. 1986-544(A),
passed 9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1987-563(A), passed 6-8-87; Am. Ord. 1992-697, passed
5-26-92; Am. Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
§ 112.031 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to, directly or indirectly, upon any premises or by any
device, manufacture, import, sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or keep for
sale any intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a license therefor
as hereinafter provided. Licenses are of three kinds: “on-sale,” “off-sale” and
“Sunday sale,” which are granted only for the purposes permitted by the
statutes of the state and limited by this chapter.
   (B)   “On-sale” licenses permit the sale and consumption of liquor on the
licensed premises only.
   (C)   (1)   “Off-sale” licenses are granted to permit the sale of liquor at
retail in the original package for consumption off the licensed premises only.
      (2)   Off-sale licensed stores may provide samples of malt liquor, wine
liqueurs, and cordials which the licensee currently has in stock and is
offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an additional
license, provided the malt liquor, wine, liqueur, and cordial samples are
dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises during the
permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity less than 100 milliliters of malt
liquor per variety per customer, 50 milliliters of wine per variety per
customer and 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordial per variety per customer.
   (D)   “Sunday sale” licenses permit the sale and consumption of liquor on
the licensed premises only.
('72 Code, § 805:05) (Am. Ord. 1989-628(A), passed 6-26-89)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.032 APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   Every person desiring a license for either “on” or “off” or for
“Sunday” sales must file an application in the form to be prescribed by the
State Department of Public Safety and with such additional information as the
Council may require. The application for a “Sunday sale” license may be
included with an application for an “on-sale” license.
   (B)   At the time of each original application for a license, the applicant
must also pay a minimum investigating fee of $500 per person on the application
and additional direct costs associated with the investigation will be billed to
the applicant(s). The minimum investigating fee is not subject to refund. If
the expenses of the investigation relating to any application exceed the
minimum investigating fee, the city must notify the applicant of this fact and
require the applicant to pay an additional investigating fee which the City
Manager deems necessary to complete its investigation of the applicant. The
applicant must pay such an additional investigating fee within five days of
being so notified. If such additional investigating fee is not paid within such
five-day period, the city shall discontinue consideration of the application.
   (C)   Each application must contain a provision on the application in bold
print indicating that any withholding of information or the providing of false
or misleading information will be grounds for denial or revocation of a liquor
license. Any changes in the information provided on the application or provided
during the investigation must be brought to the attention of the City Council
by the applicant or licensee. If the changes take place during the
investigation, the data must be provided to the Chief of Police or the City
Manager in writing and they must report the changes to the City Council.
Failure to report the changes by the applicant or the licensee may result in a
denial or a revocation of a license.
   (D)   The Council, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable cause, may
refuse to grant any license. Licenses will not be issued to a person who has
any of the following:
      (1)   Has a felony conviction;
      (2)   Who has previous convictions in the past five years of illegal
sales of alcohol or alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to sales to
minors;
      (3)   Has not properly filed personal and/or business tax returns;
      (4)   Has had a liquor license from any city, county, or state revoked
within five years of the pending license application.
('72 Code, § 805:10) (Am. Ord. 1972-122(A), passed 8-28-72; Am. Ord. 1981-371
(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 1990-664(A), passed 11-26-90; Am. Ord. 2012-
1140, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2017-1223, passed 10-23- 17; Am. Ord. 2025-1311,
passed 4-14-25)sed 11-26-90; Am. Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2017-
1223, passed 10-23-17)
§ 112.033 REGULATION.
   (A)   No off-sale liquor license may be issued except in a commercial or
business use district.
   (B)   All licensees must prove to the Council that they are financially
responsible and of good moral character. Financial data submitted as a part of
the application must provide complete information to satisfy the City Council
that the applicants have financial capital to commence business and to operate
the business. The City Council is concerned that lack of capital could lead to
sales practices which are contrary to the general welfare of the community.
   (C)   The number of “off-sale” licenses is limited to allow no more than one
such license for every 4,000 residents. This provision does not apply to
combination on and off-sale licenses. No more than 12 "off-sale" liquor
licenses may be issued for property located south of 93rd Avenue.
   (D)   In a new area being opened to commercial development or if a new
structure is being built in an existing commercial or business use district, or
if an existing structure is being remodeled to house a new on-sale and/or off-
sale license, the applicant/licensee must agree as a condition of acquiring the
license that all construction must be completed within a specified time but in
no event shall said time exceed a reasonable period as determined by the
Council at the time of Council approval. A date for completion of construction
shall be included at the time of issuance of a license. Failure to have
completed construction and to have obtained a certificate of occupancy and to
be in operation within the specified time results in automatic revocation of
the license. The applicant/licensee must then be required to file an
application for a new license, provide all data required for any new licensee
and complete the entire licensing process. Upon the issuance of a license and
the opening date established, the business must remain open and operational. If
the business closes for more than 30 consecutive days the license shall be
revoked unless it is closed by a circumstance out of the control of the
business owner (fire, tornado, etc.).
('72 Code, § 805:20) (Am. Ord. 1981-371(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 1986-517
(A), passed 2-10-86; Am. Ord. 1989-639(A), passed 11-20-89; Am. Ord. 2004-1013,
passed 5-10-04; Am. Ord. 2013-1160, passed 8-19-13)
§ 112.034 BOND REQUIRED.
   A bond with a corporate surety must accompany each application for a
license. If the application is for a “Sunday sale” special license, such bond
requirement may be met by a separate bond or by the inclusion thereof in an
existing “on-sale” bond when accompanied by a proper endorsement or certificate
showing inclusion of “Sunday sales.” In the case of an application for license
for “on-sale” or “Sunday sale” or both, the application must be accompanied by
a corporate surety bond in the sum of $4,000; or in lieu of such bond, cash or
bonds of the United States of a market value of $4,000 may be deposited with
the Treasurer on the same conditions as provided in the penalty clause of the
required surety bond. In the case of an application for an “off-sale” license,
a similar surety bond or cash or United States bond equivalent is required, but
the amount of such bond is $2,000 and must be approved by the State Department
of Public Safety.
('72 Code, § 805:25)
§ 112.035 BOND CONDITIONS.
   All such bonds must be conditioned as follows:
   (A)   That the licensee will obey the law relating to such licensed
premises.
   (B)   That the licensee will pay to the City of Brooklyn Park when due all
license fees, penalties, and other charges provided by law.
   (C)   That in the event of any violation of the provisions of any law
relating to the retail “off-sale” and retail “on-sale” and retail “Sunday sale”
of intoxicating liquor, such bond must be forfeited to the city.
   (D)   That the licensee will pay to the extent of the principal amount of
the bond any damages for death or injury caused by or resulting from the
violation of any provision of law relating thereto, and in such cases recovery
under this division may be had from the surety of this bond. The amount
specified in the bond is declared to be a penalty, the amount recoverable to be
measured by the actual damages; provided, however, that in no case is the
surety to be liable for any amount in excess of the penal amount of the bond.
   (E)   All such bonds are for the benefit of the City of Brooklyn Park and
all persons suffering damages by reason of the breach of the conditions of this
subchapter or state statutes.
   (F)   If the applicant files cash or United States government bonds, as
permitted in this section, the Finance Director must execute a receipt therefor
and a copy of the receipt must be filed with the Clerk or designee. If
government bonds are filed, the licensee is permitted to clip and take all
interest bearing coupons thereto attached as they become due.
('72 Code, § 805:30) (Am. Ord. 2004-1013, passed 5-10-04)
§ 112.036 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   All license fees as established by the Council from time to time must
be paid at the time of filing the application.
   (B)   In the case of licenses granted for premises where construction is not
yet completed, the Council may grant the license but the Clerk or designee must
not issue the license until the construction is completed in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the Council. The fee for the license
is one-half of the license fee from the date of approval until liquor sales
actually commence on the licensed premises. When sales commence, the full fee
is to become effective prorated on a quarterly basis. In no event may a reduced
fee apply for a licensed establishment under construction for a period of
longer than 12 months from the date of Council approval, the full fee is to be
paid for the balance of the construction period.
   (C)   The City Council may, in its discretion, prorate any or all license
fees as it considers appropriate under the circumstances including, but not
limited to, when a license is issued for an unexpired portion of a license
year.
('72 Code, § 805:40) (Am. Ord. 1972-122(A), passed 8-28-72; Am. Ord. 2002-971,
passed 5-13-02)
Cross-reference:
   License fees, see Appendix
§ 112.037 GRANTING OF LICENSE.
   The Council must cause an investigation to be made of all the
representations set forth in the application. An opportunity must be given at a
regular or special meeting of the Council to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of any license. After the investigation and approval of
the required bond, the Council must grant or refuse such license at its
discretion; provided that no “off-sale” license becomes effective until it,
together with the bond, has the approval of the State Department of Public
Safety. All licensed premises must have the license posted in a conspicuous
place therein at all times. No license may be transferable either as to
licensee or premises without the approval of the Council and also the State
Department of Public Safety in the case of “off-sale” licenses.
('72 Code, § 805:45)
§ 112.038 NEW LICENSE HEARING.
   No license for the sale of intoxicating liquor “on-sale,” “off-sale” or
“Sunday sale” may be hereafter granted by the Council unless the license is a
renewal of a license previously granted at the same location to the same
licensee, until a public hearing is conducted by the Council after published
notice in the official newspaper at least ten days in advance of the hearing.
('72 Code, § 805:50)
§ 112.039 APPLICATION REFERRED TO POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   All applications for a license must be referred to the Chief of Police
and to such other departments as the Council deems necessary for verification
and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The Chief of
Police must cause to be made such investigation of the information required in
this subchapter as is necessary and must make a written recommendation and
report to the Council and the report must include a list of all violations of
federal or state law or municipal ordinance. The Chief of Police is directed to
trace the assets of the applicant individual, partnership or major stockholders
of a corporation. This requirement is waived for corporations traded on the New
York, American Stock Exchange, National Association of Securities Dealers
National Market System or is a publicly held or traded corporation where no one
individual has more than 25% of the stock ownership. In this investigation the
Chief or the Chief’s designated agent must require the applicant to provide
substantiating documentation regarding the funds available for operation of the
on-sale or off-sale licensee's liquor operation. The Council may order and
conduct such additional investigation as it deems necessary.
   (B)   The requirement that the Chief of Police trace the applicant's assets
has been waived for certain corporations as set forth above. In lieu of an
investigation of the principals in the business, these publicly held
corporations must designate with their application a manager or operator who
shall be legally responsible for compliance with all federal, state, and local
laws relating to the sale of intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquors. The
named manager or operator who shall be responsible must agree in writing to
accept service of any legal process relating to the operation of the licensed
premises. The person responsible must have on file with the city at all times
their current address where service of process will be accepted. At the time of
the original application or at any time thereafter when the responsible manager
or operator is changed, the Chief of Police must conduct a criminal
investigation (not a financial investigation) to determine that the responsible
manager or operator meets the city's standards applicable to obtaining a
license and subject to all the fees and requirements set forth in §§
112.032 and
112.035 of this code. The City Council must at its sole discretion approve or
decline to approve the manager or operator to operate a public corporation's
premises licensed to sell intoxicating malt liquor.
('72 Code, § 805:55) (Am. Ord. 1981-371(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 1993-728,
passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 2001-960, passed
11-26-01)
§ 112.040 NOTICE; GRANTING.
   Upon receipt of the written report and recommendation by the Chief of
Police, the information and data must be reviewed by the City Manager to
determine that it is complete. The City Council must then be provided in
writing a complete report regarding the application and the investigation. The
City Council may request that the applicant(s) appear at a City Council Meeting
to discuss informally the applications and all relevant data. Within 20 days
thereafter, the Council must instruct the Clerk to cause to be published in the
official newspaper ten days in advance a notice of a hearing to be held,
setting forth the day, time and place when the hearing will be held, the name
of the applicant, the premises where the business is to be conducted, the
nature of the business, and such other information as the Council may direct.
At the hearing, opportunities must be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After it has conducted the public hearing,
the Council must grant or refuse the application at its discretion.
('72 Code, § 805:60) (Am. Ord. 1981-371(A), passed 12-14-81)
§ 112.041 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   All licenses granted hereunder are granted subject to the following
conditions, all other conditions of this chapter, and subject to all other
ordinances of the city applicable thereto and to all regulations promulgated by
the State Department of Public Safety and all statutes of the State of
Minnesota applicable thereto:
   (A)   Every licensee must be responsible for the conduct of the licensee’s
place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order therein. No “on-
sale” dealer nor “Sunday sale” dealer shall sell liquor by the bottle or
container for removal from the premises. No dealer license for “off-sale” shall
permit the consumption of any liquor on such licensed premises except that off
sale licensed stores may provide samples of malt liquor, wine, liqueurs, and
cordials which the licensee currently has in stock and is offering for sale to
the general public without obtaining an additional license, provided the malt
liquor, wine, liqueur, and cordial samples are dispensed at no charge and
consumed on the licensed premises during the permitted hours of off-sale in a
quantity less than 100 milliliters of malt liquor per variety per customer, 50
milliliters of wine per variety per customer and 25 milliliters of liqueur or
cordial per variety per customer.
   (B)   It is unlawful to sell intoxicating liquor to any minor. A license
must not be granted to a minor and a person under 18 years of age must not be
employed in any room constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors are
sold at retail “on-sale” or “Sunday sale,” except that persons under 18 years
of age may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of busboy or
dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel or motel. Persons
under 18 years of age may be employed as waiters or waitresses at a restaurant,
hotel or motel where only wine is sold, provided that the person under the age
of 18 may not serve or sell any wine. The licensee must not permit any person
under 18 years of age to loiter or remain in the room where intoxicating liquor
is being sold or served unless accompanied by the minor’s parent or legal
guardian. A person 18, 19 or 20 years old may enter an establishment licensed
under this chapter to:
      (1)   Perform work for the establishment, including the serving of
alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by M.S. § 340A.412,
Subdivision 10;
      (2)   Consume meals; and
      (3)   Attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
establishment where liquor is not sold.
   (C)   An “on-sale” or “Sunday sale” licensee must not keep, possess or
operate, or permit the keeping, possession or operation of, on the premises or
in any room adjoining the licensed premises controlled by the licensee, any
slot machine, dice, or other gambling device or apparatus, nor permit any
gambling therein, except as authorized by the city pursuant to M.S. Chapter
349, or as amended, nor permit the licensed premises or any room in the same or
in any adjoining building directly or indirectly under the licensee's control,
to be used as a resort for prostitutes or other disorderly persons.
   (D)   A license must not be issued to any person not a citizen of the United
States, nor to any person not of good moral character and repute, nor to any
person who has been convicted of any willful violation of any law of the United
States or the State of Minnesota within the past five years, or of any of the
local ordinances with regard to the manufacture, sale, distribution or
possession for sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor within the past five
years, nor to any person whose license under this chapter is revoked for any
willful violation of such laws or ordinances.
   (E)   Except as otherwise permitted in state law, a license must not be
granted to any manufacturer or distiller of intoxicating liquor, nor to anyone
interested in the ownership or operation of any such place, nor to a person
operating a licensed place owned by a manufacturer, distiller, or exclusive
wholesale distributing agent unless such interest was acquired at least six
months prior to January 1, 1934; and equipment or fixtures in any licensed
place must not be owned in whole or in part by any manufacturer or distiller.
   (F)   (1)   No more than one off-sale license may be directly or indirectly
issued or granted to one person or to one management within the city. It is
unlawful for a person, partnership or corporation to knowingly have or possess
a direct or indirect interest in more than one “off-sale” license in the city.
“On-sale” licenses may be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor in hotels,
clubs, restaurants and establishments for “on-sale” of liquor exclusively.
“Sunday sale” licenses may be issued to hotels or restaurants as defined in
M.S. § 340A.101 and which have facilities for serving not less than 30 guests
at one time and to which “on-sale” licenses have been issued or may be issued
hereafter for the sale of intoxicating liquor. “Off-sale” licenses are issued
only to proprietors or exclusive liquor stores. No “off-sale” licenses may be
issued to any applicant unless the applicant shows that the proposed location
of the exclusive liquor store has a minimum of 1,000 square feet of floor space
in a building which meets all building codes and building ordinances. Off-sale
liquor stores in operation as of the date of this chapter change may continue
to operate in their existing facilities as a non-conforming use until such time
as they are transferred to a different location and subject to the same
standards as set forth in this code. The existing facilities which do not meet
the standards of this chapter must be treated as a non-conforming use and are
subject to the provisions of this code.
      (2)   The term INTEREST includes any pecuniary interest in the ownership,
operation, management, or profits of a retail liquor establishment, but does
not include: bona fide loans; bona fide rental agreements; bona fide open
accounts or other obligations held with or without security arising out of the
ordinary and regular course of business of selling or leasing merchandise,
fixtures or supplies to such establishment, an interest in a corporation owning
or operating a hotel but having at least 150 or more rental units holding a
liquor license in conjunction therewith; or ten percent or less interest in any
other corporation holding a license. A person who receives monies from time to
time directly or indirectly from a licensee, in the absence of a bona fide
consideration therefor and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, is deemed to
have a pecuniary interest in such retail license. In determining “bona fides”
the reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for any
payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or
disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the
prohibitions of this chapter must be considered.
   (G)   All premises where any license hereunder is granted must be open to
inspection by any police or health officer or other properly designated officer
or employee of the city at any time during which the place so licensed is open
to the public for business.
   (H)   A license must not be granted within 300 feet of any school, early
childhood development center, licensed nursery or daycare facility, or
religious institution. A license may be granted within 300 feet of any of the
above listed uses if the licensed premises and the listed uses are located
within the same zoning district. The measurement must be made from building to
building and not from the property lines.
   (I)   (1)   Every room, place or premises wherein such liquor is permitted
to be or is sold, including any café, restaurant, or dining room operated in
connection therewith, or as part thereof, pursuant to an “on-sale” license,
must be closed and kept closed to the public on every day between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. During those hours, it is unlawful for a person or
persons to be or remain upon or within, such room, place on premises for any
purpose whatsoever, except that the owner or licensee, or the owner or
licensee’s agents or servants or employees may be and remain therein and
thereon for the purpose only of cleaning, preparation of meals, necessary
repairs, or other work in connection therewith, or as watchperson. An exception
to the foregoing statement applies to hotels, restaurants, and clubs where
portable bars are temporarily set up in dining rooms, club rooms, or other
areas which are open to the public and which are used only on a temporary
basis. Portable or temporary bars located on the licensed premises must have
all liquor removed and/or places under lock and key within the above designated
hours or all intoxicating liquor must be returned to a central location where
the liquor is stored and which is closed to the public during the hours stated
above.
      (2)   Nothing herein prohibits a hotel dining room, a restaurant, a
bowling center, or a club from serving or selling food during hours that the
sale of liquor is prohibited if the liquor is removed from display and placed
in a locked enclosure or room that is inaccessible to the public during the
hours stated above.
   (J)   (1)   It is unlawful for intoxicating liquor to be drunk or consumed
from the licensed premises during the times when the sale of intoxicating
liquors is prohibited by state law or as such state law is modified by
ordinance. During those hours and at those times no intoxicating liquor in any
quantity whatsoever shall be served, kept, displayed or permitted to be on or
in any table, booth, bar or other place in such licensed premises, except the
stock of liquors stored therein during such times on the premises in such
portions thereof as are accessible only to the licensee and his or her
employees. Temporary or portable bars located as outlined in division (J) of
this section hereof must have all liquor removed from sight and placed under
lock and key or returned to a central storage area during the hours when the
sale of liquor is prohibited.
      (2)   Nothing herein prohibits a hotel dining room, a restaurant, or a
club from serving or selling food during hours that the sale of liquor is
prohibited if the liquor is removed from display, covered or stored and is not
visible to the public.
   (K)   As a condition to the granting of an “on-sale” or “Sunday sale”
license where sale of food and such other articles is permitted by the Council,
the Council may by resolution restrict, the sale and consumption of liquor at
any place so licensed to tables where food is served to patrons purchasing and
consuming said liquor, and may prohibit or limit the sale or consumption of
liquor at a bar, and may prohibit the maintenance of a bar on the premises
where liquor is displayed or dispensed.
   (L)    An “on-sale,” “Sunday sale,” or “off-sale” license is not effective
beyond the compact and contiguous space named in the license granted, except
that the Council may permit sales of liquor with meals in additional dining
rooms open to the public and specified in the license where meals are regularly
served to guests therein.
   (M)   It must be a condition of every license heretofore or hereafter issued
hereunder to a corporation that the Clerk or designee be furnished by the
licensee with a correct list of all stockholders of the corporation to whom the
license is issued and the number of shares held by each, either individually or
beneficially for others; and it is the continuing duty of each corporate
licensee to promptly notify the Clerk or designee of any change in ownership or
beneficial interest of such shares. Any change of ownership or beneficial
interest of shares of stock entitled to be voted at any meeting of the
stockholders of such corporation which results in change in voting control of
the corporation by the persons owning shares of stock therein is deemed
equivalent to a transfer of the license issued to such corporation, and any
such licenses must be revoked and terminated 30 days after any such change in
ownership or beneficial interest of shares, unless the Council is notified of
such change in writing and has approved thereof. The Council or any officer of
the city designated by it may at any reasonable time examine the stock transfer
records and minute books of any corporate licensee in order to verify the names
of stockholders and persons voting at meetings of such corporation, and the
Council may cancel and terminate any license issued hereunder to a corporation
upon determination by the Council that any change of ownership of stock in such
corporate licensee has actually resulted in change of control of such
corporation so as to materially affect the integrity and character of its
management and its operation of an “on sale,” “Sunday sale,” or “off-sale”
liquor business, provided that no such action must be taken until after a
hearing by the Council on ten days notice to the licensee.
   (N)   The City Council finds that the sale and/or presence of alcoholic
beverages by the drink and adult entertainment occurring on the same premises
can increase disorderly conduct and can result in incidents of prostitution,
public masturbation, indecent exposure, and/or sexual assault. In order to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of city residents, and pursuant to the
City Council's authority to regulate alcoholic beverages under M.S. Chapter
340A and the Twenty-First Amendment to the United States Constitution, it is
unlawful for an on-sale licensee under this code to permit the following kinds
of conduct on the licensed premises or in areas adjoining the licensed premises
where the following kinds of conduct can be seen by patrons of the licensed
premises:
      (1)   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation; or
      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling on the
breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals; or
      (3)   The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva,
or genitals; or
      (4)   The displaying of films, videos, still pictures, electronic
reproduction, or any other visual reproduction of image depicting the acts
described in (1) through (3) above; or
      (5)   The presentation of any female in such manner or attire as to
expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola, or any
simulation thereof.
      (6)   It is unlawful for the licensee or their agent to allow or permit
to remain in or about the licensed premises any person who performs acts as set
forth in (1) through (5) above.
      (7)   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by the
licensee or their employees agents constitutes grounds for the suspension or
revocation of any and all intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, or wine
licenses issued to the premises or to the licensee.
('72 Code, § 805:65) (Am. Ord. 1992-700, passed 8-24-92; Am. Ord. 1993-715,
passed 2-22-93; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 2004-1013, passed
5-10-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1045, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-
15; Am. Ord. 2017-1223, passed 10-23-17)
§ 112.042 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   A room, place or premise where intoxicating liquor is permitted to be sold
under an “on-sale,” “off-sale,” “Sunday sale” or “club license” and including a
café, restaurant or dining room operated in connection therewith, must be
closed to the public during the times when the sale of liquor is prohibited by
state law. During those hours, it is unlawful for a person or persons to be
allowed to be or remain within such room, place or premise, for any purpose
whatsoever, except that the owner or licensee, the owner or licensee’s agents,
servants, or employees, may be and remain therefor the purpose only of
cleaning, preparation of meals, necessary repairs, or other work in connection
therewith.
('72 Code, § 805:70) (Am. Ord. 1989-628(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1989-641
(A), passed 12-18-89; Am. Ord. 1990-655(A), passed 7-9-90)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.043 RESTRICTIONS ON CONSUMPTION.
   In any place licensed for “on-sale,” the liquor sold must be served and
consumed at tables, counters or bars equipped with chairs at which customers
must sit to be served. It is unlawful for liquor to be sold or consumed on a
public highway or in an automobile.
('72 Code, § 805:75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.044 REVOCATION.
   Any violation of any provision or condition of this chapter or the state
licensing law or any falsification of any statement in the application is
grounds for an adverse action by the City Council, including, but not limited
to, suspension, revocation, denial, or non-renewal of the license. No portion
of the license fee paid shall be returned upon suspension, revocation, denial
or non-renewal.
('72 Code, § 805:80) (Am. Ord. 2009-1097, passed 4-6-09)
§ 112.045 SERVING SET-UPS IN UNLICENSED PLACES.
   It is unlawful for any proprietor of any public place of business, other
than a holder of an intoxicating liquor license to permit the consumption or
displaying of intoxicating liquor upon such premises, or in any manner to serve
or permit the serving of liquids for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating
liquor, and the serving of any such liquids for the purpose of mixing with
intoxicating liquor is prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is being
permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter.
('72 Code, § 805:85) (Am. Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.046 PROHIBITED SALES.
   It is unlawful to sell, furnish or deliver intoxicating liquor for any
purpose to any minor or to any person obviously intoxicated or to any other
person to whom sale is prohibited by state statute.
('72 Code, § 805:90)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.047 DRINKING PROHIBITED.
   The drinking of intoxicating liquor and/or 3.2 percent malt liquor on the
public streets, public parking lots, public property, or in other public areas
within the city is prohibited except in designated picnic areas approved by the
City Council. The drinking of intoxicating liquor and/or 3.2 percent malt
liquor in automobiles, on the public streets, public parking lots, or other
public property within the city is prohibited.
('72 Code, § 805:95) (Ord. 1979-295(A), passed 7-9-79; Am. Ord. 1997-841,
passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.048 SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR - RESTAURANTS.
   At the time of the initial license application and each license renewal
application for a restaurant, the applicant must provide written documentation
demonstrating that at least 25% of the restaurant's gross receipts are
attributable to the sale of food. This section does not apply to any restaurant
for which an on-sale intoxicating liquor license was initially issued before
July 1, 2012.
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
§ 112.049 LICENSES AVAILABLE.
   The city may only issue an on-sale intoxicating liquor license to the
following establishments:
   (A)   Hotels;
   (B)   Restaurants;
   (C)   Bowling centers;
   (D)   Clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations with the
approval of the Commissioner, provided that the organization has been in
existence for at least three years and liquor sales will only be to members and
bona fide guests, except that a club may permit the general public to
participate in a wine tasting conducted at the club under M.S. § 340A.419;
   (E)   Sports facilities located on land owned by the Metropolitan Sports
Commission;
   (F)   Theaters; and
   (G)   Other locations authorized by special legislation of the state
legislature.
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR
§ 112.055 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR. Any malt liquor containing not less than one-half
of one percent alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight
and is a fermented malt beverage.
   MINOR. Any person who has not attained the age of 21.
   PERSON. Every person, persons, firm, association or corporation.
('72 Code, § 810:00) (Ord. 1976-225(A), passed 8-9-76; Am. Ord. 1986-544(A),
passed 9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1989-628(A), passed 6-26- 89; Am. Ord. 1997-841,
passed 3-24-97)
§ 112.056 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at wholesale or retail
except when licensed as hereinafter provided. There are two types of licenses
issued for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquors, as hereinafter set out.
   (B)   “On-sale” licenses permit the licensee to sell 3.2 percent malt
liquors for consumption on the premises. “On-sale” licenses may be granted only
to restaurants, hotels, drug stores and bona fide clubs.
   (C)   “Off-sale” licenses permit the licensee to sell 3.2 percent malt
liquors in the original package for consumption off the premises only, except
that off-sale licensed stores may provide samples of malt liquor which the
licensee has in stock and is offering for sale to the general public without
obtaining an additional license, provided the malt liquor is dispensed at no
charge and consumed on the licensed premises during the permitted hours of off-
sale in a quantity less than 100 milliliters of malt liquor per variety per
customer.
('72 Code, § 810:05) (Am. Ord. 1989-628(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-841,
passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.057 SALES BY MANUFACTURER.
   A manufacturer of 3.2 percent malt liquors may without license sell the same
to licensed retail dealers and may sell and deliver the same in quantities of
not less than two gallons to consumers at their homes.
('72 Code, § 810:10) (Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97)
§ 112.058 OFF-SALE LICENSES.
   Every distributor of 3.2 percent malt liquors selling the same within the
city limits is required to take out an “off-sale” license unless the
distributor is also a manufacturer thereof.
('72 Code, § 810:15) (Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.059 LIMITED LICENSES FOR BONA FIDE CLUBS.
   Notwithstanding other licensing requirements for 3.2 percent malt liquor,
the Council upon proper application may in their discretion grant limited
licenses to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor “on-sale” to bona fide clubs which
meet the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101. Such limited licenses must
not exceed a two week period and require a payment in an amount as established
by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code, to the general
fund of the city. The premises from which the 3.2 percent malt liquor is
dispensed must be accurately described in the application. Only four such
limited licenses may be granted to any bona fide club within any one calendar
year except that a license for the entire year may be issued to such club under
the provisions of §
112.062 of this subchapter.
('72 Code, § 810:20) (Am. Ord. 1974-169(A), passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 1997-841,
passed 3-24-97)
§ 112.060 MUNICIPAL OPERATIONS EXEMPT.
   The Council may at their discretion waive the license fee as it applies to
any “on-sale” license issued to any city owned and operated facility.
('72 Code, § 810:25)
§ 112.061 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring either of the licenses herein described must first make
application therefor to the Council by filing with the Council a formal
application in writing, which application must set forth the applicant's name,
residence and the location at which the applicant proposes selling such 3.2
percent malt liquors, together with such other information as the Council may
require.
('72 Code, § 810:30) (Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97)
§ 112.062 FEES.
   At the time of filing such application the licensee must deposit the
required license fee in the amount set by the Council from time to time. No
license will be issued until the fee has been paid. The license fees required
to be paid are in addition to all other license fees required under any and all
other ordinances. The City Council may, in its discretion, prorate any or all
license fees as it considers appropriate under the circumstances including, but
not limited to, when a license is issued for an unexpired portion of a license
year.
('72 Code, § 810:35)(Am. Ord. 2002-971, passed 5-13-02)
Cross-reference:
   License fees, see Appendix
§ 112.063 GRANTING OF LICENSE.
   The City Council must cause an investigation to be made of all facts set
forth in the application. Opportunity must be given to any person to be heard
for or against the granting of any license. After the investigation, the City
Council must grant or refuse any such application at its discretion.
('72 Code, § 810:40)
§ 112.064 CONDITIONS OF LICENSES.
   All licenses granted hereunder are granted subject to the following
conditions, and all other conditions of this chapter, and subject to all other
ordinances of the city applicable thereto:
   (A)   A license must not be granted to a minor.
   (B)   A license must not be granted to an applicant who already owns a
license of the kind applied for.
   (C)   A license must not be issued to an applicant unless the applicant is
the actual owner or proprietor of the business at the location where the
applicant intends to sell such malt liquor.
   (D)   A person must not have in the person’s possession for sale any 3.2
percent malt liquor without first having obtained one or both of the licenses
herein provided for.
   (E)   A room, place or premises wherein such 3.2 percent malt liquor is
permitted to be or is sold, including any café, restaurant, or dining room
operated in connection therewith, or as part thereof, pursuant to an “on-sale”
license, must be closed and kept closed to the public during the times when a
sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor is prohibited by state law. During those hours,
it is unlawful for a person or persons to be or remain upon, or within, such
room, place or premises for any purpose whatsoever, except that the owner or
licensee, the owner or licensee’s agents or servants or employees may be and
remain therein and thereon for the purpose only of cleaning, preparation of
meals, necessary repairs, or other work in connection therewith, or as
watchperson.
   (F)   It is unlawful for 3.2 percent malt liquor to be drunk or consumed
from the licensed premises during the closing hours set forth in division (E)
above, and at those times it is unlawful for 3.2 percent malt liquor in any
quantity whatsoever to be served, kept, displayed or permitted to be on or in
any table, booth, bar or other place in such licensed premises, except the
stock of liquors stored therein during such times on the premises in such
portions thereof as are accessible only to the licensee and the licensee’s
employees.
   (G)   The written license must at all times be posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises named herein.
   (H)   All licenses granted under this ordinance must be issued to the
applicant only, and must be issued for the premises described in the
application.
   (I)   It is unlawful for a manufacturer of 3.2 percent malt liquors to have
any ownership, in whole or in part, in the business of any licensee holding an
“on-sale” license.
   (J)   Licenses hereunder may be issued only to persons who are citizens of
the United States and who are of good moral character and repute.
   (K)   It is unlawful to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor to any minor. No
license may be granted to a minor and no person under 18 years of age may be
employed in any room constituting the place in which 3.2 percent liquors are
sold at retail “on-sale” or “Sunday sale,” except that persons under 18 years
of age may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of busboy or
dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel or motel. Persons
under 18 years of age may be employed as waiters or waitresses at a restaurant,
hotel or motel where only wine is sold, provided that the person under the age
of 18 may not serve or sell any wine. The licensee must not permit any person
under 18 years of age to loiter or remain in the room where 3.2 percent malt
liquor is being sold or served unless accompanied by the minor’s parent or
legal guardian. A person 18, 19, or 20 years old may enter an establishment
licensed under this chapter to:
      (1)   Perform work for the establishment, including the serving of 3.2
percent malt liquor, unless otherwise prohibited by M.S. § 340A.412.
Subdivision 10;
      (2)   Consume meals; and
      (3)   Attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
establishment where 3.2 percent malt liquor is not sold.
('72 Code, § 810:45) (Am. Ord. 1986-544(A), passed 9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1989-641
(A), passed 12-18-89; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3- 24-97)
§ 112.065 HOURS OF SALE.
   It is unlawful to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor to the public during the
times when a sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor is prohibited by state law.
('72 Code, § 810:55) (Am. Ord. 1984-466(A), passed 9-24-84; Am. Ord. 1989-641
(A), passed 12-18-89; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3- 24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.066 TERM OF LICENSE.
   Licenses herein provided for expire December 31 of each year, but if issued
after the first of the year the license fee therefor may, at the option of the
Council, be prorated on a quarterly basis.
('72 Code, § 810:60)
§ 112.067 NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   A license issued hereunder is not transferable.
('72 Code, § 810:65)
§ 112.068 FOOD LICENSE.
   A license holder under this subchapter, except a bona fide club, must also
hold a hotel or restaurant license or must be engaged primarily in the business
of selling food and must hold a food stuff license.
('72 Code, § 810:70) (Am. Ord. 1982-384(A), passed 3-22-82)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.069 MIXING DRINKS.
   It is unlawful for a licensee hereunder to permit the practice of adding any
alcohol, whiskey, moonshine or other intoxicating liquor to said 3.2 percent
malt liquors sold or consumed in the licensee’s place of business, and if such
intoxicating liquor is added to such 3.2 percent malt liquor in the premises,
it is deemed to have been done with the knowledge, acquiescence and consent of
the licensee.
('72 Code, § 810:75) (Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
ON-SALE WINE LICENSE
§ 112.095 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ON-SALE WINE LICENSE. A license authorizing the sale of wine not exceeding
14% alcohol by volume, for consumption on the licensed premises only, in
conjunction with the sale of food.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, having appropriate facilities for serving meals and seating not fewer
than 25 guests, and where, in consideration of payment therefore, meals are
regularly served at tables to the general public, and which employs an adequate
staff to provide the usual and suitable service to its guests.
('72 Code, § 820:00)
§ 112.096 APPLICATION.
   Application for an on-sale wine license must be made in the manner specified
and subject to the conditions set forth in §§
112.030 et seq. where applicable. On-sale wine licenses may be granted only to
restaurants as defined herein.
('72 Code, § 820:05)
§ 112.097 FEES.
   At the time of filing such application the licensee must deposit the
required license fee in the amount set by the Council from time to time. A
license must not be issued until the fee has been paid. The license fees
required to be paid are in addition to all other license fees required under
any and all other ordinances. The City Council may, in its discretion, prorate
any or all license fees as it considers appropriate under the circumstances
including, but not limited to, when a license is issued for un unexpired
portion of a license year.
('72 Code, § 820:10) (Am. Ord. 2002-971, passed 5-13-02)
Cross-reference:
   License fees, see Appendix
§ 112.098 HOURS.
   Sales under an on-sale wine license are subject to the restrictions
specified in §
112.041.
('72 Code, § 820:15) (Am. Ord. 1989-641(A), passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.099 BOND.
   A bond as required by §§
112.034 and
112.035 must be filed with the City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee. An on-
sale wine license is not effective until the license and bond are approved by
the State Department of Public Safety.
('72 Code, § 820:20)
§ 112.100 ZONING LOCATION.
   Notwithstanding the prohibition against serving intoxicating liquor, on-sale
wine licenses are considered as restaurants (Class I) as defined in the zoning
code. All other restrictions in said section apply to restaurants holding on-
sale wine licenses.
('72 Code, § 820:25)
§ 112.101 SALE OF INTOXICATING MALT LIQUOR.
   A holder of an on-sale wine license pursuant to this chapter who is also
licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors on-sale pursuant to § 112.056, and
whose gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale of food, may
sell intoxicating malt liquors on-sale.
(Ord. 2004-1023, passed 12-6-04)
BREWER TAPROOM LICENSES
§ 112.200 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, BREWER TAPROOM LICENSE shall mean a
license authorizing the on-sale of malt liquor produced by a brewer for
consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one brewer location owned by the
brewer.
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
§ 112.201 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   A brewer taproom license may be issued to the holder of a brewer's license
under M. S. § 340A.301, Subd. 6(c), (i) or (j).
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
§ 112.202 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The only alcoholic beverages sold or consumed on the premises of the
taproom will be malt liquor produced by the brewer upon the brewery premises.
   (B)   No taproom shall be located across a public right-of-way such as a
street or alley from the brewery location.
   (C)   All other provisions of this chapter, except §§
112.034 and
112.035, shall be applicable to such licenses and licensees unless inconsistent
with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the holder of a brewer taproom
license from also holding a license to operate a restaurant at the taproom
location.
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2016-1203, passed 3-14-16)
BREWPUB LICENSES
§ 112.210 OFF-SALE PERMITTED.
   Brewpub off-sale malt liquor license as provided in M.S. § 340A.301, Subd.
7, which may be issued to a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the
Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety for the operation of a brewpub and
shall be operated in and as a part of a restaurant establishment for which an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license has been issued by the city.
   (A)   An off-sale license may be issued solely for the malt liquor produced
and packaged on the licensed premises and only upon approval of the license by
the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (B)   Off-sale malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.504, Subd. 4 and must be removed from the premises
before the applicable off-sale closing time requirements.
   (C)   Only malt liquor may be brewed or manufactured at the licensed
premises and not more than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year may
be brewed or manufactured at the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
§ 112.211 PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS.
   The malt liquor sold off-sale shall be packaged in 64-ounce containers,
commonly known as "growlers" and shall have the following requirements for
packaging:
   (A)   The containers shall bear a twist type closure, cork, stopper, or
plug.
   (B)   At the time of sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or
sleeve shall be applied to the container and extend over the top of the twist
type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon
opening of the container.
   (C)   The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of
the brewer/licensee selling the malt liquor.
   (D)   The containers shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of
the malt liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer/licensee selling the
malt liquor, and the contents in the container packaged as required herein
shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is labeled
as otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules 7515.1100.
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
TEMPORARY LICENSES
§ 112.300 TEMPORARY ON-SALE PERMITTED.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council may authorize a temporary 3.2 percent malt
liquor license or intoxicating liquor license to:
         (a)   A club or charitable, religious, or other nonprofit organization
in existence for at least three years,
         (b)   A political committee registered under M.S. §10A.14, or
         (c)   A state university, a temporary license for the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the municipality
sponsored by the licensee.
      (2)   The license may authorize the on-sale of intoxicating liquor for
not more than four consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on premises
other than premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The license may
provide that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering
services with the holder of a full-year on-sale intoxicating liquor license
issued by the city. The licenses are subject to the terms, including a license
fee, imposed by the city. Licenses issued under this subdivision are subject to
all laws and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor except M.S.
§§ 340A.409 and 340A.504, Subd. 3, paragraph (d), and those laws and ordinances
which by their nature are not applicable. Licenses under this subdivision are
not valid unless first approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (B)   The City Council may issue to a brewer who manufactures fewer than
3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year a temporary license for the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the municipality
sponsored by the brewer. The terms and conditions specified for temporary
licenses under division (A) shall apply to a license issued under this
division, except that the requirements of M.S. § 340A.409, Subd. 1 to 3a, shall
apply to the license.
   (C)   The City Council may issue to a microdistillery a temporary license
for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within
the municipality sponsored by the microdistillery. The terms and conditions
specified for temporary licenses under division (A) shall apply to a license
issued under this division, except that the requirements of M.S. § 340A.409,
Subd. 1 to 3a, shall apply to the license.
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15)
MICRODISTILLERIES
§ 112.400 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, COCKTAIL ROOM LICENSE shall mean a
license authorizing a self-contained room for the on-sale of distilled liquor
produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one
distillery location owned by the distiller pursuant to M.S. § 340A.22.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, OFF-SALE MICRODISTILLERY LICENSE shall
mean a license authorizing the off-sale of distilled spirits manufactured on-
site pursuant to M.S. § 340A.22.
(Ord. 2014-1183, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15)
§ 112.401 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A cocktail room license may be issued to the holder of a
microdistillery license under M.S. § 340A.22.
   (B)   An off-sale microdistillery license may be issued to the holder of a
microdistillery license under M.S. § 340A.22.
(Ord. 2014-1183, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15)
§ 112.402 FEES.
   At the time of filing such application the licensee must deposit the
required license fee in the amount set by the Council from time to time. A
license must not be issued until the fee has been paid. The license fees
required to be paid are in addition to all other fees required under any and
all other ordinances. The City Council may, in its discretion, prorate any or
all license fees as it considers appropriate under the circumstances including,
but not limited to, when a license is issued for an unexpired portion of a
license year.
(Ord. 2014-1183, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15)
§ 112.403 CONDITIONS ON LICENSE.
   (A)   A cocktail room license is issued pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §
340A.22. All other provisions of §§
112.001 to
112.049, except §§
112.034 and
112.035, shall be applicable to a cocktail room license and a cocktail room
licensee unless inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter or with the
provisions of state law.
   (B)   An off-sale microdistillery license is issued pursuant to the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.22. All other provisions of §§
112.001 to
112.049, except §§
112.034 and
112.035, shall be applicable to an off-sale microdistillery license and an off-
sale microdistillery licensee unless inconsistent with the provisions of this
subchapter or with the provisions of state law.
(Ord. 2014-1183, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15; Am. Ord.
2016-1203, passed 3-14-16)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 112.998 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises must be open to inspection by the Police Department or
other authorized city official during regular business hours. From time to
time, but at least as often as required by state law, the city will conduct
compliance checks, following the procedures and requirements outlined in
Minnesota State Statutes. Nothing in this section prohibits other compliance
checks authorized by state or federal law for educational, research, or
training purposes, or as required for the enforcement of any local ordinance,
or state or federal law.
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
§ 112.999 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations.
      (1)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged
violator must be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets
forth the alleged violation and which must inform the alleged violator of their
right to be heard on the accusation.
      (2)   Hearings. If a person accused of violating this chapter so
requests, a hearing will be scheduled, the time and place of which must be
published and provided to the accused violator.
      (3)   Hearing officer. The City Council will periodically approve a list
of persons, from which the City Manager or designated agent will randomly
select a hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for which a hearing is
requested.
      (4)   Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of
this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officers reasons
for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under division (B) of
this section, must be recorded in writing, a copy of which must be provided to
the accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, the findings must be
recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
      (5)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer must
be filed in the district court for the city in which the alleged violation
occurred.
      (6)   Prosecution. Nothing in this section prohibits the city or any
other legitimate jurisdiction from seeking criminal prosecution for violations
of this chapter or any other state or federal law regulating alcoholic
beverages.
      (7)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Administrative penalties.
      (1)   Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or
whose employee have violated this chapter, will be charged as follows:
         (a)   First violation of this chapter, an administrative fine of $500.
         (b)   Second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month
period, an administrative fine of $750.
         (c)   Third offense at the same licensed location within a 24-month
period, an administrative fine of $1,000 and the license will be suspended for
seven days.
         (d)   Fourth offense at the same licensed location within a 24-month
period, an administrative fine of $1,250 and the license will be suspended for
30 days.
         (e)   Fifth offense at the same licensed location within a 24-month
period, an administrative fine of $1,500 and the license will be revoked.
         (f)   It is an affirmative defense to the charge of selling alcoholic
beverages to a person under the age of 21 years in violation of this chapter
that the licensee or individual making the sale relied in good faith upon proof
of age as follows:
            1.   A valid driver's license or identification card issued by the
State of Minnesota, another state, or a province of Canada, and including the
photograph and date of birth of the licensed person; or
            2.   A valid military identification card issued by the United
States Department of Defense; or
            3.   In the case of a foreign national, from a nation other than
Canada, by a valid passport.
      (2)   Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated
by division (B)(3) of this section, found to be in violation of this chapter
will be charged an administrative fee of $50.
      (3)   Minors. Charges for minors found in unlawful possession of, or who
unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase, alcohol or alcoholic beverages will
be routed through the Hennepin County Juvenile diversion program.
      (4)   Criminal prosecution. Nothing in this section prohibits the city
from seeking criminal prosecution for violations of this chapter or any other
state or federal law regulating alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)
CHAPTER 113: AMUSEMENTS AND THEATRICAL ENTERTAINMENT
Section
Motion Picture Establishments
   
113.40   Definitions
   
113.41   License required
   
113.42   Application
   
113.43   Fees
   
113.44   Standards of issuance
   
113.45   Duties of licensee
   
113.46   Films
   
113.47   Standards for maintenance of premises
   
113.48   Revocation or suspension
   
113.49   Summary action
   
113.50   Applicable laws
Lawful Gambling
   
113.60   Purpose
   
113.61   Definitions
   
113.62   Lawful gambling
   
113.63   Additional regulations
   
113.64   Adoption by reference
MOTION PICTURE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 113.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LICENSEE. A person having a city license in full force and effect issued
hereunder for a motion picture establishment.
   MOTION PICTURE ESTABLISHMENT. Any premises in which motion pictures are
projected upon the screen for viewing by patrons and for which an admission
charge is made.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
('72 Code, § 426:00) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
§ 113.41 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for a person to engage in the business of operating a motion
picture establishment or to exhibit any motion pictures for which admission is
charged either directly or indirectly without a license; provided that no
license is necessary for any motion picture exhibition which is given for the
benefit of any school, church or benevolent institution or for any charitable
purpose or is exhibited in any home.
('72 Code, § 426:05) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.42 APPLICATION.
   Application for a license issued hereunder must be made upon forms prepared
and made available by the Licensing Division and must state:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant in the case of an individual.
The name and address of all partners in the case of a partnership. The name and
address of all officers in the case of a corporation.
   (B)   Three references as to financial responsibility and three references
as to good character of the applicant or applicants.
   (C)   The hours of operation of the motion picture establishment.
   (D)   The application required hereunder must be accompanied by a plat or
drawing of the motion picture establishment showing its location, size and
capacity, location and size of entrances and exits, kind of ground surface,
location, size and construction of all structures and location, size and
construction of any walls, fences or barriers surrounding the premises.
   (E)   In cases where the applicant lives outside of Hennepin County, the
application must be signed by a resident, subject to service of process, who
must be locally responsible for compliance with this and other ordinances of
the city and the licensee must always have a person authorized to accept
service of process for the licensee and the person must live in Hennepin
County.
('72 Code, § 426:10) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
§ 113.43 FEES.
   An application for a license hereunder must be accompanied by the annual
license fee. The fee is as established in the Appendix to this code.
('72 Code, § 426:15) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
§ 113.44 STANDARDS OF ISSUANCE.
   The City Council must approve the issuance of a license hereunder when they
find:
   (A)   That the applicant is capable of operating the proposed business in a
manner consistent with the public health, safety and general welfare; and
   (B)   That the requirements of this subchapter and of all other governing
laws and ordinances have been met.
('72 Code, § 426:20) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79; Am. Ord. 2004-1013,
passed 5-10-04)
§ 113.45 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   A licensee hereunder must comply with the following requirements and
standards of operation:
   (A)   Quiet and good order. The licensee must maintain quiet and good order
upon the premises where any motion picture establishment is operated and
loitering must not be permitted in or about the entrances or exits from such
theater. All indoor motion picture establishments must have at least four exits
to the ground for use in case of fire which must be accessible at all times and
if above ground must have one fireproof stairway leading thereto. The doors of
all indoor motion picture theaters must be so hung and arranged as to open and
swing outward during any exhibition of a motion picture and must be kept
unlocked and unfastened during the exhibition and in such condition that
immediate egress from such building must not be hindered, prevented or delayed.
   (B)   All aisles in indoor motion picture theaters having seats on each side
must not be less than three feet in width and increased in width two inches for
every ten feet of the seats farthest from the exit.
   (C)   Every projection machine in a motion picture establishment must be
housed in a fireproof booth constructed to conform with the laws of the State
of Minnesota and the ordinances of the City of Brooklyn Park.
   (D)   In addition to the other inspections required by law the Fire Chief
must inspect all motion picture establishments and if the Chief deems the same
not to afford proper protection to the public in cases of fire or accident the
Chief must cause the building to be closed to the public until it shall be so
arranged as to afford proper protection in such cases.
   (E)   The licensee must not permit indecent, obscene immoral or suggestive
advertising on the premises of any motion picture establishment and no picture
or other form of advertising is permitted which is not true to the theatrical
performance or a moving picture entertainment as advertised or which misleads
or misinforms the public as to the nature of the picture or entertainment to be
exhibited.
   (F)   The licensee must not admit children under the age of 16 to any
outdoor motion picture establishment unless accompanied by and in direct
personal charge of the child's parent or other responsible person.
   (G)   (1)   Non-intoxicating or intoxicating liquor must not be drunk,
consumed, served, kept or displayed on any premises licensed under this
ordinance.
      (2)   A person must not have in the person's possession or on the
person's person while in a private motor vehicle upon the premises of a theater
licensed under this subchapter, any bottle or receptacle containing
intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor which has been opened, or the seal
broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.
      (3)   It is unlawful for the owner of any private motor vehicle or the
driver, if the owner is not then present in the motor vehicle, to keep or allow
to be kept in a motor vehicle when the vehicle is upon the premises of a
licensed theater, any bottle or receptacle containing intoxicating liquors or
3.2 percent malt liquors which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the
contents of which have been partially removed except when such bottle or
receptacle is kept in the trunk of the motor vehicle when the vehicle is
equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally
occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with
a trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment is deemed to be within the
area occupied by the driver and passengers.
('72 Code, § 426:25) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.46 FILMS.
   It is unlawful for a licensee to knowingly allow or permit the showing of
any motion picture containing the following when there are present within the
licensee’s establishment children under the age of 18 years or when the motion
picture is visible from any public thoroughfare or private property other than
the property on which the picture is being shown:
   (A)    NUDITY means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
areas, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of an
uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the nipple (or the breast with the nipple and
immediately adjacent area only covered).
   (B)    SEXUAL CONDUCT means any of the following depicted sexual conduct:
      (1)   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude, or clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the
condition of being bound, fettered, or otherwise physically restrained on the
part of one who is so clothed as an act of sexual stimulation or gratification;
      (2)   Human defecation or urination;
      (3)   The condition of human male or female genitals, or the breasts of
the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experience of
humans in engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity; or
      (4)   Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, actual or
simulated, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of a human
being, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between
humans or animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
   (C)   An obscene motion picture as defined in M.S. § 617.298, Subd. 2.
   (D)   Any other conduct which is so obscene as to be unfit to be seen by
children under the age of 18 years old when viewed in light of contemporary
community standards, and is utterly without redeeming social importance for
minors.
('72 Code, § 426:30) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.47 STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Access. The licensee must provide access available to public streets
or other public ways from at least two points at all times. Such means of
access must be kept clear by the licensee at all times to facilitate the
departure of persons and vehicles and to permit entrance of fire apparatus or
ambulances in case of emergency. Drives must be channelized by the licensee and
limited to not more than three lanes to control traffic.
   (B)   Drives. All drives and areas used by vehicles within 50 feet of the
public right of way must be satisfactorily paved by the licensee or treated to
avoid creating dust.
   (C)   Lighting. Exits and passageways leading to them must be kept
adequately lighted by the licensee at all times when opened to the public. The
licensee must provide artificial light whenever natural light is inadequate.
   (D)   State and city fire laws. All rules, regulations and conditions
adopted, issued and prescribed by the State Fire Marshal under any and all laws
of this state are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in and made a
part of this chapter as completely as if set out here in full. The licensee is
subject to any and all rules, regulations and city code requirements adopted by
this Council or issued and prescribed by the City Fire Chief. Three copies of
the laws and of the rules, regulations and conditions are hereby filed with the
City Clerk and made a part of this record and the City Clerk is hereby
instructed to keep said copies available for inspection at all times to any
interested party. Any violation of any provision of the laws or of the rules,
regulations and conditions is a violation of this subchapter.
   (E)   Sanitary facilities. Adequate and proper sanitary facilities approved
by the Health Department must be provided by the licensee.
   (F)   Attendants. At all times when a motion picture establishment is open
to the public the licensee must provide an adequate number of qualified
attendants on duty at all times who must see that order is maintained, that
disorderly or immoral conduct is prevented, that the entrances and exits are
kept free from congestion and that this subchapter and all other governing
ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to motion picture establishments
are observed.
   (G)   Fence or wall. The licensees of any outdoor motion picture
establishment must provide a wall or fence of adequate height to screen the
patrons and cars in attendance at the theater from the view of the surrounding
property. Such fence must be of design and structure approved by the City
Building Official. The perimeter of the fence must be landscaped with suitable
plants and shrubbery to preserve as far as possible harmony with the appearance
of the surrounding property.
   (H)   Noise. The licensee of any outdoor motion picture theater must provide
individual loudspeakers for each car and a central loudspeaker system must not
be permitted by the licensee.
   (I)   Commercial activities. Any sale of soft drinks, confections or other
articles of merchandise is governed by the laws and ordinances governing such
business and requires the same license as if such sale were conducted
elsewhere.
('72 Code, § 426:35) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.48 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Every license or permit issued under this subchapter is subject to the
right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to suspend or revoke the same should
the license holder or their agents, employees, representatives or lessees
directly or indirectly operate or maintain motion picture establishments
contrary to the provisions of this subchapter or any other ordinance of the
city or any special permit issued by the city or the laws of the State of
Minnesota.
   (B)   The license may be suspended or revoked by the Council after a written
notice is sent to the license holder specifying the ordinance or law violations
with which they are charged. This notice must also specify the date for hearing
before the Council, which must not be less than ten days from the date of the
notice.
   (C)   At such hearing before the Council, the license holder or their
attorneys may submit and present witnesses in their defense.
   (D)   After a hearing the Council may suspend or revoke the license if they
deem it necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare.
('72 Code, § 426:40) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
§ 113.49 SUMMARY ACTION.
   (A)   When the conduct of any license holder or their agent, representative,
employee or lessee or the condition of their motion picture establishment is
detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a
nuisance, fire hazard or other unsafe or dangerous condition and thus give rise
to an emergency, the Building Official has the authority to summarily condemn
or close off such area of the motion picture establishment.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Official to cease
business or revoke or suspend the license or permit is entitled to appeal to
the Council, immediately by filing a notice of appeal with the Manager. The
Manager must schedule a date for hearing before the Council and notify the
aggrieved person of the date.
   (C)   The hearing must be conducted in the same manner as if the aggrieved
person had not received summary action.
   (D)   The decision of the Building Official is not voided by the filing of
such appeal. Only after the Council has held its hearing will the decision of
the Building Official be affected.
('72 Code, § 426:45) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
§ 113.50 APPLICABLE LAWS.
   Licensees are subject to all of the ordinances of the city and the State of
Minnesota relating to motion picture establishments; and this subchapter must
not be construed or interpreted to supersede or limit any other such applicable
ordinance or law.
('72 Code, § 426:50) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)
LAWFUL GAMBLING
§ 113.60 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to incorporate M.S. §§ 349.11 through
349.23, inclusive into the city code, to regulate legal forms of gambling, to
prevent the commercialization of gambling, to insure integrity of operations,
and providing for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes. It also
provides for local regulation and approval as authorized by M.S. § 349.213.
('72 Code, § 491:00) (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed - - )
§ 113.61 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this subchapter and defined in M.S. §§ 349.11 through
349.22, inclusive, and defined in the rules adopted pursuant to the authority
contained in the said statutes have the meanings set forth in those statutes
and rules.
('72 Code, § 491:05) (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed - - )
§ 113.62 LAWFUL GAMBLING.
   Gambling is unlawful in the City of Brooklyn Park except bingo, raffle
games, paddlewheels, tipboards and pull-tabs duly licensed or otherwise allowed
pursuant to the provisions of this section; M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22,
inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant to the authority contained in said
statutes.
   (A)   No Brooklyn Park permit is required for the conduct of gambling exempt
from licensing under state law.
   (B)   Nothing in this section is deemed to be an automatic approval of a
license applied for with the Charitable Gambling Control Board. The city
reserves the right to disapprove licenses for individual bingo occasions,
raffle games, paddlwheels, tipboards and pull-tab distributions.
('72 Code, § 491:10) (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed - -; Am. Ord. 2002-963, passed
2-11-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.63 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements of M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22, inclusive,
and rules adopted pursuant to the authority contained in those statutes, lawful
gambling is subject to the regulations set forth in the following divisions:
   (A)   Except as provided in this division, it is unlawful to disseminate in
the city, in any manner, information concerning any present or future lawful
gambling event of opportunity.
      (1)   An organization conducting lawful gambling, duly licensed or
otherwise allowed pursuant to the statutes and rules referred to in this
section, may disseminate information to its own membership about such games.
      (2)   Signs advertising bingo, a raffle or a pull-tab distribution are
regulated pursuant to the provisions of the applicable sections of this code.
      (3)   Advertising and news reporting contained in newspaper, radio and
television media available to the general public of more than one municipality
and addressed to the general public, and not addressed to the residents of
Brooklyn Park, is exempt from the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Pull-tab operations.
      (1)   Pull-tab operations may not be conducted on any premises other than
a church, a licensed bingo hall, the premises of a fraternal, veterans or other
non-profit organization, or the premises of an on-sale liquor licensee of the
City of Brooklyn Park.
      (2)   To be licensed to conduct pull-tab operations, any organization or
local subdivision thereof, must meet all the following requirements:
         (a)   The organization or the local subdivision has been in continuous
existence holding meetings and conforming with the requirements of this
subdivision for more than one year prior to the approval of the license; and
         (b)   Pursuant to M.S. § 349.213, 75% of the net profits of any
Brooklyn Park pull-tab distribution will be spent in the City of Brooklyn Park
or on items or activities that will directly benefit citizens of Brooklyn Park.
For purposes of this division, the term NET PROFITS means all monies received
from pull-tab purchasers minus amounts spent for necessary and statutorily
allowed expenses related to the pull-tab distribution.
         (c)   The term TRADE AREA means all that area described below: City of
Brooklyn Park, and all contiguous cities and the City of Minneapolis.
      (3)   A pull-tab operation at a licensed bingo hall may only be conducted
by the same organization that is simultaneously conducting the bingo event.
      (4)   Any one organization may hold three licenses within the city.
('72 Code, § 491:15) (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed - -; Am. Ord. 1990-644(A),
passed 2-26-90; Am. Ord. 1994-699, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1994-765, passed 7-25-
94; Am. Ord. 1999-895, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 2000-927, passed 6-26-00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.64 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22, inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant to the
authority contained in said statutes are hereby adopted by reference and are
incorporated in this subchapter as completely as if set out in full.
('72 Code, § 491:20) (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed - - )
CHAPTER 114: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
114.01   Findings and purpose
   
114.02   Adoption of state and county regulations
   
114.03   Definitions
   
114.04   License administration
   
114.05   License fees; exemptions; reinspection fees
   
114.06   Inspections
   
114.07   Emergency closure
   
114.08   Procedures for emergency closure
   
114.09   Standards for health, safety and nuisance prevention
   
114.10   Industry self-survey and training responsibility
§ 114.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Purpose. This chapter is enacted to establish standards for the
regulation of food establishments to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the people of the city pursuant to powers granted under M.S.
Chapters 28A and 145A, and subsequent recodifications and/or amendments as may
be adopted from time to time.
   (B)   Objectives. The general objectives of this chapter are as follows:
      (1)   To prevent foodborne illness.
      (2)   To correct and prevent conditions that may adversely affect persons
utilizing food establishments.
      (3)   To provide standards for the design, construction, operation, and
maintenance of food establishments.
      (4)   To meet consumer expectations of the safety of food establishments.
   (C)   Scope. This chapter is applicable to all food establishments where
food, meals, snacks, beverages, or ingredients thereof are stored, prepared, or
sold for consumption on or off the premises. Food establishments include, but
are not limited to restaurants, boarding houses, drive-ins, bars, taverns, brew
pubs, cafeterias, delicatessens, snack bars, grocery stores, retail bakeries,
micro markets, convenience stores, meat markets, caterers, cafes, clubs,
lodges, commissaries, lodging facilities, resorts, public and private schools,
public buildings, group day care facilities, concession stands, satellite or
catered feeding locations, catering food vehicles, food delivery services,
mobile food units, itinerant and other temporary food events, vending machines,
food or beverage carts, and similar business and establishments.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2019-1237, passed 2-25-19)
§ 114.02 ADOPTION OF STATE AND COUNTY REGULATIONS.
   For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing food establishments,
the following rules and statutes and subsequent recodifications and/or
amendments and other applicable legislation, as may be adopted from time to
time.
   (A)   M.S. Chapters 157, except 157.16, Subd. 2(a), 17.04, 29.21, 29.23,
29.235, 29.236, 29.237, 29.24, 29.25, 29.26, 29.27 and 30.49, applicable
sections of M.S. Chapters 28A, 31 and 34A.
   (B)   Minn. Rules Chapter 4626, except 4626.0033 subparts G through O,
4626.1720B and 4626.1760.
   (C)   Hennepin County Food Protection Ordinance 3 is adopted by reference
and incorporated into the city code in full, except as otherwise modified in
this chapter.
   (D)   Applicable sections of Minn. Rules parts 1520, 1545, 1550 and 1556.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2012-1135, passed 3-26-12; Am. Ord.
2019-1237, passed 2-25-19; Am. Ord. 2022-1277, passed 7-25-22)
§ 114.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Brooklyn Park and its designated employees or person-in-
charges.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. As used in this chapter or the Hennepin County Ordinance
No. 3, the city's Code Enforcement and Public Health Division, its designated
employees, or other designated agents.
   ITINERANT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food establishment operating as a seasonal
permanent food stand, seasonal temporary food stand, or special event food
stand as defined in M.S. § 157.15, Subd. 12.a, 13, and 14.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A self-contained food service operation, located in a
readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store, prepare,
display or serve food intended for individual portion service that is readily
movable without disassembling, or as defined in M.S. § 157.15, Subd. 9.
   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. As used in Minn. Rules Chapter 4626, the city’s Code
Enforcement and Public Health Division, its designated employees, or other
designated agents.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2014-1177, passed 7-7-14)
§ 114.04 LICENSE ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   License required. It is unlawful to operate a food establishment
within the city or engage in any enterprises described herein, unless a license
has been obtained. Each license must be obtained in accordance with the
requirements of the city code.
   (B)   General licensing. The application for such licenses must be made on
forms furnished by the city and must describe the general nature of the
business, the location, and any other information deemed necessary by the city.
   (C)   License expiration. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter commence
and expire on the dates indicated on the license certificate. With the
exception of the itinerant food establishment licenses, all food establishment
licenses will be issued for the applicable license year. Itinerant food
establishment licenses will be issued for the specific days that the itinerant
food establishment is in operation.
   (D)   Transfer and display of license. Only a person who complies with the
requirements of this chapter is entitled to receive a license. A license is not
transferable as to person or place. A valid license must be located onsite and
posted so that it is clearly visible to the public.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2019-1237, passed 2-25-19) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 114.05 LICENSE FEES; EXEMPTIONS; REINSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   Fees. Fees for licenses issued hereunder must be in the amount set
forth by the Council. An additional fee will be charged for each additional
service or operation that is separate, distinct or unique from the central or
main food establishment, as determined by the Health Authority.
   (B)   Late fees. If work has commenced prior to approval of construction or
remodeling, or license fees are submitted after the annual license date,
additional fees will be assessed according to the fees set forth by the
Council.
   (C)   Fee exemptions. Food establishments operated by governmental
subdivisions, charitable institutions, places of worship, or non-profit
agencies are required to obtain a license and comply with the provisions of
this chapter, but are not required to pay a fee.
   (D)   Reinspection fees. A reinspection fee will not be charged for the
first reinspection conducted to determine correction of a code violation. A
reinspection fee, as set forth by the Council, may be charged for each
subsequent reinspection.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.06 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspection required. The Health Authority will inspect each food
establishment prior to issuing a license for a new establishment, as part of a
construction or remodeling plan review, as part of a complaint investigation,
or for routine inspection. A license will not be issued until the food
establishment meets the standards of this chapter as demonstrated by a
satisfactory inspection.
   (B)   Construction inspection. The food establishment must be constructed in
conformance with the approved plans. A building permit will not be issued for a
food establishment for remodeling or alteration for such establishment until
such plans have the approval of the Health Authority. The Health Authority will
inspect the food establishment as frequently as necessary during construction
to ensure that construction occurs in conformance with this chapter. The food
establishment owner, operator, or person-in-charge must contact the Health
Authority and obtain a final inspection prior to the start of operations and
issuance of a license or to resume operations after remodeling.
   (C)   Access to premises and records. The person operating the food
establishment must, upon request of the Health Authority and after proper
identification, permit access to all parts of the establishment at any
reasonable time for the purpose of inspection and must exhibit and allow
copying of any records necessary to ascertain sources of food.
   (D)   Interference with Health Authority. It is unlawful to interfere with
or hinder the Health Authority in the performance of its duties, or refuse to
permit the Health Authority to make such inspections.
   (E)   Removal and correction of violations. The owner, or operator, or
person-in-charge of a food establishment, upon receipt of a report giving
notification of one or more violations of this chapter, must correct or remove
each violation in a reasonable length of time as determined by the Health
Authority. The length of time for the correction or removal of each such
violation will be noted on the inspection report. Failure to remove or correct
each violation within the time period noted on the inspection report
constitutes a separate violation of this chapter. The Health Authority may
issue orders to halt construction or remodeling, or to take corrective measures
to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.07 EMERGENCY CLOSURE.
   If any of the following conditions exist, the operator may be ordered to
discontinue all operations of the food establishment:
   (A)   Failure to possess a license required by this chapter;
   (B)   Evidence of a sewage backup in a food preparation, food storage, or
utensil washing area;
   (C)   Lack of potable, plumbed, hot or cold water to the extent that hand
washing , utensil washing, food preparation, or toilet facilities are not
operational;
   (D)   Lack of electricity or gas service to the extent that hand washing,
utensil washing, food preparation, lighting, or toilet facilities are not
operational;
   (E)   Evidence of an ongoing foodborne illness associated with the operation
of the establishment;
   (F)   Significant damage to the food establishment due to tornado, fire,
flood, or other disaster;
   (G)   Evidence of infestation of rodents or other vermin;
   (H)   Evidence of cross contamination, filthy conditions, untrained staff or
poor personal hygiene;
   (I)   Lack of an effective means of sanitizing dishes or utensils; or
   (J)   Any time an immediate health or safety hazard or public health
nuisance exists.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)
§ 114.08 PROCEDURES FOR EMERGENCY CLOSURE.
   (A)   Notification. The Health Authority, with the approval of the City
Manager, may immediately close a food establishment if a violation is found
that constitutes an imminent health or safety hazard. After written notice is
provided, the food establishment operator must immediately cease operation. The
notice must identify the food establishment, describe the specific grounds for
closure of the establishment, direct the immediate closure of the establishment
and vacating of the premises by consumers, list the corrective actions
necessary to re-open the establishment, and state that a hearing on the
emergency closure may be requested by the licensee. The notice must be served
upon the owner, food establishment operator, or person-in-charge.
   (B)   Reopening process. The person-in-charge or person receiving the order
must close the establishment and ensure the premises is vacated in accordance
with the notice. The establishment must remain closed until the Health
Authority rescinds the order for emergency closure. When the food establishment
operator notifies the health authority that the violations have been corrected,
the Health Authority must re-inspect the food establishment within a reasonable
length of time. If all violations constituting the ground for emergency closure
have been corrected, the Health Authority must reopen the establishment.
   (C)   Appeal process. The licensee may appeal the temporary suspension and
request a hearing in writing as to the conditions, if any, to be imposed for
reopening the food establishment. The hearing must be held within two business
days. A written decision must be made within two business days after the
conclusion of the hearing.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.09 STANDARDS FOR HEALTH, SAFETY AND NUISANCE PREVENTION.
   (A)   The food establishment licensee must receive approval from the Health
Authority prior to implementing the provisions in Minn. Rules 4626. The city
specifically adopts the following additional standards for health and safety to
Minn. Rules Chapter 4626 for food service establishments excluding retail food
establishments delegated by the State Department of Agriculture.
   (B)   A hand washing lavatory must be equipped to provide water to the user
at a temperature of at least 43° C. (110° F.), but not more than 54° C. (130°
F.) in a food establishment and not more than 48° C. (120° F.) in a sink that
is used by children, such as a school, day care or preschool, through a mixing
valve or combination faucet.
   (C)   Materials for indoor floor, wall, and ceiling surfaces under
conditions of normal use must be non-absorbent and resistant to the wear and
abuse to which they are subjected. Materials such as, but not limited to,
quarry tile, ceramic tile, or terrazzo are approved for floor surfaces in food
preparation areas, walk-in refrigerators, walk-in freezers, warewashing areas,
toilet rooms, mobile food establishment servicing areas, handwash areas,
janitorial areas, laundry areas, interior garbage and refuse storage rooms,
wait stations, kitchens, bars, areas subject to flushing or spray cleaning
methods, and other areas subject to moisture.
   (D)   A supply of toilet tissue in a mounted dispenser must be available at
each toilet.
   (E)   The plans and specifications for a food establishment must include the
proposed layout to scale, mechanical schematics, construction materials, and
finish schedules.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2019-1237, passed 2-25-19) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 114.10 INDUSTRY SELF-SURVEY AND TRAINING RESPONSIBILITY.
   Every licensee or person-in-charge of a food establishment must arrange for
and maintain a program of sanitation self-inspection conducted by the owner,
person-in-charge, or designated agent as approved by the Health Authority. The
self-inspection program must include written policies, employee training
procedures, appropriate forms for logging self-inspections, and evidence that
routine self-inspection of all aspects of the food establishment takes place. A
description of the food establishment operation, including the menu, must be
available for review.
(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 115: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 116: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 117: LODGING AND HOUSING ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
Lodging Establishments
   
117.25   Additional provisions
   
117.26   License required
   
117.27   Application for license
   
117.28   Inspection
   
117.29   License expiration and renewal
   
117.30   Licensing regulations and fees
Rental Establishments
   
117.40   Purpose
   
117.41   Intent
   
117.42   Definitions
   
117.43   License required
   
117.44   License period
   
117.45   Fees
   
117.46   Application
   
117.47   License transfer
   
117.48   Display of license
   
117.481-   Report changes in ownership
   
117.482-   Tenant register
   
117.483-   Responsibility for acts of manager
   
117.484-   No retaliation
   
117.485   Point of conversion inspection
   
117.486   Tenant notification
   
117.49   Conduct on rental property
   
117.491   Minnesota Crime Free Multi-housing Program
   
117.50   Landscape condition
   
117.51   Safety from fire
   
117.52   Enforcement
   
117.521   Assessment of unpaid administrative penalties
   
117.53   Removal of snow and ice
   
117.54   Rental dwelling self-assessment and good management practives
responsibility
LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 117.25 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   Except as otherwise modified in this chapter, the following provisions,
including all future revisions to them, in Minnesota Statutes and Minnesota
Rules, are adopted and incorporated by reference into this chapter:
   (A)   M.S. Chapter 157, except § 157.16;
   (B)   M.S. §§ 327.10 through 327.131 and §§ 327.70 through 327.76; and
   (C)   Minn. Rules Chapter 4625.
(Ord. 2012-1135, passed 3-26-12)
§ 117.26 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a lodging establishment unless the
City of Brooklyn Park has issued a valid license, including plan review
approval. The  license must be on display in the immediate vicinity of the
customer registration area and conveniently accessible upon demand.
('72 Code, § 456:05) (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed - -; Am. Ord. 2012-1135, passed
3-26-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.27 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for license hereunder must be submitted to the Licensing
Division in such form and manner as the City Clerk may prescribe.
('72 Code, § 456:10) (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed - - )
§ 117.28 INSPECTION.
   The Environmental Health Division or designated agent must inspect every
lodging establishment as frequently as deemed necessary to ensure compliance
with this subchapter. Inspections at board and lodging establishments regulated
by M.S. § 157.17 must be completed in accordance with the licensing provisions
in other sections in this chapter.
('72 Code, § 456:15) (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2012- 1135,
passed 3-26-12; Am. Ord. 2022-1277, passed 7-25-22)
§ 117.29 LICENSE EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   Licenses issued under this subchapter expire on the last day of December
each year. License renewal applications must be filed with the Licensing
Division prior to the expiration date each year.
('72 Code, § 456:20) (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed - - )
§ 117.30 LICENSING REGULATIONS AND FEES.
   License application and possession is subject to §
110.37 of this code. The annual license fee for a lodging establishment is set
by the Appendix to this code.
('72 Code, § 456:25) (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed - - )
RENTAL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 117.40 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect the public health, safety
and welfare of the residents of rental dwellings in the City of Brooklyn Park
and to ensure that rental housing in the city is safe, sanitary and operated
and maintained not to become a nuisance to the neighborhood and community. The
operation of rental residential properties is a business enterprise that
entails certain responsibilities.
('72 Code, § 455:00) (Am. Ord. 1990-667(A), passed 12-17-90; Am. Ord. 2002-975,
passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)
§ 117.41 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this subchapter that a permanent mode of protecting and
regulating the living conditions of citizens of the city be established; and
that uniform standards be established and applicable for all rental dwellings
in the city. This subchapter is not construed or interpreted to supersede or
limit any other such applicable ordinance or law. This subchapter applies to
all rental dwellings whether or not a valid license is in effect. City staff
will review this subchapter on an annual basis.
('72 Code, § 455:05) (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord. 1996-795,
passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)
§ 117.42 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APARTMENT. A community, complex, or building having a common owner and
containing 16 or more living units.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. Document issued by the city, stating that the
building has been inspected and is in compliance with applicable property
maintenance codes and ordinances.
   CITY MANAGER . The City Manager or the City Manager's designated agent
   DWELLING. A building or one or more portions thereof occupied or intended to
be occupied for residence purposes; but not including rooms in motels, hotels,
nursing homes, boarding houses, trailers, tents, cabins or trailer coaches.
   GENERAL HOUSING UNIT. A dwelling other than an apartment, including but not
limited to a townhouse, condominium, double bungalow, residential zero lot line
(split double), single family or tri-plex.
   LET FOR OCCUPANCY or TO LET. To permit possession or occupancy of a dwelling
or living unit by a person who is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, or pursuant to a recorded or
unrecorded agreement whether or not a fee is required by the agreement.
   LIVING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities
for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
   OCCUPANT. Any person living or sleeping in a dwelling; or having possession
of a space within a dwelling.
   OPERATE. To let for occupancy or to let.
   OPERATOR/MANAGER. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure
or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
   OWNER/LICENSEE. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property;
or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of
such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court, or any
person representing the actual owner.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, firm, association, company, partnership,
organization or any other group acting as a unit.
   RENT. To let for occupancy or to let.
   RENTAL DWELLING. Any apartment or general housing unit let for occupancy.
   SMALL APARTMENT . A community, complex, or building containing four or more
or fewer than 16 living units.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on, or connected to the ground.
('72 Code, § 455:10) (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord. 1996-795,
passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2001-956, passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-
10-02; Am. Ord. 2002-987, passed 12-16-02; Am. Ord. 2004-1021, passed 11-15-04;
Am. Ord. 2005-1036, passed 5-23-05; Am. Ord. 2007-1068, passed 2-20-07)
§ 117.43 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to operate a rental dwelling in the city without first having
obtained a license from the City Manager. Each general housing unit and each
apartment complex must register annually with the City Manager. No license is
required under this subchapter when an owner occupies a living unit as a
permanent residence. Failure to obtain a rental license may result in the
issuance of administrative citations and fines and any other civil or criminal
penalties available to the city.
('72 Code, § 455:15) (Am. Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2001-956,
passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2004-1021, passed
11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2007-1068, passed 2-20-07; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-
08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.44 LICENSE PERIOD.
   Apartment licenses are valid from July 1 through June 30 of the following
year. General housing unit licenses and licenses for small apartments are valid
from October 1 through September 30.
('72 Code, § 455:16) (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2001-956, passed
8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2002-987, passed 12-16-02;
Am. Ord. 2004-1021, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1036, passed 5-23-05; Am.
Ord. 2007-1068, passed 2-20-07)
§ 117.45 FEES.
   License fees are in the amount set by the Council.
('72 Code, § 455:17) (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Res. 2001-188, passed
8-13-01)
Cross-reference:
   License fees, see Appendix
§ 117.46 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for licenses must be made in writing to the City Manager
by the owner or operator. Failure to complete a license application may result
in delay or suspension of the application process and civil and criminal
penalties. In cases where the owner of a rental dwelling lives outside a 50-
mile radius of the rental dwelling, the owner must name an operator living
within the 50-mile radius of the rental dwelling.
   (B)   All applications must specify the following:
      (1)   Owner's name, address and telephone number. In cases where the
owner is an individual, one of the following is required: driver's license
number, state identification number, or date of birth.
      (2)   Operator's name, address, phone number and driver's license number
or state identification number or date of birth.
      (3)   Signature of owner or operator.
      (4)   Name, address and phone number of management company, manager or
managing officer.
      (5)   Legal address of the rental dwelling.
      (6)   Number and type of living units within the rental dwelling.
      (7)   Date of the most recent certificate of compliance.
      (8)   E-mail address, when available.
('72 Code, § 455:26) (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2001-956, passed
8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2004-1021, passed 11-15-
04; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)
§ 117.47 LICENSE TRANSFER.
   No licensee has the right to transfer a license to any other person or
property.
('72 Code, § 455:36) (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.48 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Rental licenses must be posted in every rental dwelling. The license for
each apartment building must be conspicuously posted at or near the front
entrance, a public corridor, hallway or lobby of the apartment building for
which it is issued. The annual license for general housing units must be posted
within the dwelling.
('72 Code, § 455:40) (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord. 1990-667
(A), passed 12-17-90; Am. Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2002-975,
passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.481 REPORT CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP.
   Licensees must report to the City Manager any changes in the identity of the
owner of a rental dwelling, including a change in the majority shareholder or
shareholders and officers in the case of corporations. Licensees must report a
change in ownership at least 30 days before closing.
(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2003-1007, passed 10-27-03; Am. Ord.
2004-1021, passed 11-15-04)
§ 117.482 TENANT REGISTER.
   Licensees must, as a continuing obligation of a license, maintain a current
register of tenants and other persons who have a lawful right to occupancy of
rental dwellings within an apartment. In its application, the licensee must
designate the person or persons who will have possession of the register and
must promptly notify the City Manager of any change of the identity, address or
telephone numbers of such persons. The register must be available for
inspection by the City Manager at all times.
(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02)
§ 117.483 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS OF MANAGER.
   Licensees are responsible for the acts or omissions of their managers and
operators.
(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)
§ 117.484 NO RETALIATION.
   No licensee shall evict, threaten to evict or take any other punitive action
against any tenant by reason of good faith calls made by such tenant to law
enforcement agencies relating to criminal activity, suspected criminal
activity, suspicious occurrences or public safety concerns. This section shall
not prohibit the eviction of tenants for unlawful conduct of a tenant or
invitee of the tenant or violation of any rules, regulations or lease terms
other than a prohibition against contacting law enforcement agencies.
(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02)
§ 117.485 POINT OF CONVERSION INSPECTION.
   Whenever a dwelling is converted to a licensed rental dwelling, the dwelling
shall be licensed and inspected for compliance with the minimum standards set
forth in §
117.52 of this code. The fee for the conversion required by this section shall
be in the amount set by the City Council. This fee shall be in addition to the
annual rental license fee. This provision shall not apply to buildings
containing more than two dwelling units.
(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2003-1007, passed 10-27-03; Am. Ord.
2004-1021, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2008-1087, passed 5-27-08; Am. Ord. 2008-
1093, passed 8-25-08)
§ 117.486 TENANT NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide housing stability,
protection and notification to tenants in rental housing during an ownership
transition. This section requires notice to tenants and to the city whenever
title to property containing three or more rental housing units is conveyed or
otherwise transferred. Under the ordinance the owner would be required to pay
resident relocation benefits if they take certain actions during the three-
month tenant notification period and the resident needs to move as a result of
that action.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Defined terms remain defined terms, whether or not capitalized.
      CAUSE. The tenant or a member of the tenant's household materially
violated a term of the lease or rental agreement, or violated an applicable
federal, state, or local law or regulation.
      HOUSING BUILDING. A building with three or more rental units.
      HOUSING UNIT. A rental unit within a housing building.
      MATERIAL CHANGE. A change in the terms of a lease that significantly
limits or restricts the tenants' use and enjoyment of a housing unit or the
housing building.
      TENANT NOTIFICATION PERIOD. The period that commences on the date when a
written notice of the transfer of ownership of a housing building is sent to
each housing unit tenant pursuant to division (C) of this section and ends on
the last day of the third full calendar month following the date on which the
notice was sent. In no case shall the tenant notification period be less than
90 days.
   (C)   Notice.
      (1)   Notice to tenants. Whenever title to property containing a housing
building is conveyed or otherwise transferred, the new owner must within 30
days after the real estate closing deliver written notice to each housing unit
tenant of the housing building that the property is under new ownership. The
notice must include, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the new
owner.
         (b)   The following statement: "Brooklyn Park City Code §
117.486 provides for a three month tenant notification period for housing unit
tenants. Under this section, a housing unit tenant may be entitled to
relocation assistance from the new owner if, during the three month tenant
notification period, the new owner:
            1.   Terminates or does not renew the tenant's rental agreement
without cause;
            2.   Raises the rent and the tenant terminates his or her rental
agreement due to the rent increase;
            3.   Requires existing tenants to be rescreened or comply with new
screening criteria and the owner or tenant terminates the tenant's lease; or
            4.   Imposes a material change in the terms of the lease and the
owner or tenant terminates or does not renew the tenant's lease.
         (c)   Whether there will be any rent increase within the three month
tenant notification period and, if so, the amount of the rent increase and the
date the rent increase will take effect.
         (d)   Whether the new owner will require existing housing unit tenants
to be rescreened or comply with new screening criteria during the three month
tenant notification period and, if so, a copy of the applicable screening
criteria.
         (e)   Whether the new owner will, without the tenant's consent, impose
a material change in the terms of the lease during the three month tenant
notification period and, if so, the language of the material change and
explanation of its effect.
         (f)   Whether the new owner will terminate or not renew rental
agreements without cause during the three month tenant notification period and,
if so, notice to the affected housing unit tenants whose rental agreements will
terminate and the date the rental agreements will terminate.
         (g)   Whether the new owner intends to increase rent, require existing
tenants to be rescreened to determine compliance with existing or modified
residency screening criteria, terminate or not renew housing unit rental
agreements, or impose a material change in the terms of the lease without cause
within 30 days immediately following the tenant notification period.
         (h)   The date that the tenant notification period will expire.
      (2)   Language requirement. Each notice required by this section shall
contain an advisory that reads as follows: "This is important information about
your housing. If you do not understand it, have someone translate it for you
now, or request a translation from your landlord." This advisory must be stated
in the notice in the following languages: English, Hmong, and Spanish. Upon
written request by a tenant that identifies the tenant's native language, the
owner must provide a written translation of the notice in that language.
      (3)   Notice to the city. The new owner must deliver a copy of the notice
required by division (C)(1) of this section to the City Community Development
Department at the same time that the notice is delivered to tenants.
      (4)   Required tenant notification period. The new owner of a housing
building must not terminate or not renew a tenant's rental agreement without
cause, raise rent, rescreen existing tenants, or impose a material change to
the terms of the lease during the tenant notification period without providing
the notices required by division (C) of this section.
   (D)   Relocation assistance.
      (1)   When required. A new owner of a housing building must pay
relocation assistance to housing unit tenants if, during the three month tenant
notification period, the new owner:
         (a)   Terminates or does not renew the tenant's rental agreement
without cause;
         (b)   Raises the rent and the tenant terminates his or her rental
agreement due to the rent increase;
         (c)   Requires existing tenants to be rescreened or comply with new
screening criteria and the owner or tenant terminates the tenant's lease; or
         (d)   Imposes a material change in the terms of the lease and the
owner or tenant terminates or does not renew the tenant's lease.
      (2)   Amount. Relocation assistance is an amount equal to three months of
the current monthly lease rent.
      (3)   When paid. The new owner shall, when required, pay relocation
assistance to the tenant of a housing unit within 30 days after receiving
tenant's written notice of termination of the lease or within 30 days after the
owner notifies the tenant that the lease will be terminated or not renewed.
   (E)   Tenant complaints.
      (1)   A tenant of a housing unit who believes the new owner has not
provided the tenant the notifications required under this section may submit a
notice of violation to the city. The purpose of the notice is to inform the
city of an alleged violation of this section to assist the city in determining
whether to impose an administrative penalty provided for in this section. The
city is not required to take any particular action in response to a notice of
violation and any enforcement action it does take shall be on behalf of the
city, not the tenant. Filing a notice of violation does not prohibit the tenant
from pursuing any remedy available to the tenant under law.
   (F)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of divisions (C) and (D) of this section is an
administrative offense that may be subject to an administrative citation and
civil penalties as provided in §
117.52. Notwithstanding any provision of §
117.52, the penalty for a violation of divisions (C) and/or (D) shall be the
sum of the applicable amount of relocation assistance plus $500.
      (2)   A violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense for
each dwelling unit affected.
      (3)   Within 30 days after a person pays the penalty in division (F)(1)
of this section to the city, the city shall pay to the displaced tenant of the
housing unit in which the violation occurred an amount equal to the relocation
assistance amount specified in division (D) of this section.
(Ord. 2019-1245, passed 10-28-19)
§ 117.49 CONDUCT ON RENTAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the owner/licensee to see that persons
occupying a rental dwelling conduct themselves in such a manner as not to cause
the premises to be disorderly. For purposes of this section, a rental dwelling
is disorderly when any of the following types of conduct occur under any of the
following provisions:
      (1)   §§
92.05 and
92.06 of this code (animal noise and public nuisances).
      (2)   §
134.03 of this code (noisy parties).
      (3)   
Chapter 135 of this code (unlawful possession, delivery or purchase) or
violation of laws relating to the possession of controlled substances as
defined in M.S. §§ 152.01 et seq.
      (4)   §§
134.15 et seq. of this code (disorderly conduct) or laws relating to disorderly
conduct as defined in M.S. § 609.72.
      (5)   §§
112.030 through
112.069 of this code (unlawful sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 malt liquor)
or laws relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor as defined in M.S. §§
340A.701, 340A.702 or 340A.703.
      (6)   Laws relating to prostitution or acts relating to prostitution as
defined in M.S. § 609.321, Subdivision 9 and 609.324, housing individuals
engaged in prostitution.
      (7)   
Chapter 136 of this code (weapons) or laws relating to unlawful use or
possession of a firearm as defined in M.S. §§ 609.66 et seq., on the licensed
premises.
      (8)   §
134.01 of this code (assaults) or laws relating to assault.
      (9)   Laws relating to contributing to the need for protection or
services or delinquency of a minor as defined in M.S. § 260C, et seq.
      (10)   M.S. § 609.33, relating to owning, leasing, operating, managing,
maintaining or conducting a disorderly house or inviting or attempting to
invite others to visit or remain in a disorderly house.
      (11)   M.S. § 609.50 which prohibits interference with a police officer.
      (12)   M.S. § 609.713 which prohibits terroristic threats.
      (13)   M.S. § 609.715 which prohibits presence of unlawful assembly.
      (14)   M.S. § 609.71 which prohibits riot.
      (15)   M.S. §§ 609.226 and 347.56, relating to dangerous dogs.
      (16)   M.S. § 609.78 which prohibits interfering with "911" phone calls.
      (17)   M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.76, which prohibits gambling.
      (18)   M.S. § 243.166 (Predatory Offender Registration).
      (19)   M.S. § 609.229 (Crime committed for benefit of a gang).
      (20)   M.S. § 609.26, subdivision 1(8) (causing or contributing to a
child being a runaway).
      (21)   M.S. § 609.903 (Racketeering).
   (B)   Conduct enforcement. The City Manager is responsible for enforcement
and administration of this section.
     (C)   Upon determination by the City Manager that a rental dwelling was
used in a disorderly manner, as described in paragraph (A) of this section, the
City Manager must give notice to the owner/licensee of the violation and direct
that steps be taken to prevent further violations.
   (D)   If a second instance of disorderly use of a rental dwelling occurs
within the 12-month period following an incident for which a notice in
paragraph (C) of this section was given, the City Manager must notify the
owner/licensee of the violation and must also require the owner/licensee to
submit a written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken to
prevent further disorderly use. This written report must be submitted to the
City Manager within ten business days of receipt of the notice of disorderly
use and must detail all actions taken by the owner/licensee in response to all
notices of disorderly use within the preceding 12 months.
   (E)   (1)   If a third instance of disorderly use of a rental dwelling
occurs within the 12-month period following any two previous instances of
disorderly use for which notices were given, the City Manager must notify the
owner/licensee of the violation and must also require the owner/licensee to
submit a written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken, to
prevent further disorderly use. The 12-month period begins on the date of the
police report generated in response to the first instance of disorderly use.
The written report must be submitted to the City Manager within ten business
days of receipt of the notice of disorderly use and must detail all actions
taken in response to all notices of disorderly use within the preceding 12
months.
      (2)   After the third instance of disorderly use, the City Manager may
deny, revoke, suspend or not renew the license for the premises. Before such an
action, the City Manager must give to the owner/licensee written notice of a
hearing before the City Hearing Officer to consider such denial, revocation,
suspension or non-renewal. Such written notice must specify all violations of
this section, and must state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing.
The hearing must be held no less than ten days and no more than 30 days after
giving such notice.
      (3)   Following the hearing, the City Manager may deny, revoke, suspend
or decline to renew the license for all or any part or parts of the rental
dwelling or may grant a license upon such terms and conditions as it deems
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section.
      (4)   Appeals of any decision made by the City Manager must be filed in
Hennepin County District Court.
      (5)   Upon a decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a license for
violations of this section, the owner/licensee will not be eligible for any new
rental licenses for a period determined by the City Manager, but not to exceed
one year. Any person who has had two or more licenses revoked, suspended,
denied or not renewed for violations of this section, will not be eligible for
any new rental licenses for a period determined by the City Manager, but not to
exceed two years.
   (F)   No adverse license action shall be imposed where the instance of
disorderly use occurred during the pendency of eviction proceedings (unlawful
detainer) or within 30 days of notice given to a tenant to vacate the premises
where the disorderly use was related to conduct by that tenant or by other
occupants or guests of the tenant's unit. Eviction proceedings are not a bar to
adverse license action, however, unless they are diligently pursued by the
licensee.
   (G)   A determination that a rental dwelling has been used in a disorderly
manner as described in paragraph (A) of this section shall be made upon a fair
preponderance of the evidence to support such a determination. It is not
necessary that criminal charges be brought in order to support a determination
of disorderly use nor does the fact of dismissal or acquittal of such a
criminal charge operate as a bar to adverse license action under this section.
   (H)   All notices given by the city under this section must be personally
served on the owner/licensee, sent by certified mail to the owner/licensee's
last known address or, if neither method of service effects notice, by posting
on a conspicuous place on the rental dwelling.
   (I)   Enforcement actions provided in this section are not exclusive, and
the City Manager may take any action with respect to a licensee, a tenant, or a
rental dwelling as is authorized by the city code, state or federal law. The
City Manager may postpone or discontinue any enforcement action, including an
action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license, if it appears that the
owner/licensee has taken appropriate measures to prevent further instances of
disorderly use.
('72 Code, § 455:50) (Ord. 1992-710, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2002- 975, passed 6-
10-02; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 2016-1208, passed 9-26-16)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.491 MINNESOTA CRIME FREE MULTI-HOUSING PROGRAM.
   (A)   The city has established a rental owner educational program consistent
with the Minnesota Crime Free Multi-housing Program. This educational program
will include, but is not limited to information such as: applicant screening,
rental agreements, identification of illegal activity, eviction process, the
roles of working with the police, crime prevention, code enforcement and public
health, licensing and inspections, and active property management. The
following are requirements of the program:
      (1)   All owners or operators must attend one of these regularly-
scheduled seminars within one year of the issuance of a new rental license.
      (2)   Owners or operators possessing rental licenses issued prior to the
enactment of this section will be required to attend the Crime Free Housing
Program within one year of the renewal their rental license.
      (3)   The owner or operator of a property notified of a third instance of
disorderly use under §
117.49 will be required to attend the next available Brooklyn Park Crime Free
Housing Program to maintain their rental license.
      (4)   Program attendees will be required to pay a participation fee in an
amount determined to cover the direct cost of the program.
   (B)   An owner whose only rental dwelling is a single-family dwelling
homesteaded by a relative is exempted from the program.
   (C)   All tenant leases signed following the enactment of this section,
except for state-licensed residential facilities and subject to all preemptory
state and federal laws, shall contain the following Crime Free Housing Addendum
language:
      (1)   Resident, any members of the resident's household or a guest or
other person affiliated with resident shall not engage in criminal activity,
including drug-related criminal activity, on or near the premises.
      (2)   Resident, any members of the resident 's household or a guest or
other person affiliated with resident shall not engage in any act intended to
facilitate criminal activity, including drug-related criminal activity, on or
near the premises.
      (3)   Resident or members of the household will not permit the dwelling
unit to be used for, or to facilitate criminal activity, including drug-related
criminal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging in such
activity is a member of the household, or a guest.
      (4)   Resident, any member of the resident's household or a guest, or
other person affiliated with the resident shall not engage in the unlawful
manufacturing, selling, using, storing, keeping, or giving of a controlled
substance at any locations, whether on or near the premises or otherwise.
      (5)   Violation of the above provisions shall be a material and
irreparable violation of the lease and good cause for immediate termination of
tenancy.
      (6)   The term DRUG RELATED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY means the illegal
manufacture sale, distribution, use, or possession with intent to manufacture,
sell, distribute, or use of a controlled substance or any substance represented
to be drugs (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substance Act [21
U.S.C. 802]).
      (7)   Non-exclusive remedies. The Crime Free Housing Addendum language is
in addition to all other terms of the lease and does not limit or replace any
other provisions.
   (D)   Upon determination by the City Manager that a licensed premises or
unit within a licensed premises was used in violation of the Crime Free Housing
Addendum language, the City Manager shall notify the owner and property manager
of the violation. The owner or property manager shall notify the tenant or
tenants within ten days of the notice of violation of the Crime Free Housing
Addendum language and proceed with the termination of the tenancy of all
tenants occupying the unit. The owner shall not enter into a new lease with the
evicted tenant for a period of one year after the eviction. If the owner or
property manager fails to comply with this section, the City Manager may
initiate an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew the license following
the same process as outlined in §
117.49(E)(2) - (5).
(Ord. 208-1090, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 2016-1208, passed 9-26-16)
§ 117.50 LANDSCAPE CONDITION.
   Each rental dwelling must be maintained by its owner, occupant, or operator
so that the yards, open spaces and parking facilities are kept in a safe and
attractive condition. Where a conditional use permit has been granted, the
landscaping shown on the approved landscaping plan is considered as minimal and
must be maintained accordingly. Any deviation to species or material shall be
equal to or better than originally approved. In addition, adequate lighting
facilities must be provided and operated between the hours of sunset and
sunrise; and snow plowing or snow shoveling must be regularly accomplished to
maintain all sidewalk and parking areas in a safe and passable condition.
('72 Code, § 455:70) (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord. 2002-975,
passed 6-10-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.51 SAFETY FROM FIRE.
   An owner or operator of a rental dwelling is responsible to comply with the
applicable provisions of the Fire Prevention Code of the city in keeping open
all fire lanes established by the city.
('72 Code, § 455:75) (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord. 2002-975,
passed 6-10-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.52 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Responsibility. It is the responsibility of the owner and operator/
manager to be in compliance with this subchapter, other city ordinances and
state laws.
   (B)   Maintenance standards. Every rental dwelling must maintain the
standards in the city property maintenance code,
Chapter 106 of this code, in addition to any other requirement of the
ordinances of the city or special permits issued by the city, or the laws of
the State of Minnesota.
   (C)   Inspections and investigations.
      (1)   The City Manager is authorized to make inspections and to take any
other action reasonably necessary to enforce this subchapter.
      (2)   All designated agents authorized to inspect have the authority to
enter, at all reasonable times, any rental dwelling. Prior to entering a rental
dwelling, the designated agent must first present proper credentials and
request entry. If any owner, operator, occupant or other person(s) in charge of
a rental dwelling fails or refuses to permit access and entry to the rental
dwelling, or any part thereof, the designated agent may, upon showing that
probable cause exists for the inspection and for the issuance of an order
directing compliance with the inspection requirements of this section, petition
and obtain such order from a court of competent jurisdiction in order to secure
entry.
      (3)   Compliance orders must be written in accordance with § 107.00 of
the International Property Maintenance Code.
      (4)   There is no fee charged for an initial inspection to determine the
existence of a housing maintenance code violation, nor any fee for the first
reinspection to determine compliance with an order to correct a housing
maintenance code violation.
         (a)   A fee will be charged for each subsequent re-inspection
occurring after the due date for compliance with an order, as determined by the
City Manager. The amount of the re-inspection fee will be set by resolution of
the council as listed in the Appendix of this code.
         (b)   The re-inspection fees prescribed above are to be billed
directly to the owner or operator/manager for the property upon completion of
any re-inspection for which a fee is required. Failure to pay such fees is
grounds for revocation, suspension, or non-issuance of a rental dwelling
license. This subdivision is not to be considered the exclusive method of
collecting re-inspection fees and does not preclude collection by other lawful
means.
         (c)   Every notice of violation and order to correct housing code
violations must contain a clear and conspicuous explanation of the policy in
this section requiring re-inspection fees for subsequent re-inspection.
         (d)   The City Manager may waive a re-inspection fee in case of error,
mistake, injustice, or other good cause.
   (D)   Revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal of license.
      (1)   The City Manager may revoke, suspend, deny or decline to renew any
license issued under this subchapter for part or all of a rental dwelling upon
any of the following grounds:
         (a)   False statements on any application or other information or
report required by this subchapter to be given by the applicant or licensee;
         (b)   Failure to pay any application, penalty, reinspection or
reinstatement fee required either by this section or City Council resolution;
         (c)   Failure to correct deficiencies in the time specified in a
compliance order;
         (d)   Failure to allow an authorized inspection of a rental dwelling;
         (e)   Violation of an owner's duties under M.S. §§ 299C.66 to 299C.71
("Kari Koskinen Manager Background Check Act");
         (f)   Failure to comply with the Minnesota Crime Free Multi-housing
Program requirements in §
117.491.
         (g)   Any other violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   Before the City Manager may revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a
license, written notice must be sent to the applicant or owner/licensee setting
forth the alleged grounds for the potential action. The notice must also
specify a date for a hearing before the Hearing Officer, which must not be less
than ten days from the date of the notice. At the hearing, the owner/licensee
may present witnesses in their defense. The Hearing Officer may give due regard
to the frequency and seriousness of violations, the ease with which such
violations could have been cured or avoided and good faith efforts to comply
and shall issue written findings.
      (3)   Upon a decision to revoke, deny or not renew a license, the owner/
licensee will not be eligible for any new rental licenses for a period
determined by the City Manager, but not to exceed one year.
      (4)   A decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a license or
application will specify the part or parts of the rental dwelling to which it
applies. Until a license is reissued or reinstated, no rental units becoming
vacant in such part or parts of the rental dwelling may be relet or occupied.
Revocation, suspension or non-renewal of a license will not excuse the owner/
licensee from compliance with all terms of this section for as long as any
units in the rental dwelling are occupied.
      (5)   Failure to comply with all terms of this section during the term of
revocation, suspension or non-renewal is a misdemeanor and grounds for
extension of the term of revocation, suspension or continuation of non-renewal
of the license.
      (6)   Appeals of any decision made by the City Manager must be filed in
Hennepin County District Court.
   (E)   [Reserved].
   (F)   Summary action.
      (1)   When the conduct of any owner/licensee or their agent,
representative, employee or lessee or the condition of their rental dwelling is
detrimental to the public health, sanitation, safety and general welfare of the
community at large or residents of the rental dwelling as to constitute a
nuisance, fire hazard or other unsafe or dangerous condition and thus give rise
to an emergency, the City Manager has the authority to summarily condemn or
close off individual units or such areas of the rental dwelling. Notice of
summary condemnation must be posted at the location of the rental dwelling
license and at the units or areas affected and shall indicate the units or
areas affected. Upon notice of summary condemnation, the City Manager may deny,
revoke, suspend or decline to renew the license for all or any part or parts of
the rental dwelling or may impose terms and conditions as necessary to remedy
the nuisance, fire hazard, or other unsafe or dangerous condition.
      (2)   Any person aggrieved by a decision or action of the City Manager
under paragraph (F) shall be entitled to appeal by filing a notice of appeal in
the office of the City Manager. The appeal must be filed within ten days of the
City Manager's decision. The City Manager will schedule a date for a hearing
before the Hearing Officer and notify the aggrieved person of the date. At the
hearing, the owner/licensee may present witnesses in their defense. The Hearing
Officer may give due regard to the frequency and seriousness of violations, the
ease with which such violations could have been cured or avoided and good faith
efforts to comply and shall issue written findings.
      (3)   The decision of the City Manager is not voided by the filing of
such appeal. Only after the Hearing Officer has held its hearing will the
decision or action of the City Manager be affected.
   (G)   Posting of unlicensed properties. Any dwelling found in violation of §
117.43 of this subchapter may be posted with a placard near or upon the main
entrance of the dwelling and must be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE
Property Address
This property is in violation of Brooklyn Park Ordinance Section 117:43,
License
Required. Failure to obtain a rental license will result in legal action. Any
unauthorized
person removing or defacing this notice will be prosecuted.
Division...Designated Agent...Date
('72 Code, § 455:78) (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2001- 956, passed
8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2003-1007, passed 10-27-
03; Am. Ord. 2004-1021, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1036, passed 5-23-05;
Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 2016-1208, passed 9-26-16; Am. Ord.
2023-1289, passed 6-12-23)
§ 117.521 ASSESSMENT OF UNPAID ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   Any unpaid administrative penalty for failure to comply with the rental
licensing provisions in §§
117.40 through
117.52 of this code may be assessed against the property in the manner set
forth in §
37.08 of this code.
(Ord. 2009-1103, passed 9-8-09)
§ 117.53 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
   The owner of any rental dwelling is responsible for the removal of snow and
ice from parking lots, driveways, steps and walkways on the premises.
Individual snowfalls of three inches or more, or successive snowfalls
accumulating to a depth of three inches must be removed from walkways and steps
within 48 hours after the cessation of the snowfall.
(Ord. 2001-956, passed 8-13-01)
 Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.54 RENTAL DWELLING SELF-ASSESSMENT AND GOOD MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Every licensee, operator, and manager of an apartment or small
apartment must establish a written self-assessment program that includes
policies and procedures related to:
      (1)   Tenant and landlord responsibilities;
      (2)   Routine maintenance and response to requests for service, including
a plan for relocating renters if major repairs are needed;
      (3)   A capital reinvestment plan that includes the restoration or
replacement of major systems;
      (4)   Emergency response to life safety and security issues (i.e. heat
loss, power outages, and gas leaks);
      (5)   Treatment and proper remediation of environmental contaminants
(i.e. asbestos, lead, mold and radon);
      (6)   Water and moisture events, pest infestations and unsanitary
conditions; employee training procedures; and
      (7)   Employee training procedures.
   (B)   Every licensee, operator, and manager of an apartment or small
apartment must utilize best management practices, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Communication with occupants on a regular basis using multiple
forms of communication such as a website, flyers, texts, and emails;
      (2)   Providing mandatory 24-hour on call service for emergencies;
      (3)   Transparency and fair treatment in its guest parking and towing
practices;
      (4)   Implementing a waste management program that includes adequate and
regularly scheduled pickups to prevent accumulation of waste in common spaces
and on the property; and
      (5)   Utilizing management and maintenance staff who routinely and
regularly walk the site to identify and correct maintenance and cleanliness
issues.
   (C)   Upon request by city staff, a licensee, operator, or manager must
provide evidence that implementation of the self-assessment program occurs on a
regular basis and that the best management practices are being followed.
   (D)   Apartments with 100 or more dwelling units must have on-site a person
knowledgeable about the management of the property and the maintenance program.
The person must be available for regular in-person office hours a minimum of 20
hours per week, including at least four hours after 5:00 p.m. on weekdays or
four hours on Saturday. The office hours must be posted in a conspicuous
location on the property. The city may approve alternative arrangements that
provide adequate in-person availability.
   (E)   The city may require a live-in caretaker to reside in an apartment
complex in situations where the city identifies significant deficiencies in
property management or maintenance affecting the life, health, and safety of
occupants.
(Ord. 2023-1289, passed 6-12-23)
CHAPTER 118: EXCAVATIONS AND EARTH MOVING
Section
   
118.01   Permit required
   
118.02   Exceptions
   
118.03   Application
   
118.04   Filing and fees
   
118.05   Requirements
   
118.06   Violations and nuisances
   
118.07   Land reclamation permit
   
118.08   Conditions of permit
   
118.09   Prohibited materials
§ 118.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to remove, store or
excavate rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material in the amount of
more than 200 cubic yards without obtaining an earth moving permit from the
City Engineer.
('72 Code, § 340:00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Basements. No permit is required for the excavation, removal or
storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material for the
purpose of the foundation, cellar or basement of some immediately pending
superstructure to be erected, built, or placed thereon contemporaneously with,
or immediately following such excavation, removal or storage, providing a
building permit has been issued.
   (B)   Road construction. No permit is required for such excavations, removal
or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material as may be
required by the state, county or city authorities in connection with the
construction or maintenance of roads and highways.
('72 Code, § 340:05)
§ 118.03 APPLICATION.
   The application must be made in writing on such form as the city may from
time to time designate, and must include such information as may be required by
the City Engineer and shall contain, among other things:
   (A)   The correct legal description of the premises where the excavation,
removal or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material
shall or does occur.
   (B)   The name and address of the applicant and owner of the land.
   (C)   The purpose of the removal, storage or excavation.
   (D)   The estimated time required to complete the removal, storage or
excavation.
   (E)   The highways, streets or other public ways within the city upon and
along which the material excavated or removed is to be transported.
   (F)   A map or plat of the proposed pit or excavation to be made showing the
confines or limits thereof together with the proposed finished elevations based
on sea level readings.
('72 Code, § 340:10)
§ 118.04 FILING AND FEES.
   Each application must be filed with the City Engineer. A permit fee in an
amount set by the Council from time to time must accompany each application.
('72 Code, § 340:15)
Cross-reference:
   License fees, see Appendix
§ 118.05 REQUIREMENTS.
   As a pre-requisite to the granting of a permit, or after a permit has been
granted, the applicant or the owner of the premises must comply with the
requirements of the following:
   (A)   Properly fence any pit or excavation to protect the safety of the
public.
   (B)   Slope the banks, and otherwise guard and keep any pit or excavation in
such condition as not to be dangerous because of sliding or caving banks.
   (C)   Properly drain, fill or level off any pit or excavation so as to make
the same safe and healthful.
   (D)   Reimburse the city for the cost of periodic inspections by the City
Engineer, or other city employee, for the purpose of seeing that the terms
under which the permit has been issued are being complied with.
   (E)   The permit must include as a condition thereof a plan for a finished
grade which will not adversely affect the surrounding land or the development
of the site on which the excavating is being conducted, and the permitted route
of trucks moving to and from the site.
   (F)   Post a surety bond, in such form and sum as the city may require,
running to the city, conditioned to pay the city the cost and expense of
repairing any highways, streets, or other public ways within the city made
necessary by the special burden resulting from hauling and transporting thereon
by the applicant in the removal of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like
material, the amount of such cost to be determined by the City Engineer; and
conditioned further to comply with all the requirements of this subchapter and
the particular permit, and to save the city free and harmless from any and all
suits or claims for damages resulting from the negligent excavation, removal or
storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay, or other like material within the
city.
   (G)   And such other requirements as the City Engineer or Council from time
to time deems proper and necessary for the protection of the citizens and the
general welfare.
   (H)   Such permit must not be granted for a period of longer than 12 months,
but may be renewed by the City Engineer.
('72 Code, § 340:20)
§ 118.06 VIOLATIONS AND NUISANCES.
   A person, firm or corporation that refuses, neglects or fails to comply with
any requirement made of that person, firm or corporation under the provisions
of §
118.05 as promptly as same can be reasonably done, is guilty of a penal offense
and the Council may revoke the permit issued, and in addition to other
penalties prescribed herein, the failure to comply with such requirement, after
notice, and the continuing excavation, removal or storage of rock, sand,
gravel, dirt, clay, or other like material on the premises is prima facie
evidence of a public nuisance and may be abated by court action.
('72 Code, § 340:25)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see §§
94.01 et seq.
§ 118.07 LAND RECLAMATION PERMIT.
   Land reclamation under this subchapter is the reclaiming of land by
depositing of material so as to elevate the grade. Land reclamation is
permitted only after issuance of a special permit in all districts on any lot
or parcel upon which 200 cubic yards or more of fill is to be deposited for
land reclamation. Fill materials shall be approved by the City Engineer as
suitable to the final use of the property. Fill materials must conform to the
following minimum requirements: The material must not include garbage or toxic
materials and must be stable, non-combustible and not support decay.
('72 Code, § 340:30) (Am. Ord. 1981-372(A), passed 12-14-81)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.08 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   The permit must include as a condition thereof a finished grade plan which
will not adversely affect the adjacent land, and as a condition thereof must
regulate the type of fill permitted, plans for rodent control, fire control and
general maintenance of the site and adjacent area and make provision for
control of material dispersed from wind or hauling material to or from the
site.
('72 Code, § 340:35)
§ 118.09 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   The dumping of materials for the purposes of land reclamation must not be a
violation of any other ordinance or code provisions of the city, including but
not limited to dumping and sanitary landfill, provided that the person engaged
in such land reclamation must have first secured a special permit in accordance
with the provisions of §
118.07. Any area of the city which has been licensed as a public dump by the
city shall not be subject to this section or §
118.07.
('72 Code, § 340:40) (Am. Ord. 1981-355(A), passed 3-23-81; Am. Ord. 1981-372
(A), passed 12-14-81)
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 119: PAWNBROKERS AND PEDDLERS
Section
Pawnbrokers
   
119.01   Purpose
   
119.02   Definitions
   
119.03   License required
   
119.04   License fees
   
119.05   Investigation fees
   
119.06   Expiration of license
   
119.07   Application required
   
119.08   Bond
   
119.09   Records required
   
119.10   Daily reports to police
   
119.11   Receipt required
   
119.12   Redemption period
   
119.13   Holding period
   
119.14   Police order to hold property
   
119.15   Inspection of items
   
119.16   Labels required
   
119.17   Prohibited acts
   
119.18   Denial, suspension, or revocation
   
119.19   Payments by check
   
119.20   Business at only one place
   
119.21   Applicable laws
Peddlers and Solicitors
   
119.30   Definitions
   
119.31   Exceptions to definitions; license exemptions
   
119.32   Licensing
   
119.33   License ineligibility
   
119.34   Suspension and revocation
   
119.35   Transferability
   
119.36   Prohibited activities
   
119.37   Exclusion by placard
Itinerant Produce Merchant
   
119.40   Definitions
   
119.41   Permit required
   
119.42   Time period
   
119.43   Location
   
119.44   Time of day
   
119.45   Itinerant produce merchant limit
   
119.46   Application
   
119.47   Transfer
   
119.48   Nuisance
   
119.49   Loud noises and speaking devices
   
119.50   Signs
   
119.51   Duty of Community Development and Police Departments to enforce
   
119.52   Revocation of permit
PAWNBROKERS
§ 119.01 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that pawnbrokers can provide an opportunity for the
commission and concealment of crimes, because such businesses have the ability
to receive and transfer stolen property easily and quickly. The City Council
also finds that consumer protection regulation is warranted with transactions
involving pawnbrokers. The purpose of this subchapter is to prevent pawn
businesses from being used as facilities for the commission of crimes and to
assure that such businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards,
thereby protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the city. It is also the purpose of this section to help the
Police Department regulate such businesses and to decrease and stabilize costs
associated with the regulation of the pawn industry and to assist the Police
Department in the identification of criminal activities in the pawn industry
through the timely collection and sharing of pawn transaction information.
('72 Code, § 468:00) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker
except renewals, redemptions, or extensions of existing pawns on items
previously reported and continuously in the licensee’s possession is a billable
transaction.
   CHATTEL. A movable article of personal property.
   CHOSE IN ACTION. A thing in action and a right of bringing an action or
right to recover a debt or money. Right of proceeding in a court of law to
procure payment of sum of money, or right to recover a personal chattel or a
sum of money by action.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person, who, either as a principal, agent, or employee lends
money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, or
who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable thing on
condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who lends
money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of
the property or any part thereof so mortgaged.
   PAWNSHOP. The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly
conducts business.
   PAWN TRANSACTION. Any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase
of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left with the
pawnbroker and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price
within a fixed period of time.
   PLEDGED GOODS. Tangible personal property other than choses in action,
securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness, purchased by,
deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a
pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity, however
organized.
   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION. Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which
merchandise is received through a pawn or in which a pawn is renewed, extended,
or redeemed, is reportable except:
      (1)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a
merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established permanent place of
business, and the retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker
maintains a record of that purchase or consignment that describes each item,
and must mark each item in a way that relates it to that transaction record.
      (2)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by
pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods
have expired.
   TRUE COPY. A copy consistent with fact or reality, not false or erroneous.
Reliable, accurate, real, and genuine.
('72 Code, § 468:05) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for a person to conduct, operate or engage in the business of
a pawnbroker or otherwise portray the person as a pawnbroker without having
first obtained a valid license authorizing engagement in the business. No
license may be transferred to a different location or a different person. In
the case of the death of a licensee, the personal representative of the
licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days after
the licensee’s death. Issuance of a license under this section will not relieve
the licensee from obtaining any other licenses required to conduct business at
the same or any other locations.
('72 Code, § 468:10) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.04 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The annual license fees for a license will be as set forth in the
Appendix to this code. If the application is made during the license year, a
license may be issued for the remainder of the license year for a monthly pro
rata fee. An unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a complete month.
   (B)   The billable transaction license fee will be as set forth in the
Appendix.
   (C)   Billable transaction fees will be billed monthly and are due and
payable within 30 days. Failure to do so is a violation of this subchapter.
('72 Code, § 468:15) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.05 INVESTIGATION FEES.
   An applicant for a new license under this section, or for the renewal of an
existing license that is more than six months past due, will pay an
investigation fee as set forth in the Appendix to this code at the time an
original application is submitted. This investigation fee will not be subject
to refund or proration. If the expenses of the investigation relating to any
application exceed the minimum investigation fee, the city will notify the
applicant(s) of this fact and will require the applicant(s) to pay an
additional investigation fee that the city deems necessary to complete the
city's investigation of the applicant(s). The applicant(s) will pay such an
additional investigation fee within five days of being so notified. If such
additional investigation fee is not paid within the five day period, the city
will cease consideration of the application. Nonpayment of any additional
investigation fees required will be grounds for denial of the application.
('72 Code, § 468:20) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.06 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   The license is issued for a period of one year beginning on January 1 except
that if the application is made during the license year a license may be issued
for the remainder of the license year for a monthly pro rata fee. An unexpired
fraction of a month will be counted as a complete month. All licenses will
expire on December 31.
('72 Code, § 468:25) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.07 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Required information. An application form provided by the License
Division must be completed by every applicant for a new license or for a
renewal of an existing license. Every new applicant must provide all the
following information:
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual:
         (a)   The full legal name, place of birth, date of birth, street
resident address, home telephone number, and work telephone number of the
applicant.
         (b)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or
resident alien.
         (c)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places used.
         (d)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a
certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S. § 333.01.
         (e)   The street address at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding five years.
         (f)   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five years and the
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and partner(s), if any,
for the preceding five years.
         (g)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the
applicant must furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of all
such convictions.
         (h)   The physical description of the applicant.
         (i)   The applicant’s current personal financial statement and true
copies of the applicant’s federal and state tax returns for the two years prior
to application.
         (j)   If the applicant does not manage the business, the full legal
name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business, as well
as, the following information:
            1.   Place of birth, date of birth, street resident address, home
telephone number, and work telephone number of the manager(s) or other person
(s) in charge of the business.
            2.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.
            3.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business has ever used or has been known by a name other than the name(s)
listed as manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business. If so, the
name or names used and information concerning dates and places used.
            4.   The street address at which the manager(s) or other person(s)
in charge of the business has lived during the preceding five years.
            5.   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation
in which the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business has been
engaged during the preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of
their employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years.
            6.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any
ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, they must furnish information
as to the time, place, and offense of all such convictions.
            7.   The physical description(s) of the manager(s) or other person
(s) in charge of the business.
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership:
         (a)   The full legal name(s), address(es), place of birth(s), home
telephone number(s), and work telephone number(s) of all general or limited
partners.
         (b)   Whether all the general or limited partners are citizens of the
United States or resident aliens.
         (c)   Whether the general or limited partners have ever used or have
been known by a name other than the names listed as general or limited
partners, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates
and places used.
         (d)   The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each
partner in the licensed business.
         (e)   The street address at which the general or limited partners have
lived during the preceding five years.
         (f)   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the general or limited partners have been engaged during the preceding
five years and the name(s) and address(es) of the general or limited partner’s
employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years.
         (g)    A true copy of the partnership agreement will be submitted with
the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a
trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, a certified copy of such certificate must
be attached to the application.
         (h)    A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for
partnership for the two years prior to application.
         (i)   Whether any general or limited partner has ever been convicted
of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic
ordinance. If so, the partner(s) must furnish information as to the time,
place, and offense of all such convictions.
         (j)   If the partnership does not manage the business, the full legal
name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business, as well
as, the following information:
            1.   Place of birth, date of birth, street resident address, home
telephone number, and work telephone number of the manager(s) or other person
(s) in charge of the business.
            2.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.
            3.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business has ever used or has been known by a name other than the name(s)
listed as manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business. If so, the
name or names used and information concerning dates and places used.
            4.   The street address at which the manager(s) or other person(s)
in charge of the business has lived during the preceding five years.
            5.   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation
in which the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business has been
engaged during the preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of
their employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years.
            6.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any
ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, they must furnish information
as to the time, place, and offense of all such convictions.
            7.   The physical description(s) of the manager(s) or other person
(s) in charge of the business.
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
         (a)   The name of the corporation or business form, and if
incorporated, the state of incorporation.
         (b)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement, and bylaws will be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, must be attached.
         (c)   The full legal name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent
(s), as well as, the following information concerning each manager, proprietor,
or agent:
            1.   Place of birth, date of birth, street resident address, home
telephone number, and work telephone number of the manager(s), proprietor(s) or
agent(s).
            2.   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s) is a
citizen of the United States or resident alien.
            3.   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s) or agent(s) has ever
used or has been known by a name other than the name(s) listed as manager(s),
proprietor(s), or agent(s). If so, the name or names used and information
concerning dates and places used.
            4.   The street address at which the manager(s), proprietor(s), or
agent(s) has lived during the preceding five years.
            5.   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation
in which the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s) has been engaged during the
preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of their employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years.
            6.   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s) or agent(s) has ever
been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a
traffic ordinance. If so, furnish information as to the time, place, and
offense of all such convictions.
            7.   The physical description of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or
agent(s).
            8.   A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess
of five percent in such organization or business form or who are officers of
the corporation or business form and the following information for each said
persons:
               a.   Place of birth, date of birth, street resident address,
home telephone number, and work telephone number.
               b.   Whether all said persons are a citizens of the United
States or resident aliens.
               c.   Whether all said persons have ever used or have been known
by a name other than the name(s) listed. If so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places used.
               d.   The street address at which all said persons have lived
during the preceding five years.
               e.   The type, name, and location of every business or
occupation in which all said persons have been engaged during the preceding
five years and the name(s) and address(es) of employer(s) and partner(s), if
any, for the preceding five years.
               f.    Whether all said persons have ever been convicted of a
felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If
so, furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of all such
convictions.
               g.   The physical description of all said persons.
               h.   This subdivision, however, will not apply to a corporation
whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange and is applying for a
license to be owned and operated by it.
      (4)   For all applicants:
         (a)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal
dealer or secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit.
         (b)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked
or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealers
license from any other governmental unit.
         (c)   The location of the business premises.
         (d)   If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and
complete copy of the executed lease.
         (e)   The legal description of the premises to be licensed.
         (f)   Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under
construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application must be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed
premises to be licensed.
         (g)   The approved conditional use permit (CUP).
         (h)   Such other information as the City Council or issuing authority
may require.
   (B)   New manager. When a licensee places a manager(s), proprietor(s), or
agent(s), or if the named manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s) of a licensed
business changes, the licensee must complete and submit the appropriate
information, on forms provided by the City Manager or designated official,
within 14 days and will pay the investigation fee as set forth in the Appendix
to this code. The application must include:
      (1)   The full legal name, place of birth, date of birth, street resident
address, home telephone number, and work telephone number of the manager(s),
proprietor(s) or agent(s).
      (2)   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s) is a citizen of
the United States or resident alien.
      (3)   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s) or agent(s) has ever used or
has been known by a name other than the name(s) listed as manager(s),
proprietor(s), or agent(s). If so, the name or names used and information
concerning dates and places used.
      (4)   The street address at which the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent
(s) has lived during the preceding five years.
      (5)   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s) has been engaged during the
preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of their employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years.
      (6)   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s) or agent(s) has ever been
convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a
traffic ordinance. If so, furnish information as to the time, place, and
offense of all such convictions.
      (7)   The physical description of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent
(s).
   (C)   Investigation. The investigation fee will not be subject to refund or
proration. If the expenses of the investigation relating to any application
exceed the investigation fee, the city will notify the applicant(s) of this
fact and will require the applicant(s) to pay an additional investigation fee
which the city deems necessary to complete the city's investigation of the
applicant(s). The applicant(s) will pay such an additional investigation fee
within five days of being so notified. If such additional investigation fee is
not paid within the five day period, the city will discontinue consideration of
the application. Nonpayment of any additional investigation fees required will
be grounds for denial of application.
   (D)   Application execution. All applications for a license under this
section must be signed and sworn to under oath or affirmation by the applicant.
If the application is that of a person, it must be signed and sworn to by such
person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a
partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an unincorporated
association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
   (E)   Investigation. The city, prior to the granting of an initial license,
must conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the
applicant. The Police Department and Finance Division must investigate into the
truthfulness of the statements set forth in the application and will verify the
findings thereon. The applicant must furnish to the Police Department and
Finance Division such evidence as the Police Department and Finance Division
may reasonably require in support of the statements set forth in the
application.
   (F)   Public hearing. A license will not be issued or renewed without a
public hearing. Any person having an interest in or who will be affected by the
proposed license will be permitted to testify at the hearing. The public
hearing must be preceded by at least ten days published notice specifying the
location of the proposed licensed business premises.
   (G)   Granting of license. After review of the license application,
investigation report, and a public hearing, the City Council may grant or
refuse the application for a new or renewed pawnbroker license. A license will
not be effective unless the application fee and bond have been filed with the
License Division.
   (H)   Persons ineligible for a license. No licenses under this ordinance
will be issued to an applicant who is a natural person, a partnership if such
applicant has any general partner or managing partner, a corporation or other
organization if such applicant has any manager, proprietor or agent in charge
of the business to be licensed, if the applicant:
      (1)   Is a minor at the time that the application is filed;
      (2)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation
licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, and has not shown competent
evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties
of a licensee under this chapter as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3;
      (3)   Is not of good moral character or repute; or
      (4)   Has had a pawnbroker license revoked within five years of the
license application date.
('72 Code, § 468:30) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 2004-1013, passed
5-10-04)
§ 119.08 BOND.
   Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit a bond with
corporate surety, cash, or a United States government bond in an amount of
$5,000. All bonds must be conditioned that the principal will observe all laws
in relation to pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity thereto,
and that the principal will account for and deliver to any person legally
entitled any goods which have come into the principal’s hand through the
principal’s business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the
reasonable value in money to the person. The bond will contain a provision that
no bond may be canceled except upon 30 days written notice to the city, which
will be served upon the City Manager or designated official. The bond must
provide that it is forfeited to the city upon a violation of law or ordinance.
('72 Code, § 468:35) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.09 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions or
redemptions, every licensee must immediately record the following in a
computerized record approved by the Police Department:
   (A)   A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifying marks on such an item.
   (B)   The purchase price, amount of money lent upon, or pledged therefor.
   (C)   The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including
monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.
   (D)   Date, time, and place the item of property was received by the
licensee.
   (E)   Full legal name, residence address, residence telephone number, date
of birth, and accurate description of the person from whom the item of the
property was received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes, and
color of hair.
   (F)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the following
forms of identification of the seller:
      (1)   Current valid photo Minnesota drivers’ license.
      (2)   Current valid photo Minnesota identification card.
      (3)   Current valid photo driver’s license issued by another state.
      (4)   Current valid photo identification card issued by another state.
   (G)   The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
   (H)   The licensee must also take a color photograph or color video
recording of:
      (1)   Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
      (2)   (a)   Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial
or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
         (b)   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches in
length by two inches in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the
photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the
Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, upon request. The licensee must keep
the photograph for six months. The major portion of the photograph must include
an identifiable front facial close-up of the person who pawned or sold the
item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee must inform
the person that the person is being photographed by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises.
         (c)   If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must zoom in on
the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an identifiable close-
up of that person’s face. Items photographed by video must be accurately
depicted. Video photographs must be electronically referenced by time and date
so they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. The licensee must inform the person that the
person is being videotaped orally and by displaying a sign of sufficient size
in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed
videotape for six months.
   (I)   Renewals, extensions and redemptions. For renewals, extensions and
redemptions, the licensee will provide the original transaction identifier, the
date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction.
   (J)   Inspection of records. The records must at all reasonable times be
open to inspection by the Police Department or the License Division. Data
entries will be retained for at least three years from the date of transaction.
('72 Code, § 468:40) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.10 DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.
   (A)   Method. Licensees must provide to the Police Department the
information required in §
119.09(A) through (F), in an approved computerized form. The licensee must
display a sign of sufficient size, and in a conspicuous place in the premises,
so as to inform all patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police
Department.
   (B)   Billable transaction fees. Licensees will be charged for billable
transactions at the rate set forth in the Appendix to this code.
('72 Code, § 468:45) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.11 RECEIPT REQUIRED.
   Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every
reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three
years. The receipt must include at least the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, and telephone number of the licensed business.
   (B)   The date and time the item was received by the licensee.
   (C)   Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction.
   (D)   An accurate description of each item received including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifying marks on such an item.
   (E)   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that
conducted the transaction.
   (F)   The amount advanced or paid.
   (G)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and
charges.
   (H)   The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by
the pledgor without risk that the item will be sold and the amount necessary to
redeem the pawned item on that date.
   (I)   The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, and date
of birth of the pledgor or seller.
   (J)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the following
forms of identification of the pledgor or seller:
      (1)   Current valid photo Minnesota drivers’ license.
      (2)   Current valid photo Minnesota identification card.
      (3)   Current valid photo drivers’ license issued by another state.
      (4)   Current valid photo identification card issued by another state.
   (K)   Description of the pledgor or seller including sex, height, weight,
race, color of eyes and color of hair.
   (L)   The signature of the pledgor or seller.
   (M) All printed statements required by M.S. § 325J.04, Subdivision 2, or any
other applicable statutes.
('72 Code, § 468:50) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.12 REDEMPTION PERIOD.
   Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have a
minimum of 90 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before
it may be forfeited and sold. During the 90 day holding period, items may not
be removed from the licensed location except as provided in §
119.19. Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than
the person to whom the receipt was issued or, to any person identified in a
written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the
receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the
initial transaction and signed by the pledgor, or with approval of the Police
Chief or the Chief’s designee. Written authorization for release of property to
persons other than original pledgor must be maintained along with an original
transaction record in accordance with §
119.09(J).
('72 Code, § 468:55) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.13 HOLDING PERIOD.
   Any item purchased by a licensee must not be sold or otherwise transferred
for 90 days from the date of the transaction. An individual may redeem an item
72 hours after the item was received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal
holidays.
('72 Code, § 468:60) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.14 POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
   (A)   Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any
agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the premises. The investigative hold will be confirmed in writing
by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days
from the date of initial notification or until the investigative order is
canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to division
(B) of this section, whichever comes first.
   (B)   Order to hold. Whenever the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee,
notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed
from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the Chief or the
Chief’s designee. The order to hold will expire 90 days from the date it is
placed unless the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee determines the hold
is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
   (C)   Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in
a criminal case, the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee may:
      (1)   Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a
written order from the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee; or
      (2)   (a)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in
division (B) of this section, and leave it in the shop.
         (b)   When an item is confiscated, the person doing so will provide
identification upon request of the licensee, and will provide the licensee the
name and phone number of the confiscating agency and investigator, and the case
number related to the confiscation.
         (c)   When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the
Chief of Police, or Chief’s designee will so notify the licensee.
('72 Code, § 468:65) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.15 INSPECTION OF ITEMS.
   At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow the
Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee(s) to enter the premises where the
licensed business is located, including all off-site storage facilities as
authorized in §
119.19 during normal business hours, except in an emergency, for the purpose of
inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, ware and merchandise and
records, therein to verify compliance with this subchapter or other applicable
laws.
('72 Code, § 468:70) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.16 LABELS REQUIRED.
   Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently
recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the
transaction in the shop’s records, the transaction date, the name of the item,
and the description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to
the Police Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of
pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels will not be re-used.
('72 Code, § 468:75) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.17 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell or attempt to
pawn or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive any goods
from a person under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an
intoxicated person.
   (C)   No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents
identification in the form of a current valid photo Minnesota driver’s license,
a current valid photo State of Minnesota identification card, or current valid
photo drivers’ license issued by another state of residency, or current valid
photo identification card issued by the state of residency of the person from
whom the item was received.
   (D)   No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an altered
or obliterated serial number or “operation identification” number or any item
of property that has had its serial number removed.
   (E)   No licensee may receive any revolver, pistol, sawed-off shotgun,
automatic rifle, blackjack, switchblade knife, or other similar weapons or
firearms.
('72 Code, § 468:80) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.18 DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.
   Any license under this subchapter may be denied, suspended, or revoked for
one or more of the following reasons:
   (A)   The proposed use does not comply with the zoning code.
   (B)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building
maintenance, or other provisions of this code of ordinances or state law.
   (C)   The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more
provisions of this subchapter.
   (D)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing or renewing a
license.
   (E)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application
and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant’s business.
   (F)   Violation within the preceding five years, of any law relating to
theft, damage, or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or
operation of a business.
   (G)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify
for a license under the terms of this subchapter.
('72 Code, § 468:85) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 2004-1013, passed
5-10-04)
§ 119.19 PAYMENTS BY CHECK.
   When a pawnbroker buys or otherwise receives an item at the licensed place
of business, payment must be made by a check made payable to a named payee who
is the actual intended seller.
('72 Code, § 468:90) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
§ 119.20 BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE.
   A license under this subchapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its
business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license. The
licensee will permit inspection of the facility in accordance with §
119.16. All provisions of this subchapter regarding record keeping and
reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property will be stored in
compliance with all provisions of the city code. The licensee must either own
the building in which the business is conducted or have a lease on the business
premises which extends for more than six months.
('72 Code, § 468:95) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.21 APPLICABLE LAWS.
   A pawnbroker must meet all city, county, state, and federal regulations
relating to pawnbrokers and this subchapter shall not be construed or
interpreted to supersede or limit any other such applicable ordinance or law.
('72 Code, § 468:100) (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
§ 119.30 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER/SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door- to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of advertising, selling or attempting to sell items that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting, or obtaining or attempting to
obtain orders for products or services of which the person may be carrying or
transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means,
and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence
of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this
provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or
attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term includes each member, officer, partner,
associate, agent or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the City Hall is open for the
purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law are not
counted as regular business days.
(Am. Ord. 2014-1177, passed 7-7-14; Am. Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)
§ 119.31 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS; LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER/SOLICITORdo not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at
wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property to
a retailer of the items being sold by the wholesaler. The terms also do not
apply to any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the
purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery
route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products such as baked
goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any person making deliveries of
perishable food and dairy products to the customers on the person’s established
regular delivery route.
   (B)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license is required for any person to sell the products of the
farm or garden occupied and cultivated by that person.
      (2)   No license is required of any person going from house-to-house,
door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to- street, or other type of place-
to-place when such activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's
state or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press,
religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person's
exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
      (3)   Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt
person or group are exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)
§ 119.32 LICENSING.
   (A)   City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this
chapter, it is unlawful to conduct business as a peddler/solicitor without
first having obtained a license from the city.
   (B)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler/solicitor, must be made at least 30 regular business days before the
applicant desires to begin conducting business. Application for a license must
be made on a form approved by the city and available from the city. All
applications must be signed by the applicant. All applications must include the
following information:
      (1)   Applicant's full legal name.
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers.
      (3)   Full address of applicant.
      (4)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.
      (5)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
      (6)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any).
      (7)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant.
      (8)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license.
      (9)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can
be reached while conducting business within the city.
      (10)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses.
      (11)   A list of all cities where the applicant has conducted business as
a peddler/solicitor in the past two years.
      (12)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided.
      (13)   All additional information deemed necessary by the city.
      (14)   The applicant's valid state issued identification or driver's
license or other acceptable form of identification.
      (15)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license must be accompanied by the fee
established in the city's fee schedule as adopted from time to time by a
resolution passed by the City Council.
   (E)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of
the license fee, the Licensing Division within five regular business days of
receipt, must determine if the application is complete. An application is
determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If it
is determined that the application is incomplete, the Licensing Division must
inform the applicant of the required necessary information which is missing. If
the application is complete, any investigation, including background checks,
necessary to verify the information provided with the application will be
ordered. Upon receipt of the completed application the license will be
processed. If the Licensing Division denies the license, the applicant must be
notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the
applicant's right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 14 days of the
date of the notice of denial, an administrative hearing. The final decision of
the administrative Hearing Officer is appealable by petitioning the Minnesota
Court of Appeals for a Writ of Certiorari.
   (F)   Duration. Licenses are valid for either 30 days, six months, or annual
and only during the time period indicated on the license.
   (G)   Any solicitor/peddler who was registered or licensed with the city
before September 1, 2018 may continue to operate under such registration or
license until December 31, 2018.
(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.33 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following are grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   (B)   The conviction of the applicant who has not shown sufficient evidence
of rehabilitation pursuant to M.S. § 364.03 for any violation of any federal or
state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely
reflects on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license
is being sought in an honest and legal manner or that will not adversely affect
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. Such violations
include but are not limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud,
unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm
against another person.
   (C)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler/solicitor.
   (D)   The applicant or company that the applicant is representing is
determined to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business
reputation includes, but is not limited to, the existence of more than three
complaints against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney
General's Office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or
agency, within the preceding 12 months.
   (E)   Prior violations of this chapter.
   (F)   Conducting business without the required license.
   (G)   A determination of previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
   (H)   A record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
   (I)   Any prior revocations or suspensions of peddler or solicitor licenses
in any other city within the past 5 years.
(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)
§ 119.34 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked for a violation of any of the following:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application
form.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity.
      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could
have been denied under §
119.33.
      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city must provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of the licensee’s right to a hearing
on the alleged violation. Notice must be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (C)   Administrative hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division
(C) of this section, the licensee has the right to request an administrative
hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the city within 14 regular
business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with
the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service is
considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a
hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing must be scheduled
within 30 days from the date of the request. If the Hearing Officer determines
that a violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the
Hearing Officer's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be
imposed, must be recorded in writing, a copy of which must be provided to the
accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, the findings must be in
writing and a copy provided to the licensee.
   (D)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the city, imminent harm to the
health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler/
solicitorlicensed under this chapter, the city may immediately revoke the
person's license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent
administrative hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
   (E)   Appeals. The final decision of the administrative Hearing Officer is
appealable by petitioning the Minnesota court of Appeals for a Writ of
Certiorari.
(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.35 TRANSFERABILITY.
   A license issued under this chapter must not be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.36 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   It is unlawful for a peddler/solicitor to conduct business in any of the
following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to the person’s business or items to be sold by
means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any
other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
   (C)   Conducting business in such a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
   (D)   Conducting business before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
   (E)   Failing to properly display approved license identification in plain
view attached to the outer clothing and provide proof of license and
identification, when requested.
   (F)   Using the license of another person.
   (G)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. It is unlawful for a
peddler/solicitor to claim to have the endorsement of the city solely based on
the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to that person.
   (H)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.37 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   It is unlawful for a peddler/solicitor unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, to enter the property of another for the purpose of
conducting business as a peddler/solicitor when the property is marked with a
sign or placard at least four inches long and four inches wide with print of at
least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient
Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or
other comparable statement. It is unlawful for a person other than the property
owner or tenant to remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard
under this section.
(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
ITINERANT PRODUCE MERCHANT
§ 119.40 DEFINITIONS.
   PERSON. Includes the singular and the plural and also means and includes any
person, firm or corporation, association, club, co-partnership or society, or
any other organization.
   ITINERANT PRODUCE MERCHANT. Any person who has lawfully applied for a permit
to sell produce in compliance with the provisions, restrictions, and location
(s) specified in the zoning ordinance.
   ITINERANT PRODUCE SALES. Any temporary sale of produce on property
specifically designated for that purpose.
   PRODUCE. Fresh flowers, fruits, and vegetables.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.41 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of itinerant produce
sales and to sell or offer for sale any produce without first obtaining a
permit and license as provided herein. It is unlawful to sell or offer for sale
any produce anywhere within the city without a permit.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.42 TIME PERIOD.
   Itinerant produce sales may only occur during the time period beginning
April 1 and ending October 31 of each year.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.43 LOCATION.
   Itinerant produce sales may exist only in those locations specified in the
Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.44 TIME OF DAY.
   Itinerant produce sales may be permitted only during the following hours:
   (A)   Monday through Friday. 12 p.m. (noon) to 5 p.m.
   (B)   Saturday. 8 a.m. to 1 p.m.
   (C)   Sunday. 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.45 ITINERANT PRODUCE MERCHANT LIMIT.
   Itinerant produce merchants licenses are limited to ten merchants at any one
time period.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.46 APPLICATION.
   Applicants for a permit under this subchapter must file with the Licensing
Division a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be
furnished by the Licensing Division, which gives the following information:
   (A)   Full legal name and date of birth of the applicant.
   (B)   Address (legal and local).
   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the produce to be sold.
   (D)   The specific length of time and the dates for which the right to do
business is desired.
   (E)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
license number or other means of identification.
   (F)   The Licensing Division may refer the application to the Community
Development and Recreation and Parks Departments for comment and
recommendation.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.47 TRANSFER.
   No permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be used or
exhibited at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.48 NUISANCE.
   No itinerant produce merchant may conduct business so as to annoy any other
person or to become a nuisance or so as to obstruct travel upon any street,
highway or public place in the city. All merchants must be responsible for
removing all associated litter, trash and the like from the site each and every
day.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.49 LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.
   No itinerant produce merchant nor any person on their behalf may shout, make
any cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, include any loud
speaking radio or sound amplifying system to be plainly heard upon any streets,
avenues, adjacent property, or for the purpose of attracting attention to any
produce for sale.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.50 SIGNS.
   The itinerant produce merchant signs must be in compliance with the sign
ordinance (
Chapter 150).
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.51 DUTY OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS TO ENFORCE.
   It is the duty of the Community Development department and/or any police
officer of this municipality to require any person seen selling, who is not
known by such employee to have received a permit, to produce their permit and
to enforce the provisions of this subchapter against any person found to be
violating the same.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
§ 119.52 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Permits issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be revoked
by the city after notice for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for permit or made to the course of carrying out the business as a
merchant;
      (2)   Any violation of City Code;
      (3)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a nuisance, breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Notice of the revocation of a permit may be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of complaint.
(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)
CHAPTER 120: SAUNAS
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Massage distinguished
   
120.03   License required
   
120.04   Granting or denial of licenses
   
120.05   Revocation or suspension of license
   
120.06   Restrictions and regulations
   
120.07   Construction and maintenance requirements
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSAGE. The rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or rolling of the body
with the hands, for the exclusive purposes of relaxation, physical fitness, or
beautification, and for no other purposes.
   MASSEUR. A male person who practices massage.
   MASSEUSE. A female person who practices massage.
   SAUNA. Any commercial establishment in which is located a steam or heat
bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing
steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent.
('72 Code, § 485:00)
§ 120.02 MASSAGE DISTINGUISHED.
   The practice of massage is declared to be distinct from the practice of
medicine surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry, and
persons duly licensed or registered in this state to practice medicine,
surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry, nurses who
work solely under the direction of any such persons, athletic directors, and
trainers are expressly excluded from the provisions of this chapter. Beauty
culturists and barbers who do not give, or hold themselves out to give, massage
treatments, as defined herein, other than is customarily given in such shops or
places of business, for the purpose of beautification only, are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
('72 Code, § 485:00)
§ 120.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to engage in the business of operating a sauna either
exclusively or in connection with any other business enterprise which offers
massage as part of its service without being licensed as provided in this
section.
   (B)   Application for a license must be made in writing, filed with the City
Clerk on the form prescribed by the Licensing Division and verified by the
applicant or if the applicant is a corporation by one of its officers having
knowledge of the facts. At the time of filing an application the applicant must
pay the license fee and investigation fee of $500.
   (C)   License fees are in the amount set by the Council from time to time. A
separate license will be obtained for each place of business. The licensee must
display the license in a prominent place on the licensed premises at all times.
The license, unless revoked, canceled or suspended, is for the calendar year or
part thereof for which it has been issued. The license is not transferable and
should ownership change during the license year, the new owner must immediately
apply for a new license and pay the license fee and a new investigation fee as
set forth in division (B) of this section.
   (D)   If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the applicant must
designate a person as the manager and responsible and in charge of the
business. The person must remain responsible for the proper conduct of the
business until another suitable person has been designated in writing by the
applicant and approved by the City Manager.
('72 Code, § 485:05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.04 GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSES.
   License applications must be reviewed by the Police Department, Planning
Department, Health Department and such other department as the City Manager
shall deem necessary. The investigation reports must be submitted to the City
Council who will grant or deny the license applications subject to the
provisions of this section. Renewal licenses must be approved by the City
Council.
('72 Code, § 485:10)
§ 120.05 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Manager is hereby empowered to revoke or suspend any sauna
license issued pursuant to this section. The licensee may appeal to the City
Council from the Manager's decision. The following are grounds for revocation
or suspension of the sauna license:
      (1)   Violation by the licensee or any of the licensee's employees of any
of the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The sale or consumption, on the premises, by employees or customers
of alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs.
      (3)   Any conduct or activity contrary to the public health, safety,
morals or welfare.
   (B)   If any license is revoked pursuant to this section, the licensee is
not entitled to make application for a new license for a period of five years
commencing with the date of revocation by the City Manager.
('72 Code, § 485:15)
§ 120.06 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Licenses may be granted only for lands in the B-3 General Business
District as set forth in the zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Licenses are granted only to establishments which can meet the safety
and sanitary requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   It is grounds for denial of a license application that the applicant
or persons in the applicant's employ are not complying with or have a history
of noncompliance with any state or municipal regulations relating to health,
safety or morals.
   (D)   A license is not to be granted to a person of bad repute or to a
partnership or to a corporation who has in its employ or is owned by any
persons of bad repute.
   (E)   Saunas will not be opened for business nor will patrons be permitted
on the premises between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the same day.
   (F)   It is unlawful for an employee of the sauna to agree to perform or
perform any of the activities ordinarily incident to the enterprise at any
place other than the licensed premises.
   (G)   It is unlawful for a person under the age of 18 years to be employed
in a sauna requiring a license under the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Upon demand by any police officer, any person engaged in providing
services in any licensed premises must provide identification, giving the
person's true legal name and correct address.
('72 Code, § 485:20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.07 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All sauna rooms and all restrooms and bathrooms used in connection
therewith must be constructed of materials which are impervious to moisture,
bacteria, mold or fungus growth. The floor to wall and wall to wall joints must
be constructed to provide a sanitary cove with a minimum radius of one inch.
   (B)   All restrooms used in connection with saunas must be provided with
mechanical ventilation of two CFM per square foot of floor area, a minimum of
30 foot candles of illumination, a hand washing sink, equipped with hot and
cold running water under pressure, sanitary towels and a soap dispenser.
   (C)   Each sauna establishment must have a janitor's closet which must
provide for the storage of cleaning supplies. The closets must have mechanical
ventilation with two CFM per square foot of floor area and a minimum of 30 foot
candles of illumination. The closet must include a mop sink.
   (D)   Walls, floors and equipment in sauna rooms and in restrooms and in
bathrooms used in connection therewith must be kept in a state of good repair
and clean at all times. Linens and other materials must be stored at least 12
inches off the floor. Clean towels and wash cloths must be made available for
each customer.
   (E)   Individual lockers must be made available for use by patrons. The
lockers must have separate keys for locking.
   (F)   The establishments must provide adequate refuse receptacles which must
be emptied as required.
   (G)   In addition to the requirements contained in this section the licensed
premise must conform in all ways to all of the applicable rules, regulations
and codes of the city.
('72 Code, § 485:25)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 121: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 122: TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
   
122.01   Purpose and intent
   
122.02   Definitions
   
122.03   License
   
122.04   Fees
   
122.05   Basis for denial of license
   
122.06   Prohibited sales
   
122.07   (Reserved)
   
122.08   (Reserved)
   
122.09   Responsibility
   
122.10   Compliance checks and inspections
   
122.11   Other prohibited acts
   
122.12   Exceptions and defenses
 
   
122.99   Violations and penalty
§ 122.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 21 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine or lobelia
delivery devices; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several
serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all
levels of government; this chapter is intended to regulate the sale,
possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices for the purpose of enforcing and
furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects
associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices
and to further the official public policy of the State of Minnesota as stated
in M.S. § 144.391.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15; Am. Ord.
2020-1259, passed 11-30-20)
§ 122.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
are given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter,
the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   CHILD-RESISTANT PACKAGING. Packaging that meets the definition set forth in
Code of Federal Regulations, title 16, section 1700.15(b), as in effect on
January 1, 2015, and was tested in accordance with the method described in Code
of Federal Regulations, title 16, section 1700.20, as in effect on January 1,
2015.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell licensed products are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. Compliance checks involve the use of persons
under the age of 21 who purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products.
Compliance checks may also be conducted by the city or other units of
government for educational, research and training purposes or for investigating
or enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations relating
to licensed products.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance, whether natural or synthetic, intended for
human consumption through inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE includes, but is not limited to, devices
manufactured, marketed or sold as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pens,
mods, tank systems, or under any other product name or descriptor. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include any
nicotine cessation product that has been authorized by the United States Food
and Drug Administration to be marketed and for sale as "drugs," "devices," or
"combination products," as defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   LICENSED PRODUCTS. The term that collectively refers to any tobacco,
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia
delivery product.
   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to single cigarettes, cigars and
other licensed products that have been removed from their original retail
packaging and offered for sale. LOOSIES does not include premium cigars that
are hand constructed, have a wrapper made entirely from whole tobacco leaf and
have a filler and binder made entirely of tobacco, except for adhesives or
other materials used to maintain size, texture or flavor.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a kiosk,
truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
that is not a fixed address or other permanent type of structure licensed for
over-the-counter sales transactions.
   NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a
product, that is not tobacco or an electronic delivery device as defined in
this section. NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT does not include any
nicotine cessation product that has been authorized by the United States Food
and Drug Administration to be marketed and for sale as "drugs," "devices," or
"combination products, " as defined by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where licensed products are
available for sale to the general public. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT includes but is
not limited to grocery stores, tobacco products shops, convenience stores,
liquor stores, gasoline service stations, bars and restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of licensed products in any manner
where any person has access to the licensed products without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee and where a physical
exchange of the licensed products between the customer and the licensee or
employee is not required in order to access the licensed products.
   TOBACCO. Any product containing, made or derived from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component,
part, or accessory of a tobacco product including but not limited to
cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, fine cut or other chewing tobacco,
cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and
other smoking tobacco, snuff flowers, cavendish, shorts, plug and twist
tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings
of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco. TOBACCO does not include any
nicotine cessation product that has been authorized by the United States Food
and Drug Administration to be marketed and for sale as "drugs," "devices," or
"combination products," as defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Any pipes, wraps, rolling papers or other device
intentionally designed or intended to be used with tobacco products.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses licensed products upon the insertion of money, tokens or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the licensed products.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15; Am. Ord.
2020-1259, passed 11-30-20)
§ 122.03 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. It is unlawful to sell or offer to sell any licensed
products without first having obtained a license to do so from the city.
   (B)   Application. An application for a license to sell licensed products
must be made on a form provided by the city. The application must contain the
full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses
and telephone numbers, the name and address of the business for which the
license is sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary.
Upon receipt of a completed application, the Licensing Division must forward
the application to the City Council for action at its next regularly scheduled
City Council meeting. If the licensing Division determines that an application
is incomplete, they will return the application to the applicant with notice of
the information necessary to make the application complete.
   (C)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the application
for a license, or it may delay action for a reasonable period of time to
complete any investigation of the application or the applicant deemed
necessary. If the City Council approves the application, the Licensing Division
will issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the
application, notice of the denial will be given to the applicant along with
notice of the applicant's right to appeal the decision.
   (D)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter terminate on December 31
of the calendar year in which issued.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended as provided in §
122.99.
   (F)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter are valid only on
the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom
the license was issued.
   (G)   Display. All licenses must be posted and displayed at all times in
plain view of the general public on the licensed premise.
   (H)   Renewals. The renewal of a license may be approved by the City Manager
or designated official provided that the licensee meets all of the requirements
for renewal. If the renewal of a license is denied by the City Manager or
designated official, the licensee has the right to appeal that decision to the
City Council. The issuance of a license under this chapter is considered a
privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and does not entitle the
holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15; Am. Ord.
2020-1259, passed 11-30-20) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.04 FEES.
   No license will be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fee is paid in full. The fee for a license under this chapter is established in
the city's schedule of fees.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98)
Penalty, see § 122.99
§ 122.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   The following are grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license
under this chapter; however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the
existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must
deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it
must be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the
license under this section.
   (A)   The applicant is under the age of 21 years.
   (B)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to licensed products.
   (C)   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products revoked
within the preceding 12 months of the date of application.
   (D)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information.
   (E)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation from holding such a license.
   (F)   The applicant is applying for a renewal of a license under this
section and there have been three or more illegal sales of licensed products to
persons under the age of 21 documented at the licensed place of business in the
preceding 12 months.
   (G)   The proposed location of a store that has over 40% of the floor area
(not including controlled access storage or office areas) dedicated to the
display or sale of licensed products is within 500 feet of a public or private
elementary, junior high (or middle), or senior high school.
   (H)   The applicant has failed to pay any outstanding administrative
penalties.
   (I)   The business for which the license is requested is a moveable place of
business. Only fixed-location retail establishments are eligible to be
licensed.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15; Am. Ord.
2020-1259, passed 11-30-20) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.06 PROHIBITED SALES.
   (A)   General. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or
offer to sell any licensed product:
      (1)   By means of any type of vending machine.
      (2)   By means of loosies.
      (3)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes
or other products subject to this chapter.
      (4)   By means of self-service display. All licensed products must be
stored behind the sales counter, in a locked case, in a storage unit, or in
another area not freely accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling
licensed products at the time this chapter is adopted must comply with this
section within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. This provision
does not apply to tobacco shops that have an entrance door opening directly to
the outside and which derive more than 90% of its gross revenue from the sale
of licensed products and which cannot be entered at any time by persons younger
than 21 years of age.
      (5)   By any other means, to any other person, on in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation.
   (B)   Legal age. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or
offer to sell any licensed product to any person under the age of 21.
      (1)   Age verification. Licensees must verify by means of government-
issued photographic identification containing the bearer's date of birth that
the purchaser is at least 21 years of age. Verification is not required for a
person over the age of 30. That the person appeared to be 30 years of age or
older does not constitute a defense to a violation of this division.
      (2)   Signage. Notice of the legal sales age, age verification
requirement, and possible penalties for underage sales must be posted
prominently and in plain view at all times at each location where licensed
products are offered for sale. The required signage, which will be provided to
the licensee by the city, must be posted in a manner that is clearly visible to
anyone who is or is considering making a purchase.
   (C)   Liquid packaging. No person shall sell or offer to sell any liquid,
whether or not such liquid contains nicotine, which is intended for human
consumption and use in an electronic delivery device, in packaging that is not
child resistant. Upon request by the city, a licensee must provide a copy of
the certificate of compliance or full laboratory testing report for the
packaging used.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15; Am. Ord.
2020-1259, passed 11-30-20) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.07 (RESERVED).
§ 122.08 (RESERVED).
§ 122.09 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees under this chapter are responsible for the actions of their
employees, or any persons acting on their behalf, in regard to the sale, offer
to sell, or furnishing of licensed products on the licensed premises. The sale,
offer to sell, or furnishing of any licensed product by an employee is
considered an act of the license holder. Nothing in this section is construed
as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties
are appropriate under this chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable
law or regulation.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15; Am. Ord.
2020-1259, passed 11-30-20) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises must be open to inspection by law enforcement or other
authorized city official during regular business hours. From time to time, but
at least once per year, the city will conduct compliance checks. In accordance
with state law, the city will conduct a compliance check that involves the
participation of a person at least 17 years of age, but under the age of 21 to
enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase licensed products. Prior
written consent from a parent or guardian is required for any person under the
age of 18 to participate in a compliance check. Nothing in this section
prohibits other compliance checks authorized by state or federal law for
educational, research, or training purposes, or as required for the enforcement
of any local ordinance, or state or federal law.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2020-1259, passed 11-30-20) Penalty,
see §
122.99
§ 122.11 OTHER PROHIBITED ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts are a violation of this
chapter:
   (A)   Prohibiting furnishing or procurement. It is a violation of this
chapter for any person 21 years of age or older to purchase or otherwise obtain
any licensed product on behalf of a person under the age of 21. It is further a
violation for any person 21 years of age or older to coerce or attempt to
coerce a person under the age of 21 to purchase or attempt to purchase any
licensed product.
   (B)   Use of false identification. It is a violation of this chapter for any
person to attempt to disguise their true age by the use of a false form of
identification, whether the identification is that of another person has been
modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the
person using that identification.
   (C)   It is a violation of this chapter to allow the sampling of licensed
products except in compliance with M.S. § 144.4167.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15; Am. Ord.
2020-1259, passed 11-30-20) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.12 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a native Indian from furnishing tobacco,
tobacco products or tobacco related devices to an Indian under the age of 21
years if the tobacco is furnished as a part of a traditional Indian spiritual
or cultural ceremony. It is an affirmative defense to the violation of this
chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by
state law.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2020-1259, passed 11-30-20)
§ 122.99 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations.
      (1)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged
violator must be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets
forth the alleged violation and which must inform the alleged violator of their
right to be heard on the accusation.
      (2)   Hearings. If a person accused of violating this chapter so
requests, a hearing will be scheduled, the time and place of which must be
published and provided to the accused violator.
      (3)   Hearing Officer. The City Council will periodically approve a list
of persons, from which the City Manager or designated agent will randomly
select a hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for which a hearing is
requested.
      (4)   Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of
this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officers reasons
for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under division (B) of
this section, must be recorded in writing, a copy of which must be provided to
the accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, the findings must be
recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator. The decision of
the hearing officer is final, subject to an appeal as described in division (A)
(5) of this section.
      (5)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer must
be filed in the Hennepin County district court within ten business days of the
date of the decision.
      (6)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section prohibits the city
or any other legitimate jurisdiction from seeking criminal prosecution for an
alleged violation of this chapter or any other state or federal law regulating
tobacco products.
      (7)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Administrative penalties.
      (1)   Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or
whose employee has violated this chapter, will be charged as follows:
         (a)   First violation of this chapter, an administrative fine of $300.
         (b)   Second offense at the same licensed premises within a 36-month
period, an administrative fine of $600.
         (c)   Third or any subsequent offense at the same licensed location
within a 36-month period, an administrative fine of $1,000 and the license will
be suspended for a period of not less than 30 consecutive days and may be
revoked.
      (2)   Employees of licensees and other individuals. Individuals, other
than persons under the age of 21 regulated by division (B)(3) of this section,
found to be in violation of this chapter may be charged an administrative fee
of $50.
      (3)   Persons under the age of 21. Persons under the age of 21 who use a
false identification to purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products may
only be subject to non-criminal, non-monetary civil penalties or remedies such
as tobacco-related education classes, diversion programs, community services,
or another non-monetary, civil penalty that the city determines to be
appropriate. The City Council will consult with educators, parents, guardians,
persons under the age of 21, public health officials, court personnel, and
other interested parties to determine an appropriate remedy for persons under
the age of 21 in the city in the best interest of the underage person. The
remedies for persons under 21 who use a false identification to purchase or
attempt to purchase licensed products may be established by ordinance and
amended from time to time.
      (4)   Statutory penalties. If the administrative penalty for violations
against licensed retailers under division (B)( 1) authorized to be imposed by
M.S. § 461.12, as it may be amended from time to time, differ from that
established in this section, then the higher penalty will prevail.
(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15; Am. Ord.
2020-1259, passed 11-30-20)
CHAPTER 123: BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
123.01   Findings and purpose
   
123.02   General provisions
   
123.03   Definitions
   
123.04   License administration
   
123.05   License expiration
   
123.06   Transfer and display of license
   
123.07   Location restricted
   
123.08   Activities prohibited
   
123.09   Inspection and plan review
   
123.10   Grounds for emergency closure
   
123.11   Standards for health and safety
   
123.12   Industry self survey and training responsibility
   
123.13   Fees
 
   
123.99   Penalty
§ 123.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted to establish standards to protect health,
safety and general welfare of the people of the City of Brooklyn Park through
regulation of body art establishments.
   (B)   The principal objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent disease transmission;
      (2)   To correct and prevent conditions that may adversely affect persons
utilizing body art establishments;
      (3)   To provide standards for the design, construction, operation, and
maintenance of body art establishments; and
      (4)   To meet consumer expectations of the safety of body art
establishments.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
§ 123.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)    Scope. This chapter shall apply to all body art establishments where
body art are conducted. Nothing in this chapter is intended to supersede the
provisions in M.S. Chapter 146B that are otherwise applicable to body art
establishments or body art technicians.
   (B)   Incorporation by reference. Except as otherwise provided for in this
chapter, the provisions in M.S. Chapter 146B are incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
§ 123.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BODY PIERCING. The penetration or puncturing of the skin or tongue by any
method for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other objects in or through the
body. BODY PIERCING does not include the piercing of the outer perimeter or the
lobe of the ear using a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing
system.
   ESTABLISHMENT PLAN. A to-scale drawing of the establishment's physical and
equipment layout illustrating the requirements of this chapter.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The City of Brooklyn Park Code Enforcement and Public
Health Division, its designated employees, or other designated agents.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
§ 123.04 LICENSE ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Administrative procedures. Provisions of the City of Brooklyn Park
General Business Regulations,
Chapter 110, that are not covered by this chapter and do not conflict with
provisions of this chapter shall apply as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   License required. No person may own or operate a body art
establishment without first having obtained an establishment license from the
Health Authority.
   (C)   Limit on number of licenses. The number of licenses for body art
establishments shall be limited to no more than one such license for every
4,000 residents.
   (D)   Licensing procedure.
      (1)   Application. All applications, new and renewal, for licenses must
be made upon forms furnished by the city. Upon payment of the required fee(s),
the Health Authority will review the application. If the application is
approved, a license will be issued.
      (2)   Establishment license application. Each establishment license
application must describe the general nature of the business, the location, and
any other information deemed necessary by the city.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
§ 123.05 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall commence and expire on the
dates indicated on the license certificate.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
§ 123.06 TRANSFER AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter may be
entitled to receive a license. A license is not transferable as to person or
place. A valid license must be located onsite and available to the public upon
request.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
§ 123.07 LOCATION RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No individual may engage in body art activities at any place other
than a licensed establishment.
   (B)   A body art establishment may only be located in non-residential areas
and in districts as further determined by the city zoning code. Temporary body
art establishments are prohibited.
   (C)   A body art establishment must be separated by at least 500 feet from
another body art establishment, as measured from the closest point on the
property lines of the body art establishments. No more than one body art
establishment may be located on a single parcel of land.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
Penalty, see § 123.99
§ 123.08 ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   A body art establishment, a body art technician, or any other person may not
perform branding, scarification, suspension, subdermal implantation,
microdermal, or tongue bifurcation procedures.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
Penalty, see § 123.99
§ 123.09 INSPECTION AND PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Inspection required. The Health Authority will inspect each body art
establishment before issuing a license for a new establishment, as part of a
construction or remodeling plan review, as part of a complaint investigation,
or at least once a year for a routine inspection, and as necessary to ensure
compliance with all applicable regulations.
   (B)   Construction inspections. The body art establishment must be
constructed in conformance with the approved plans. The Health Authority may
inspect the body art establishment as frequently as necessary during the
construction to ensure that the construction occurs in conformance with this
chapter. The licensee or owner must contact the Health Authority to schedule a
final inspection prior to the start of operations and issuance of a license or
to resume operations after remodeling.
   (C)   Access to premises and records. The operator of the body art
establishment must, upon request of the Health Authority and after proper
identification, permit access to all parts of the establishment at any
reasonable time, for the purpose of inspection. The operator must allow review
of any records necessary for the Health Authority to ascertain compliance to
this chapter.
   (D)   Interference with the Health Authority. No person may interfere with
or hinder the Health Authority in the performance of its duties, or refuse to
permit the Health Authority to make such inspections.
   (E)   Removal and correction of violations. Operator(s) or technician(s)
must correct or remove each violation upon receipt of an inspection report
giving notification of one or more violations of this chapter in a reasonable
length of time as determined by the Health Authority. The length of time for
the correction or removal of each such violation shall be noted on the
inspection report. Failure to remove or correct each violation within the time
period noted on the inspection report will constitute a separate violation of
this chapter. The Health Authority may issue orders to halt construction or
remodeling, or to take corrective measures to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
Penalty, see § 123.99
§ 123.10 GROUNDS FOR EMERGENCY CLOSURE.
   If any violation of this code or relevant state statutes exists, the
operator(s) or technician(s) may be ordered to discontinue all operations of
the body art establishment. Body art establishments may only reopen with
permission from the Health Authority.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
§ 123.11 STANDARDS FOR HEALTH AND SAFETY.
   No operator or body art establishment may engage in body art activities
without complying with the following health and safety requirements:
   (A)   Facilities.
      (1)   Establishment plan. Any new or remodeled establishment must submit
to the Health Authority a to-scale establishment plan in sufficient detail to
ascertain compliance with conditions in this chapter.
      (2)   Procedure area. No less than 45 square feet of floor space for each
procedure area must be provided. The procedure area(s) must be separated from
the bathroom, retail sales area, hair salon area, or any other area that may
cause potential contamination of work surfaces. For clients requesting privacy,
dividers, curtains, or partitions at a minimum must separate multiple procedure
areas.
      (3)   Hand sink. Each establishment must have a readily accessible hand
sink that is not in a public restroom and is equipped with:
         (a)   Hot and cold running water under pressure;
         (b)   No touch faucet controls such as wrist or foot operated;
         (c)   Dispensed liquid hand soap;
         (d)   Dispensed single use paper towels: and
         (e)   A waste container.
      (4)   Toilet facilities. Every establishment must have at least one
available bathroom equipped with a toilet and a hand lavatory, and in
compliance with building codes. The hand lavatory must be supplied with:
         (a)   Hot and cold running water under pressure;
         (b)   Dispensed liquid hand soap;
         (c)   Dispensed single use paper towels or mechanical hand drier/
blower;
         (d)   A waste container;
         (e)   A self-closing door; and
         (f)   Adequate ventilation.
      (5)   Lighting. The establishment must have an artificial light source
equivalent to 20 foot candles at three feet above the floor. At least 100 foot
candles of light must be provided at the level where body art procedure is
performed, where sterilization takes place, and where instruments and sharps
are assembled.
      (6)   Surfaces. All procedure surfaces must be smooth, nonabsorbent and
easily cleanable.
      (7)   Ceiling. All ceilings must be in good condition.
      (8)   Walls and floors. All walls and floors must be free of open holes
or cracks and washable. Carpeting may not be used in areas where body art
procedures are performed.
      (9)   Maintenance. All facilities must be maintained in good working
order. All facilities must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (10)   Facility use. No establishment must be used or occupied for living
or sleeping quarters.
      (11)   Service animals. Only service animals may be allowed in the
establishment. No animals are allowed in the procedure area(s).
      (12)   Pest control. Effective measures must be taken by the operator to
prevent entrance, breeding, and harborage of insects, vermin, and rodents in
the establishment.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
Penalty, see § 123.99
§ 123.12 INDUSTRY SELF SURVEY AND TRAINING RESPONSIBILITY.
   Every licensee of a body art establishment must arrange for and maintain a
program of sanitation self-inspection conducted by the owner, operator,
technician, or apprentice and approved by the Health Authority. The self-
inspection program must include written policies, appropriate forms for logging
self-inspections, and evidence that routine self-inspection of all aspects of
the body art establishment takes place. A description of the body art
establishment self-inspection program must be available for review.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
Penalty, see § 123.99
§ 123.13 FEES.
   (A)   License fees. Fees for licenses and plan review issued hereunder shall
be those established from time to time by resolution of the City of Brooklyn
Park City Council. An additional fee shall be charged for each additional
service or operation that is separate, distinct or unique from the central or
main body art establishment, as determined by the Health Authority.
   (B)   Late fees. If work has commenced prior to approval of construction or
remodeling plans, late fees may be assessed in accordance with the fee
schedule.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
§ 123.99 PENALTY.
   A person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished as provided by law if he/she:
   (A)   Violates this chapter;
   (B)   Permits a violation to exist on the premises under his/her control; or
   (C)   Fails to take action to abate the existence of the violationf(s)
within a specified time period, when ordered or notified to do so by the Health
Authority.
(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)
CHAPTER 124: MASSAGE THERAPY
Section
   
124.01   Purpose
   
124.02   Findings
   
124.03   Definitions
   
124.04   License required
   
124.05   License application
   
124.06   License terms and fees
   
124.07   License application verification and consideration
   
124.08   License eligibility
   
124.09   General license restrictions
   
124.10   Restrictions regarding sanitation and health
   
124.11   License suspension and revocation
   
124.12   Transfer and display of license
   
124.13   Inspections
   
124.14   Appeal and hearing procedure
§ 124.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate massage therapists and
therapeutic massage enterprises requiring that all be licensed pursuant to this
chapter. The licensing regulations prescribed in this chapter are necessary in
order to prevent criminal activity and to protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of the City of Brooklyn Park.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.02 FINDINGS.
   It is found and determined that:
   (A)   Persons who have recognized and standardized training in therapeutic
massage including in health and hygiene provide a legitimate and necessary
service to the general public;
   (B)   Health and sanitation regulations governing therapeutic massage
enterprises and massage therapists will minimize the risk of the spread of
communicable diseases and promote health and sanitation;
   (C)   License qualifications for therapeutic massage enterprises and massage
therapists will minimize the risk that such businesses and persons may
facilitate prostitution and other criminal activity in the city;
   (D)   Massage services provided by persons without recognized and
standardized training in massage can endanger members of the public by
facilitating the spread of communicable diseases, by exposing persons to
unhealthy and unsanitary conditions, and by increasing the risk of personal
injury; and
   (E)   The training of professional massage therapists through accredited
institutions and programs is an important means of ensuring the fullest measure
of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCREDITED INSTITUTION. An educational institution holding accredited status
from a school which has been licensed or registered by the Minnesota Office of
Higher Education or similar agency of another state either presently or at the
time the applicant obtained his or her diploma or certificate of graduation.
   ACCREDITED PROGRAM. A professional massage program that is presently, or at
the time the applicant obtained his or her diploma or certificate of
graduation, accredited by the Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation
("COMTA").
   CLEAN. The absence of dirt, grease, rubbish, garbage, and other offensive,
unsightly, or extraneous matter.
   GOOD REPAIR. Free of corrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, pitting, excessive
wear and tear, leaks, obstructions, and similar defects so as to constitute a
good and sound condition.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The city's registered sanitarian.
   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or the rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating, stretching, or
rolling of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid
of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with
or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic,
oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment, or other similar preparations.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. An individual who practices or administers therapeutic
massage to another for a fee or other consideration paid either directly or
indirectly and who can demonstrate to the city that he or she has current
insurance coverage of $1,000,000 for professional liability in the practice of
massage and
      (1)   Has completed 600 hours of therapeutic massage training with
content that includes the subjects of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics,
massage theory and research, and massage practice from an accredited
institution or program. These training hours must be authenticated by a single
provider through a certified copy of the transcript of academic record from the
institution issuing the certificate or diploma. Individuals who completed
training prior to the effective date of this chapter are only required to
complete 500 hours of certified therapeutic massage training; or
      (2)   Has one year of experience practicing massage therapy as
established by an affidavit and can document within two years of adoption of
this chapter that he or she has completed at least 600 hours of certified
therapeutic massage training with content that includes the subjects of
anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage theory and research, and massage
practice from an accredited institution or program. These training hours must
be authenticated by a single provider through a certified copy of the
transcript of academic record from the institution issuing the certificate or
diploma. This provision is only available to persons that are issued massage
therapist licenses by the city within the first two years of the adoption date
of this chapter.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE. A license issued by the city to a massage
therapist authorizing the licensee to practice or administer massage in the
city.
   OPERATE. To own, manage, or conduct or to have control, charge, or custody
over.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint
venture, or combination of individuals.
   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ENTERPRISE. A business which hires licensed massage
therapists to provide therapeutic massage within the city for a fee or other
consideration paid either directly or indirectly, that:
      (1)   Has one or more massage therapists employed or contracted to
provided massage therapy for the therapeutic massage enterprise; or
      (2)   Is located in a fixed location within the city wherein massage
therapy services are provided.
   WITHIN THE CITY. Physical presence in the city as well as telephone
referrals such as phone-a-massage operations in which the business premises,
although not physically located within the city, serves as a point of
assignment for employees who respond to requests for services within the city.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Massage therapy license. It shall be unlawful for any person to
practice massage therapy or provide or offer to provide massage therapy within
the city without a massage therapist license issued by the city. This includes
persons providing massage therapy at therapeutic massage enterprises that have
therapeutic massage enterprise licenses.
   (B)   Therapeutic massage enterprise license. It shall be unlawful for any
person or entity to operate a therapeutic massage enterprise within the city
without a therapeutic massage enterprise license issued by the city. The owner
or operator of a therapeutic massage enterprise need not be licensed as a
massage therapist unless he or she personally provides massage services.
   (C)   A therapeutic massage enterprise located in a residential district
must comply with all requirements set forth in § 152.901 of the City Code but
shall be exempt from the vocation administrative permit requirement.
   (D)   A therapeutic massage enterprise license or massage therapist license
is not required for the following:
      (1)   Persons licensed by the state to practice medicine, surgery,
osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry or persons working for
a licensed medical professional, provided that the massage is administered in
the regular course of the medical treatment and is not being provided as part
of a separate and distinct massage business;
      (2)   Persons licensed by the state as beauty culturists or barbers,
provided the persons do not hold themselves out as giving massage treatments
and further provided that massage by beauty culturists is limited to the head,
hands, neck, and feet and massage by barbers is limited to the head and neck;
      (3)   Places licensed or operating as a hospital, nursing home, hospice,
sanitarium, group home, or other health care office, clinic, or facility
established for hospitalization or medical care;
      (4)   Athletic coaches, directors, and trainers employed by public or
private schools;
      (5)   Accredited institutions and students of accredited institutions
which provide an accredited program of study or course work in massage therapy,
provided that the massage is provided during and as a part of the course or
clinical component of the institution's program or course work and students are
supervised by an instructor while performing the massage.
      (6)   Persons providing temporary massage services such as a "chair
massage" provided that all of the following requirements are met:
         (a)   The massage is provided in a location where the massage can
easily be seen by employees and visitors;
         (b)   The establishment where the massage is being provided does not
hold a license to sell alcoholic beverages;
         (c)   Massages are offered at the establishment no more than ten days
per calendar year;
         (d)   Each recipient of a massage remains in an upright position
during the massage, either in a seated or standing position; and
         (e)   Each recipient of a massage remains fully clothed in the normal
daytime attire worn when he or she enters the establishment and clothing except
for outerwear such as coats and jackets is not removed.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.05 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Therapeutic massage enterprise license application. An application for
a therapeutic massage enterprise license shall be filed, along with all
required fees and information with the city Licensing Division. The city shall
conduct a background investigation on all first-time applicants. The
application for a license under this section shall be made on a form supplied
by the city and must contain the following information:
      (1)   For all applicants:
         (a)   Whether the applicant is an individual, corporation,
partnership, or other form of organization and the name of the individual or
organization;
         (b)   The full name, address, date and place of birth, social security
number, and telephone number of the natural person designated by the applicant
as the business's on-site manager or agent along with the notarized written
consent of the person to:
            1.   Take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed
premises and operation;
            2.   Serve as the business's agent for purposes of service of
notice and other processes related to the license by the city;
            3.   If the premises is under construction or undergoing
substantial alteration, the application shall be accompanied by a set of
preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be licensed.
If the plans for design are already on file with the city's Building
Inspections Division, no plans need be submitted;
            4.   Proof of identification consisting of one of the following:
               a.   A valid driver's license or identification card issued by a
state of the United States that includes the photograph and date of birth of
the applicant;
               b.   A valid military identification card issued by the United
States Department of Defense; or
               c.   A valid passport issued by the United States or another
country if the applicant is a foreign national.
For purposes of satisfying this requirement, the "applicant" is deemed to be
the on-site manager or agent for the business that is signing the application
on behalf of the business; and
            5.   Such other information as the city may require.
   (B)   Massage therapist license application. An application for a massage
therapist license shall be filed, along with all required fees and information
with the city Licensing Division. The city shall conduct a background
investigation on all first-time applicants. The application for a license under
this section shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The full name, address, date and place of birth, social security
number, and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Evidence that the applicant has legal work status in the United
States;
      (3)   Documentation to verify whether the applicant has met the
definition of a massage therapist set forth by this chapter;
      (4)   Proof of identification consisting of one of the following:
         (a)   A valid driver's license or identification card issued by a
state of the United States that includes the photograph and date of birth of
the applicant;
         (b)   A valid military identification card issued by the United States
Department of Defense; or
         (c)   A valid passport issued by the United States or another country
if the applicant is a foreign national; and
      (5)   Such other information as the city may require.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.06 LICENSE TERMS AND FEES.
   (A)   The license and background investigation fees for licenses required by
this chapter shall be determined by the City Council in the city's fee
schedule. Penalties for late payments of license fees are set forth in §
110.38 of the City Code.
   (B)   Licenses expire annually on March 31. If a license application is
received in the middle of a license term, the license fee shall be prorated for
the remaining term of the license in accordance with §
110.39 of the City Code.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.07 LICENSE APPLICATION VERIFICATION AND CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   Background investigation. The City Manager must verify the information
supplied in the license application and investigate the background, including
the criminal background, of the applicant to assure compliance with this
chapter, by referring the application to the Police Chief for a CCH
Investigation.
   (B)   Massage therapist and therapeutic massage enterprise licenses will be
issued by the City Manager upon completion of the investigation and review of
the application. In the event that the license is denied, notice will be sent
to the applicant informing the applicant of the decision and his or her right
to appeal the decision to the hearing officer pursuant to §
124.14 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.08 LICENSE ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Therapeutic massage enterprise licenses. The city may deny issuance of
a therapeutic massage enterprise license in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent financial
interest in the business or the appointed on-site manager or agent has a
conviction for, or was charged with, but convicted of a lesser charge of any
crime which would reasonably pose an increased danger to the health and welfare
of the public should the applicant be granted a license in the city as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, and who has not shown competent evidence
of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties and
responsibilities of a licensee as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3;
      (2)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent financial
interest in the business or the appointed on-site manager or agent had a
massage therapist or massage therapy business-related license in the city or
another jurisdiction that was either suspended or revoked within five years
preceding the date of application;
      (3)   The information provided in the application does not meet the
requirements of this chapter;
      (4)   The applicant provided false or misrepresented information in the
application;
      (5)   The business is proposed to be operated on premises on which
property taxes, assessments, or other financial claims by the state, county, or
city are due, delinquent, or unpaid, provided the applicant or other entity in
which the applicant has an interest has the legal duty to pay said taxes,
assessments, or claims due and owing;
      (6)   The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect as
required by this chapter;
      (7)   The applicant has been denied a license under this chapter within
the preceding 12 months;
      (8)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent financial
interest in the business or the appointed on-site manager or agent applicant is
not of good moral character or repute; or
      (9)   The proposed premises in which the business proposes to operate is
located in a zoning district where the use is not allowed.
   (B)   Massage therapist licenses. The city may deny issuance of a massage
therapist license in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The applicant has a conviction for, or was charged with, but
convicted of a lesser charge of any crime which would reasonably pose an
increased danger to the health and welfare of the public should the applicant
be granted a license in the city as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, and
who has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties and responsibilities of a licensee as prescribed
by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3;
      (2)   The applicant had a massage therapist or massage therapy business-
related license in the city or another jurisdiction that was either suspended
or revoked within five years preceding the date of application;
      (3)   The applicant is not 18 years of age or older;
      (4)   The information provided in the application does not meet the
requirements of this chapter;
      (5)   The applicant provided false or misrepresented information on the
application;
      (6)   The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect as
required by this chapter;
      (7)   The applicant has been denied a license under this chapter within
the preceding 12 months; or
      (8)   The applicant is not of good moral character or repute.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.09 GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Area. A therapeutic massage enterprise license is effective only for
the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved license application.
If the licensed premises is proposed to be enlarged, altered, or extended, the
licensee must inform the City Manager.
   (B)   Coverings. When performing a massage, the massage therapist must
require that the person who is receiving the massage have his or her breasts
(with respect to females), buttocks, anus, and genitals covered with clothing
or a non-transparent material at all times. The massage therapist performing
the massage must have his or her breasts, buttocks, anus, and genitals covered
with clothing at all times.
   (C)   Prohibited massages. A massage therapist must not intentionally
massage or offer to massage the penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva, or vaginal
area of a person.
   (D)   Unlicensed massage therapists prohibited. No therapeutic massage
enterprise shall employ or use any person to perform massage who is not
licensed by the city as a massage therapist under this chapter, unless the
person is specifically exempted by this chapter from obtaining a massage
therapist license.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.10 RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SANITATION AND HEALTH.
   (A)   A therapeutic massage enterprise must be equipped with adequate and
conveniently located toilet rooms for the accommodation of its employees and
patrons. The toilet room must be well ventilated by natural or mechanical
methods and be enclosed with a door. The toilet room must be kept clean and in
good repair. It must be fully and adequately illuminated.
   (B)   A therapeutic massage enterprise must provide single-service disposal
paper or clean linens to cover the table, chair, furniture, or area on which
the patron receives the massage. If the table, chair, or furniture on which a
patron receives the massage is made of material impervious to moisture, such
table, chair, or furniture must be sanitized after each massage.
   (C)   The massage therapist must wash his or her hands and arms with water
and soap, anti-bacterial scrubs, alcohol, or other disinfectants prior to and
following each massage service performed.
   (D)   Massage tables, chairs, or furniture on which the patron receives the
massage must have surfaces that can be readily disinfected after each massage.
   (E)   Rooms in a therapeutic massage enterprise must be adequately
illuminated.
   (F)   Therapeutic massage enterprises must have a janitor's closet that
provides for the storage of cleaning supplies.
   (G)   Therapeutic massage enterprises must provide adequate refuse
receptacles that must be emptied as required by this chapter.
   (H)   Therapeutic massage enterprises must be continuously maintained in
good repair and in a sanitary condition and must take reasonable steps to
prevent the spread of infections and communicable diseases on the premises.
   (I)   Massage therapists must wear clean clothing when performing massage
services.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.11 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   A massage therapist license or therapeutic massage enterprise license
may be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by the city if the licensee has
engaged in any of the following conduct:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement contained in a
license application or a renewal application;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement made in the course
of carrying on the licensed occupation or business;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or state law;
      (4)   A licensee or in the case of a therapeutic massage enterprise
license, the business's owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent
financial interest in the business or the appointed on-site manager or agent's
criminal conviction that is directly related to the occupation or business
licensed as defined by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, provided that the person cannot
show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to
perform the duties of the licensed occupation or business as defined by M.S. §
364.03, Subd. 3.
      (5)   Conduct involving moral turpitude or permitting or allowing others
within their employ or organization to engage in conduct involving moral
turpitude or failing to prevent agents, officers, or employees from engaging in
conduct involving moral turpitude; or
      (6)   Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community.
   (B) Before the city may revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a license,
written notice must be sent to the applicant or owner/licensee setting forth
the alleged grounds for the potential action. The notice must also specify a
date upon which hearing on the action before the city's Hearing Officer must be
requested, which must not be less than ten days from the date of the notice.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.12 TRANSFER AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Transfer. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
chapter is entitled to receive a license. The license issued is for the person
or the entity named on the license. The license is not transferrable. However,
a massage therapist license is not considered to be transferred with respect to
this section if the licensed individual moves to a different place of
employment or location.
   (B)    Display/possession. A therapeutic massage enterprise license issued
must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises for which it is used. A
person licensed as a massage therapist must have in his or her possession a
copy of the license when massage services are being rendered.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.13 INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Authority and law enforcement shall have the right to enter,
inspect, and search the licensee's premises without a search and seizure
warrant during the hours in which the massage business is being operated. The
business records of the licensee shall be available for inspection by the city
during the hours in which the massage business is being operated.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
§ 124.14 APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE.
   A hearing officer shall hold hearings on contested massage therapist and
therapeutic massage enterprise license revocations, suspensions, denials, and
non-renewals. The hearing officer shall be a person appointed by the City
Council. At the hearing, the applicant/licensee may speak on his or her behalf
and may present witnesses and other evidence he or she deems necessary. In the
event that a violation of this chapter is involved, the hearing officer may
give due regard to the frequency and seriousness of violations, the ease with
which such violations could have been cured or avoided, and the licensee's good
faith efforts to comply. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue a written decision that includes findings of fact. The city
shall provide the applicant/licensee with a copy of the hearing officer's
decision. The applicant/licensee may appeal the hearing officer's decision to
the Minnesota Court of Appeals by writ of certiorari.
(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 125: BUSINESS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
General Provisions
   
125.01   Purpose
Micromobility Sharing Services
   
125.10   Definitions
   
125.11   License required
   
125.12   Control of right-of-way
   
125.13   Compliance with laws
   
125.14   Attachment of micromobility vehicles prohibited
   
125.15   Enforcement
   
125.16   Impoundment authorized
   
125.17   Disposal of impounded micromobility vehicles
   
125.18   Standards for micromobility vehicles
   
125.19   Hold harmless and indemnity agreement
   
125.20   Insurance
Courtesy Benches
   
125.30   Definitions
   
125.31   License required
   
125.32   Requirements
   
125.33   Hold harmless and indemnity agreement
   
125.34   Insurance
   
125.35   Location, construction, and maintenance
   
125.36   Removal
   
125.37   Advertising allowed
   
125.38   Enforcement
Mobile Food Units
   
125.50   On-street parking
   
125.51   Enforcement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 125.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate private business operations,
other than utility and telecommunications companies, occurring in the public
right-of-way.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
MICROMOBILITY SHARING SERVICES
§ 125.10 DEFINITIONS.
   IMPOUNDMENT or IMPOUND. Removal of a micromobility vehicle to a storage
facility or designated impound location by the city or a licensed city
contractor in response to authorization from a police officer, traffic control
agent, or other city employee who is designated by the Director of Operations
and Maintenance to act under this section.
   MICROMOBILITY SHARING or MICROMOBILITY SHARING SERVICE. Any rental or
lending service that:
      (1)   Allows riders to temporarily use micromobility vehicles available
from a fleet in exchange for a fee or other form of direct or indirect
compensation; and
      (2)   Encourages, allows, or is susceptible to micromobility vehicle
vending, renting, or lending from city-maintained right-of-way or other city
property.
   MICROMOBILITY VEHICLE. Bicycles, electric-assisted bicycles, motorized foot
scooters, passenger vehicles, and any other transportation device intended for
short-duration or short-distance trips that is identified by the City Manager
as a micromobility vehicle. A current list of all micromobility vehicles
included in this definition shall be kept on file by the City Manager and shall
be made readily available for public inspection.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.11 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no person shall
engage in the business of micromobility sharing from city-maintained right-of-
way or other city property without a valid license from the city. The business
of micromobility in city parks is regulated by
Chapter 95.
   (B)   Any micromobility vehicle that is part of a micromobility sharing
service not authorized by a license under this section shall be considered an
unpermitted micromobility vehicle. Any person in possession of an unpermitted
micromobility vehicle may ride such micromobility vehicle into and through the
city, subject to all applicable state and local laws and rules. All unpermitted
micromobility vehicles must be attended by the same user at all times while on
city-maintained right-of-way or other city property. "Attended" shall mean that
a readily identifiable user is located within five feet of the micromobility
vehicle or with the key in possession.
   (C)   Application. An application for a license must be made on a form
provided by the city. The application must contain all information deemed
necessary pursuant to this chapter. If the city determines that an application
is incomplete, they will return the application to the applicant with notice of
the information necessary to make the application complete.
   (D)   Issuance. All new licenses must be approved by the City Council.
   (E)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter terminate on March 31 of
the calendar year in which issued.
   (F)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter are valid only for
the person or business to whom the license was issued.
   (G)   Renewals. The renewal of a license may be approved by the City Manager
or designated official provided that the licensee meets all of the requirements
for renewal. If the renewal of a license is denied by the City Manager or
designated official, the licensee has the right to appeal that decision to the
City Council. The issuance of a license under this chapter is considered a
privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and does not entitle the
holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
   (H)    The license fee shall be set by the annual fee schedule.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.12 CONTROL OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall not operate so as to transfer
ownership or control of the public right-of-way to micromobility sharing
operators, or to any other party.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.13 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   Micromobility sharing services shall comply with all applicable federal,
state, and local laws, as they may be amended from time to time. Persons
operating, driving, or riding a micromobility vehicle upon a public street,
alley, highway, sidewalk, or other public property in the city shall be
governed by the corresponding provisions of M.S. Chapter 169.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.14 ATTACHMENT OF MICROMOBILITY VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   Micromobility vehicles that are part of any micromobility sharing service
shall not be secured, attached, or connected to a bicycle rack, or any other
immovable object with a lock unless expressly permitted under a valid license.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.15 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Micromobility vehicles are considered to be part of a micromobility
sharing service based on any of the following: marketing or advertising
associated with a business logo attached to the vehicle; marketing or
advertising associated with the overall appearance of the vehicle; the
existence of a locking mechanism that can be unlocked for a fee or other form
of direct or indirect compensation; or any other indicator that would lead a
reasonable person to believe that the vehicle is used for micromobility sharing
as defined in this section.
   (B)   Any micromobility vehicle that is found illegally parked, or otherwise
in violation of this section or the terms of a valid city license, shall be
subject to impoundment.
   (C)   Any micromobility vehicle that is left unattended on private property
shall be subject to impoundment. Impoundment shall not occur unless and until a
request to remove the micromobility vehicle is made by the owner or authorized
representative of such property.
   (D)   In addition to any other remedy available at equity or law, failure to
comply with the provisions of this section, or with the terms of any license
issued pursuant hereto, may result in impoundment, license termination,
suspension or cancellation, administrative fines, restrictions, or other
penalties.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.16 IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Micromobility vehicles may be impounded by any authorized city
employee because:
      (1)   The micromobility vehicle is in violation of § 125.14.
      (2)   The micromobility vehicle was found unattended, blocking traffic or
public infrastructure, or otherwise compromising public safety.
      (3)   The micromobility vehicle is part of an unpermitted micromobility
vehicle sharing service that is not attended or is found in violation of one or
more provisions of this section.
      (4)   The micromobility vehicle is found in violation of one or more of
the terms of a contract or license issued under § 125.11.
      (5)   The micromobility vehicle is on private property without consent of
the property owner and impoundment is requested by the property owner.
   (B)   All micromobility vehicles found in violation of this section are
subject to impoundment without notice to the micromobility sharing service.
   (C)   Not more than 72 hours after impoundment of any micromobility vehicle,
the city shall provide written notice to the owner of the micromobility
vehicle, as disclosed by readily identifiable owner contact information
attached to the micromobility vehicle. The notice shall be sent by either
electronic or US mail. The notice shall contain the full particulars of the
impoundment and redemption process. If a micromobility vehicle is redeemed
prior to the submission of notice, or if the city is unable to readily identify
the owner, then notice need not be sent. Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays
are to be excluded from the calculation of the 72 hour period.
   (D)   All micromobility vehicles impounded under this section shall be
subject to an impounded fee that is sufficient to offset the city's costs of
enforcement and storage for each such micromobility vehicle. The fee shall be
set in the annual fee schedule.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.17 DISPOSAL OF IMPOUNDED MICROMOBILITY VEHICLES.
   Notwithstanding
Chapter 90 of the City Code, impounded micromobility vehicles that remain
unclaimed by the owner for a period of at least 30 days may be sold to the
highest bidder at public auction or sale following reasonable published notice.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.18 STANDARDS FOR MICROMOBILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   All micromobility vehicles must be clearly identified with the
company's name.
   (B)   In addition to the general requirements listed above, micromobility
vehicle modes are subject to the following mode-specific requirements.
      (1)   Bicycles and electric-assisted bicycles:
         (a)   Must be parked in such a way that it is not blocking a public
sidewalk;
         (b)   Must not be parked on a street;
         (c)   Must be parked upright; and
         (d)   Must be equipped with reflective markings and lights for
operation after sunset.
      (2)   Motorized foot scooters:
         (a)   Must be parked in such a way that it is not blocking a public
sidewalk;
         (b)   Must not be parked on a street;
         (c)   Must be parked upright; and
         (d)   Must be equipped with reflective markings and lights for
operation after sunset.
      (3)   Passenger vehicles:
         (a)   Must follow all relevant state and city parking regulations.
         (b)   Vehicles found in violation of a parking regulation may be
ticketed and/or towed in accordance with state law.
         (c)   Vehicles may be parked in excess of a limited-duration space
(i.e., two-hour parking) on a public street without penalty provided the
vehicle is available for rental, but not overnight according to winter parking
rules.
         (d)   If parked on private property, the vehicle must be parked in a
marked parking space and follow the rules of the property owner. A property
owner may have the vehicle towed off the property in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.19 HOLD HARMLESS AND INDEMNITY AGREEMENT.
   The license applicant must enter into a hold harmless and indemnity
agreement with the city, in a form acceptable to the city, in which the
applicant agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the city from any claims,
losses, judgments, damages or costs incurred, including attorney's fees,
resulting from the issuance of the license, or arising out or in connection
with the licensee's locations of any micromobility vehicles.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.20 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The micromobility license applicant must maintain comprehensive
general liability insurance in an amount not less than a minimum set by the
city and at such insurance rates listed in the fee schedule in the
Appendix to this code, including liability for personal injury, death and
property damage, for all courtesy bench locations during the term of the
courtesy bench license.
   (B)   The applicant must submit a certificate of insurance that includes the
city as an additional insured and provides that the city must be given 30 days'
advance written notice of the cancellation or substantial modification of any
insurance described in the certificate of insurance.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
COURTESY BENCHES
§ 125.30 DEFINITIONS.
   COURTESY BENCH. A bench for the convenience and comfort of persons waiting
for buses placed and maintained near public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.31 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person placing or maintaining any courtesy bench on any public sidewalk
or any public right-of-way along a street or thoroughfare, or any private
property, for public use within the city shall first apply for and obtain a
license from the City Manager or designee for such courtesy bench. Courtesy
benches must conform to the provisions provided in this section.
   (A)   Application. An application for a license must be made on a form
provided by the city. The application must contain all information deemed
necessary pursuant to this chapter. If the city determines that an application
is incomplete, they will return the application to the applicant with notice of
the information necessary to make the application complete.
   (B)   Issuance. All new licenses must be approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Term. A license term shall be for two years and the City Council shall
set the license fee as part of the annual fee schedule.
   (D)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter are valid only for
the person or business to whom the license was issued.
   (E)   Renewals. The renewal of a license may be approved by the City Manager
or designated official provided that the licensee meets all of the requirements
for renewal. If the renewal of a license is denied by the City Manager or
designated official, the licensee has the right to appeal that decision to the
City Council. The issuance of a license under this chapter is considered a
privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and does not entitle the
holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.32 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The courtesy bench license applicant shall submit a current list of
the requested locations of the courtesy bench to be licensed with the initial
license application. A single license shall be issued to the applicant for
multiple courtesy bench locations.
   (B)   A maximum of 100 courtesy bench locations shall be allowed within the
city.
   (C)   The courtesy bench licensee must receive approval from the city before
any courtesy bench location may be changed. The request for a location change
must be made in writing and include a license fee that shall be set by the city
at a schedule that is listed in the
Appendix to this code.
   (D)   For any courtesy bench to be located partially or fully on private
property for public use, the courtesy bench license applicant must submit with
the application the signed approval from the property owner or a copy of the
signed agreement between the applicant and the property owner for the location
and public use of the courtesy bench. Courtesy benches on private property must
follow the site requirements listed in §
125.35.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.33 HOLD HARMLESS AND INDEMNITY AGREEMENT.
   The courtesy bench license applicant must enter into a hold harmless and
indemnity agreement with the city, in a form acceptable to the city, in which
the applicant agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the city from any claims,
losses, judgments, damages or costs incurred, including attorney's fees,
resulting from the issuance of the courtesy bench license, or arising out or in
connection with the licensee's location of the courtesy bench on city property.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.34 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The courtesy bench license applicant must maintain comprehensive
general liability insurance in an amount not less than a minimum set by the
city and at such insurance rates listed in the fee schedule in the Appendix to
this code, including liability for personal injury, death and property damage,
for all courtesy bench locations during the term of the courtesy bench license.
   (B)   The applicant must submit a certificate of insurance that includes the
city as an additional insured and provides that the city must be given 30 days'
advance written notice of the cancellation or substantial modification of any
insurance described in the certificate of insurance.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.35 LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   A courtesy bench shall be located parallel to the nearest curb and no
less than 30 inches behind the face of the curb at its closest point.
   (B)   A courtesy bench may be located on a concrete sidewalk, provided there
remains a minimum continuous width of six feet, including the top of the curb
or unobstructed sidewalk.
   (C)   A courtesy bench must not be located within the two-foot clear zone of
a bituminous multi-use path.
   (D)   A courtesy bench shall be installed and maintained on a durable, level
surface, including, but not limited to, concrete or decorative brick or block
pavers. Such courtesy bench shall be of sufficient weight or shall be secured
in a manner to minimize the potential of accidental tipping or vandalism. No
courtesy bench shall be fastened, secured or anchored to any city property,
including, but not limited to, city sidewalks, utility poles and signposts,
without the approval of the city.
   (E)   A courtesy bench shall have a minimum paved clearance of three feet on
at least one end of the courtesy bench.
   (F)   A courtesy bench placed on a boulevard shall have a durable surface
provided under and around the courtesy bench with the durable surface extending
from the curb to the sidewalk. A courtesy bench placed behind a sidewalk shall
have a durable surface under and around the courtesy bench with the durable
surface extending to the sidewalk and then to the curb. The durable surface
shall extend at least two feet beyond the ends of the courtesy bench when the
courtesy bench is located in front of a sidewalk. The durable surface shall
extend at least six inches beyond the ends of the courtesy bench when the
courtesy bench is not located in front of a sidewalk. A courtesy bench placed
at a location where no sidewalk exists shall have a durable surface extending
from the edge of the roadway to the courtesy bench, including clearance areas
required in this division. A right-of-way permit may be required when permanent
structures, surfaces or similar uses are proposed per § 102.28
   (G)   A courtesy bench shall not be located within five feet of a fire
hydrant, driveway, or marked crosswalk.
   (H)   A courtesy bench shall be constructed of durable materials, including,
but not limited to, concrete, wood, steel, plastic or a combination thereof,
with colors limited to earth tones of subdued greens, grays, browns, reddish-
browns, and golds.
   (I)   No courtesy bench shall be more than 44 inches high, 30 inches wide,
or more than seven feet long, overall.
   (J)   A courtesy bench shall be located only at a designated metro transit
bus stop, school bus stop, or in areas with significant rideshare pick-ups. No
more than one courtesy bench is allowed at a bus stop.
   (K)   It shall be the duty of the courtesy bench licensee to maintain each
courtesy bench, at all times, in a safe condition at its approved location, and
to inspect each courtesy bench periodically in order that such courtesy bench
may be properly maintained including the removal of snow and trash left in the
immediate vicinity.
   (L)   No license shall be granted within a light rail transit corridor or
where publicly owned benches are provided.
   (M)   The courtesy bench license application shall be denied if the city
determines that the maintenance of the courtesy bench at the proposed location
would tend to obstruct passage along any public sidewalk or public way, or tend
to create a hazard, or otherwise tend to be detrimental to the public safety,
convenience or welfare.
   (N)   If the owner or lessee of any property on which a courtesy bench is
located shall, by writing filed with the city on or before December 1 preceding
the expiration of a courtesy bench license, withdraw consent to the renewal of
such courtesy bench license, after such expiration, the city shall promptly
notify the courtesy bench licensee of the filing of such writing, and shall
deny the renewal of such license unless and until such owner or person in
possession or control of the property on which the courtesy bench is located
shall in writing consent to such renewal courtesy bench license being issued.
   (O)   In the event the license holder is not performing the maintenance
duties and the city abates trash, snow removal, repairs, and other maintenance
activities, the costs of the abatement must be paid for by the license holder
at the time of license renewal.
   (P)   All existing privately-owned courtesy benches within the city limits
at the time of adoption of this chapter shall have one year to comply with the
standards in this section.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.36 REMOVAL.
   (A)   The courtesy bench licensee shall remove all courtesy benches
authorized under a courtesy bench license, including any durable surface
installed under the courtesy bench, and shall restore the affected ground area
to the condition it was in prior to installation of the courtesy bench within
ten days following revocation of the courtesy bench license. If the licensee
fails to remove any courtesy bench as provided in this section, the city may,
at the licensee's cost, remove all courtesy benches authorized under a courtesy
bench license and underlying durable surface, complete any necessary
restoration and dispose of the courtesy benches and durable surfaces by any
means it deems appropriate after providing ten business days' written notice,
by certified mail, to the licensee of the city's intent to remove the courtesy
benches. If the licensee fails to pay for the costs incurred by the city in the
removal, restoration and disposal process within 15 days after the city's
demand for payment addressed to the licensee and sent by certified mail, the
city may draw on the surety provided by the licensee to reimburse the city for
its costs.
   (B)   The city may remove any courtesy bench authorized under a courtesy
bench license in the manner set forth in § 125.30 of this chapter when the
courtesy bench licensee fails to adequately repair or maintain a courtesy
bench, as determined by the city. The city must provide the licensee with ten
days' written notice, by certified mail, of the condition of the courtesy bench
and the need for appropriate repair or maintenance, and the city's intent to
remove the courtesy bench and underlying durable surface.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.37 ADVERTISING ALLOWED.
   Advertising may be displayed only on the front (i.e., the roadway side)
surface of the backrest of a courtesy bench, shall not exceed 12 square feet in
surface area, and not be for tobacco or alcohol products.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.38 ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to any other remedy available at equity or law, failure to
comply with the provisions of this section, or with the terms of any license
issued pursuant hereto, may result in license termination, suspension or
cancellation, administrative fines, restrictions, or other penalties.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
MOBILE FOOD UNITS
§ 125.50 ON-STREET PARKING.
   A licensed mobile food unit as defined under §
114.03 and regulated by
Chapter 114 may park in an otherwise legal manner on a public city street to
conduct business with the following conditions:
   (A)   The parking location is adjacent to a business property zoned as one
of the following:
      (1)   Business Park ("BP");
      (2)   General Industrial ("I");
      (3)   Transit-Oriented Development Employment ("TOD-E"); or
      (4)   Transit-Oriented Development Employment Transition ("TOD-E.T").
   (B)   The parking space is at least 50 feet from a driveway or intersection
to maintain driver visibility.
   (C)   Customer service must occur from the side of the mobile food unit
facing the adjacent curb.
   (D)   Waste receptacles must be provided by the mobile food unit licensee if
none are otherwise available.
   (E)   Parking hours are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily.
   (F)   Other locations and times may be considered through issuance of a
special event permit.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
§ 125.51 ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to any other remedy available at equity or law, failure to
comply with the provisions of this section, or with the terms of any license
issued pursuant hereto, may result in license termination, suspension or
cancellation, administrative fines, restrictions, or other penalties.
(Ord. 2021-1263, passed 5-10-21)
CHAPTER 126: TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL (THC) PRODUCTS
Section
   
126.01   Purpose and intent
   
126.02   Definitions
   
126.03   License required
   
126.04   Fees
   
126.05   Ineligibility and basis for denial of license
   
126.06   Prohibited acts
   
126.07   Additional requirements
   
126.08   Responsibility
   
126.09   Compliance checks and inspections
   
126.10   Other prohibited acts
 
   
126.99   Violations and penalty
§ 126.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this section is to regulate the sale of legalized adult-use
of any product that contains tetrahydrocannabinol and that meets the
requirements to be sold for human or animal consumption under M.S. § 151.72 for
the following reasons:
   (A)   By enacting 2022 Session Law Chapter 98, Article 13, the Minnesota
Legislature amended M.S. § 151.72 to allow the sale of certain products
containing tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).
   (B)   The new law does not prohibit municipalities from adopting and
enforcing local ordinances to regulate THC product businesses including, but
not limited to, local zoning and land use requirements and business license
requirements.
   (C)   The National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine note that
the growing acceptance, accessibility, and use of THC products, including for
medical purposes, have raised important public health concerns, while the lack
of aggregated knowledge of cannabis-related health effects has led to
uncertainty about the impact of its use.
   (D)   The city recognizes the danger THC use presents to the health,
welfare, and safety of youth in Brooklyn Park.
   (E)   The Minnesota Legislature recognized the danger of THC product use
among the public at large by setting potency and serving size requirements.
   (F)   The Minnesota Legislature recognized the danger of THC product use
among youth by prohibiting the sale of any product containing THC to those
under the age of 21, requiring that edible THC products be packaged without
appeal to children and in child-resistant packaging or containers.
   (G)   State law authorizes the Board of Pharmacy to adopt product and
testing standards in part to curb the illegal sale and distribution of THC
products and ensure the safety and compliance of commercially available THC
products in the State of Minnesota.
   (H)   The city has the opportunity to be proactive and make decisions that
will mitigate this threat and reduce exposure of young people to the products
or to the marketing of these products and improve compliance among THC product
retailers with laws prohibiting the sale or marketing of THC products to youth.
   (I)   A local regulatory system for THC product retailers is appropriate to
ensure that retailers comply with THC product laws and business standards of
the city to protect the health, safety, and welfare of our youth and most
vulnerable residents.
   (J)   A requirement for a THC product retailer license will not unduly
burden legitimate business activities of retailers who sell or distribute THC
products to adults but will allow the city to regulate the operation of lawful
businesses to discourage violations of state and local THC product-related
laws.
   (K)   In making these findings and enacting this chapter, it is the intent
of the city to ensure responsible THC product retailing, allowing legal sale
and access without promoting increases in use, and to discourage violations of
THC product-related laws, especially those which prohibit or discourage the
marketing, sale or distribution of THC products to youth under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The following words, terms,
and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
   CITY. The City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell licensed products are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS involve the use of persons
under 21 who purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products. COMPLIANCE
CHECKS may also be conducted by the city or other units of government for
educational, research, and training purposes, or for investigating or enforcing
federal, state, or local laws and regulations relating to licensed products.
   INSPECTIONS. The routine evaluation of a licensed establishment to ensure
compliance with all license conditions, this chapter, this code, state statutes
and federal law.
   LICENSED PRODUCTS. The term that refers to all THC products licensed under
this chapter.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a kiosk,
truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address storefront or other permanent type of structure authorized
for sales transactions.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business facility that sells goods or
merchandise directly to the public at retail value, including but not limited
to, convenience stores, grocery stores, restaurants and drug stores.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of licensed products in any manner
where any person has access to the licensed products without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. Assistance or
intervention means the actual physical exchange of the licensed product between
the customer and the licensee or employee.
   THC PRODUCT. Any product that contains more than trace amounts of
tetrahydrocannabinol and that meets the requirements to be sold for human or
animal consumption under M.S. § 151.72, as may be amended from time to time.
Licensed product does not include medical cannabis as defined in M.S. § 152.22,
Subd. 6, as may be amended from time to time.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric, or electronic, or other type of
device that dispenses licensed products upon the insertion of money, tokens, or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the licensed product.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any licensed
product within the city without first having obtained a license to do so from
the city.
   (B)   Application. An application for a license to sell licensed products or
THC products shall be made on a form provided by the city and include all
information the city deems necessary. If the city determines that an
application is incomplete, they shall return the application to the applicant
with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete. The
city shall conduct a background investigation of the applicant(s) on all new
applications. The investigation shall consider all facts and information
bearing upon the question of the applicant's fitness to receive the license and
to perform the duties imposed by this chapter. The city may conduct a
background check on an applicant for a renewal of a license if it is in the
public interest to do so. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a
person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible
for the license under this chapter and the city shall provide the person with a
notice of revocation, along with information on the right to appeal.
   (C)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the application
for a license, or it may delay action for a reasonable period of time as
necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it
deems necessary. If the City Council approves the license, the Licensing
Division shall issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council denies
the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with
notice of the applicant's right to appeal the City Council's decision. If a
license application is denied, the earliest an applicant may reapply is 12
months from the date the license is denied.
   (D)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December
31 of each year.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended as provided in §
126.99.
   (F)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person or
business to whom the license was issued. The transfer of any license to another
location, business, or person is prohibited.
   (G)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premises.
   (H)   Renewals. The renewal of a license may be approved by the City Manager
or designated official provided the license meets all the requirements for
renewal. If the renewal of a license is denied by the City Manager or
designated official, the licensee has the right to appeal that decision to the
City Council.
   (I)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license
issued under this chapter is a privilege and does not entitle the license
holder to automatic renewal of the license.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.04 FEES.
   No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate license
fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this section shall be
established by the City Council and adopted in the city fee schedule, and may
be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.05 INELIGIBILITY AND BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Ineligibility.
      (1)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a
moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to
be licensed under this chapter.
      (2)   No license shall be issued to a business located within 300 feet of
any public or private elementary, middle, or high school.
      (3)   Location. Licensed products may only be sold within a retail
establishment. No more than 15 licenses may be issued in each City Council
District.
      (4)   Number of licenses. No more than 45 licenses may be issued in the
city.
      (5)   No license may be issued to any establishment in which such sales
would be prohibited by state or federal law.
   (B)   Grounds for denial. Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a
license under this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 21 years.
      (2)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license.
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years for any
violation of a federal, state, or local law, other ordinance, provision, or
other regulation relating to the licensed products.
      (4)   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products suspended
or revoked during the 12 months preceding the date of application, or the
applicant has or had an interest in another premises authorized to sell
licensed products, whether in the city or in another jurisdiction, that has had
a license to sell licensed products suspended or revoked during the same time
period, provided the applicant had an interest in the premises at the time of
the revocation or suspension, or at the time of the violation that led to the
revocation or suspension.
      (5)   The applicant is a business that does not have an operating officer
or manager who is eligible pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
      (6)   The applicant is the spouse of a person ineligible for a license
pursuant to the provision of divisions (B)(2) and (3) of this section or who,
in the judgement of the Council, is not the real party in interest or
beneficial owner of the business to be operated, under the license.
      (7)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application or provides false or misleading information. Any false statement on
an application, or any willful omission of any information called for on such
application form, shall cause an automatic refusal of license, or if already
issued, shall render any license issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect
to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any
part thereof.
   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which real estate taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the city
or of the state are due, delinquent, or unpaid. If an action has been commenced
pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 278, questioning the amount or
validity of taxes, the council may, on application by the licensee, waive
strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for
taxes, or any portion thereof, which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one
year after becoming due unless such one-year period is extended through no
fault of the licensee.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.06 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   In general.
      (1)   No person shall sell or offer to sell any licensed product:
         (a)   By means of any type of vending machine.
         (b)   By means of self-service merchandising.
         (c)   By any other means, to any other person, on in any other manner
or form prohibited by state or other local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation.
         (d)   By means of delivery. Sales of licensed products must be
conducted at the licensed facility only.
      (2)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a product containing THC
that does not meet all the requirements of M.S. § 151.72, Subd. 3.
   (B)   Legal age. No person shall sell any licensed product to any person
under the age of 21.
      (1)   Age verification. Licensees shall verify by means of government
issued photographic identification that the purchaser is at least 21 years of
age. Verification is not required for a person over the age of 30. That the
person appeared to be 30 years of age or older does not constitute a defense to
a violation of this section.
      (2)   Signage. Notice of the legal sales age and age verification
requirement must be posted prominently and in plain view at all times at each
location where licensed products are offered for sale. The required signage,
which will be provided to the licensee by the city, must be posted in a manner
that is clearly visible to anyone who is or is considering making a purchase.
   (C)   Samples prohibited. No person shall distribute samples of any licensed
product free of charge or at a nominal cost.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.07 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Storage. All licensed products shall either be stored behind a counter
or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage
unit not left open and accessible to the general public.
   (B)   All THC products sold must meet requirements set forth in M.S. §
151.72.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.08 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees are responsible for the actions of their employees in regard
to the sale, offer to sell, and furnishing of licensed products on the licensed
premises. The sale, offer to sell, or furnishing of any licensed product by an
employee shall be considered an act of the licensee. Nothing in this section
shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the employee to
any civil penalties that the city deems to be appropriate under this chapter,
state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.09 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All premises licensed under this section shall be open to inspection by the
city during regular business hours. From time to time, the city shall conduct
compliance checks. No person used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a
false identification misrepresenting their age. All persons lawfully engaged in
a compliance check shall answer all questions about their age asked by the
licensee or their employee, and produce any identification, if any exists, for
which they are asked. The city will conduct a compliance check that involves
the participation of a person at least 18 years of age, but under the age of 21
to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase the licensed products.
Persons used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by law
enforcement or other designated personnel. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational,
research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular
state or federal law. Additionally, from time to time, the city will conduct
inspections to determine compliance with any or all other aspects of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.10 OTHER PROHIBITED ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts are a violation of this
chapter by individuals and may be enforced as indicated:
   (A)   Prohibiting furnishing or procurement. It is a misdemeanor violation
of this chapter for any person 21 years of age or older to purchase or
otherwise obtain any licensed product on behalf of a person under the age of
21.
   (B)   Use of false identification. It is a petty misdemeanor violation of
this chapter for any person to attempt to disguise their true age by the use of
a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another
person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the
actual age of the person using that identification.
   (C)   Possession under 21. It is a petty misdemeanor violation of this
chapter for any person under the age of 21 to possess licensed products.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22)
§ 126.99 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations.
      (1)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation of this chapter, or
a recommendation to deny or not renew a license, the alleged violator must be
issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged
violation and which must inform the alleged violator of their right to be heard
on the accusation.
      (2)   Hearings. If a person accused of violating this chapter so
requests, a hearing will be scheduled, the time and place of which must be
published and provided to the accused violator.
      (3)   Hearing Officer. The City Council will periodically approve a list
of persons, from which the City Manager or designated agent will randomly
select a hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for which a hearing is
requested.
      (4)   Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of
this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officers reasons
for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under division (B) of
this section, must be recorded in writing, a copy of which must be provided to
the accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, the findings must be
recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator. The decision of
the hearing officer is final, subject to an appeal as described in division (A)
(5) of this section.
      (5)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer must
be filed in the Hennepin County District Court within ten business days of the
date of the decision.
      (6)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section prohibits the city
or any other legitimate jurisdiction from seeking criminal prosecution for an
alleged violation of this chapter or any other state or federal law regulating
licensed products. This includes seeking misdemeanor prosecution for any
alleged violation of this chapter under §
10.99.
      (7)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Administrative penalties.
      (1)   Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or
whose employee has violated this chapter, will be charged as follows:
         (a)   First violation of this chapter, an administrative fine of $300.
         (b)   Second offense at the same licensed premises within a 36-month
period, an administrative fine of $600.
         (c)   Third or any subsequent offense at the same licensed location
within a 36-month period, an administrative fine of $1,000 and the license will
be suspended for a period of not less than 30 consecutive days.
         (d)   Fourth or any subsequent violation within 36 months:
Administrative fine of $2,000 and/or license revoked.
      (2)   Employees of licensees and other individuals. Individuals, other
than persons under the age of 21 regulated by division (B)(3) of this section,
found to be in violation of this chapter may be charged an administrative fee
of $50.
      (3)   Persons under the age of 21. Persons under the age of 21 who use a
false identification to purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products may
only be subject to non-criminal, non-monetary civil penalties or remedies such
as THC-related education classes, diversion programs, community services, or
another non-monetary, civil penalty that the city determines to be appropriate.
The City Council will consult with educators, parents, guardians, persons under
the age of 21, public health officials, court personnel, and other interested
parties to determine an appropriate remedy for persons under the age of 21 in
the city in the best interest of the underage person. The remedies for persons
under 21 who use a false identification to purchase or attempt to purchase
licensed products may be established by ordinance and amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 2022-1286, passed 12-5-22; Am. Ord. 2024-1303, passed 6-24-24)
CHAPTER 127: CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
   
127.01   Findings and purpose
   
127.02   Definitions
   
127.03   Pre-license certification of cannabis businesses
   
127.04   Retailer registration
   
127.05   Registration enforcement
   
127.06   Compliance checks
   
127.07   Hours of operation
   
127.08   Temporary cannabis events
   
127.09   Requirements for lower-potency hemp edible retailers
 
   
127.99   Penalty
§ 127.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The City of Brooklyn Park makes the following legislative findings:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S.
Chapter 342, which authorizes the city to protect the public health, safety,
welfare of the city’s residents by regulating cannabis businesses within the
legal boundaries of the city.
   (B)   The city finds and concludes that the proposed provisions are
appropriate and lawful land use regulations for the city, that the proposed
amendments will promote the community's interest in reasonable stability in
zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed provisions are in the
public interest and for the public good.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24)
§ 127.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. An entity with a preliminary license approval, license, or other
applicable written approval issued by the OCM that is applying for an initial
registration or for registration renewal.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. As defined in M.S. § 342.01.
   CANNABIS RETAILER. A business with a cannabis retailer license or cannabis
retail endorsement from the OCM.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE RETAILER. A business with a lower-potency hemp
edible retailer license from the OCM.
   OCM. The Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management.
   POTENTIAL LICENSEE. An entity that has not received a license from the OCM
and is seeking a prelicense certification.
   RETAILER. Every business that is licensed under the act and required to
register with the city under M.S. § 342.22. Including cannabis businesses and
lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
   THE ACT. M.S. Chapter 342, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1318, passed 10-13-25)
§ 127.03 PRE-LICENSE CERTIFICATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   The City Manager, or their designee, is authorized to certify whether
a proposed cannabis business complies with the city’s zoning ordinances, this
chapter, and if applicable, with State Fire Code and Building Code pursuant to
M.S. § 342.13.
   (B)   Potential licensees are responsible for obtaining all necessary
zoning, land use, and State Fire and Building Code approvals prior to the city
receiving the request for certification from the OCM. If a potential licensee
fails to obtain necessary approvals prior to the city receiving a request for
certification, the city will not certify that the potential licensee complies
with the applicable law, regulation, ordinance, or other applicable standard.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1318, passed 10-13-25)
§ 127.04 RETAILER REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Retail registration required. Before making retail sales to customers
or patients, a retailer must register with the city. Making retail sales to
customers or patients without an active registration is prohibited.
   (B)   Civil penalties for sales without registration. Subject to M.S. §
342.22, Subd. 5(e) the city may impose a civil penalty, as specified in the
city’s fee schedule, for making a sale to a customer or patient without a valid
registration from the city and a valid license from the OCM.
   (C)   Processing registrations.
       (1)   Applications will be processed on a first-come, first- served
basis based on the city receiving a complete application and payment of all
fees.
      (2)   The date a certification under §
127.03 of this code is issued will have no impact on the applicant’s
registration processing.
      (3)   Once an application is considered complete, the city shall inform
the applicant as such and forward the application for approval or denial.
   (D)   Cannabis retail registration limit.
      (1)   The city will issue no more than one cannabis retailer registration
per 12,500 residents of the city. City population will be determined based on
the most recent population estimates from the state demographer.
      (2)   Registrations issued to businesses with a cannabis retailer
license, preliminary license approval, or other applicable written approval
from the OCM will count toward the city’s registration limit. Businesses
operating under a tribal compact entered into under M.S. §§ 3.9224 or 3.9228
and tribally issued licenses and registrations are counted towards the
registration limit.
      (3)   (a)   If a registration becomes available due to population
increases or the termination of a registration the city will conduct a lottery
to select the order in which to process complete applications. The city will
accept applications for at least 30 days from the date the registration becomes
available after which the city will conduct a random lottery selected all
completed applications and placing them in the order in which the applications
will be processed. All sections of this chapter shall apply to processing
complete applications after the lottery selection process, except the language
in division (C)(1) of this section.
         (b)   The date a registration becomes available will be as follows:
            1.   A registered business’s license lapses or is revoked by the
OCM.
            2.   The calculations in division (D)(1) of this section are
updated based on the most recent population estimates from the state
demographer and the result is that a new registration is available.
   (E)   Application. The applicant must submit a registration application or
renewal form provided by the city. The form may be amended from time to time by
the City Manager, but must include or be accompanied by:
      (1)   Name, address, phone number and email of the property owner.
      (2)   Name, address, phone number and email of the applicant.
      (3)   Address and parcel ID for the property for which the registration
is sought.
      (4)   Certification that the applicant complies with the requirements of
this chapter and Chapter 152 of this code.
       (5)   Any additional information the city deems necessary.
      (6)   Fee required. At the time of initial application, and prior to the
city’s consideration of any renewal application, each retailer must pay, as
established in the city’s fee schedule.
      (7)   Proof of taxes, assessments, utility charges or other financial
claims of the city of the state are current.
      (8)   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of preliminary
license approval from the OCM.
      (9)   Any additional information required by the city.
   (F)   Immediate denial; buffers. Buffers enacted pursuant to the city’s
zoning code for cannabis retail businesses will be established on the earlier
of the city receiving the request from the OCM for certification that is
ultimately successful pursuant to §
127.03 of this code or the city receiving a complete application for a
registration. An applicant that does not comply with the buffer requirements of
the city’s zoning code will be immediately denied.
   (G)   Processing application. Once the city receives a complete application,
and the maximum number of registrations defined in §
127.04(D) have not been issued, the applicant will receive written confirmation
confirming that the applicant has submitted a complete application and
informing the applicant of the steps that must be complete before the city will
issue the registration:
      (1)   Fee required. At the time of initial application, and prior to the
city’s consideration of any renewal application, each retailer must pay fees or
initial registration and renewal as established in the city’s fee schedule.
Initial registration fees and renewal registration fees are nonrefundable.
      (2)   Preliminary compliance check. Prior to issuing any retail
registration, the city shall conduct a preliminary compliance check to ensure
compliance with this chapter and any other regulations established pursuant to
M.S. § 342.13.
      (3)   At the time of the preliminary compliance check, the applicant must
also submit a form recertifying that the applicant complies with the
requirements of this chapter and proof of taxes, assessments, utility charges
or other financial claims of the city or the state are current for both the
applicant and the proposed location.
      (4)   Fee required. At the time of initial application, and prior to the
city’s consideration of any renewal application, each retailer must pay fees or
initial registration and renewal as established in the city’s fee schedule.
Initial registration fees and renewal registration fees are nonrefundable.
   (H)   Reasons for denial. The city shall not issue a registration or renewal
if any of the following conditions are true:
      (1)   The applicant has not submitted a complete application.
      (2)   The applicant does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
      (3)   The applicant does not comply with applicable zoning, building,
fire, health and land use regulations.
      (4)   The applicant is found to not comply with the requirements of the
act or this chapter at the preliminary compliance check.
      (5)   The applicant does not have a valid license or other applicable
written approval from the OCM.
   (I)   Issuing the registration or renewal. The city shall issue the
registration or renewal if the retailer meets the requirements of this chapter,
including that none of the reasons for denial in division (H) are true.
   (J)   Nontransferable. A registration is not transferable to another person
or entity.
   (K)   Amending an application. An applicant that has submitted a complete
application for a registration may not amend information on the application
once it has been submitted and deemed complete.
   (L)   Waitlist. During the time when applications for open registration
slots are being processed, applicants that submitted complete applications will
be placed on a waitlist based on the order in which they were received or the
order selected in the lottery and processed should the city deny applications
with a higher priority order based on the date received.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1318, passed 10-13-25)
§ 127.05 REGISTRATION ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Generally. The city may impose a fine or suspend a registration under
this chapter on a finding that the registered business has failed to comply
with the requirements of this chapter or any applicable statute or regulation.
   (B)   Notice and right to hearing. Prior to imposing a fine or suspending
any registration under this chapter, the city shall provide the registered
business with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the
registered business of his or her right to a hearing on the alleged violation.
      (1)   Notice shall be delivered in person or by regular mail to the
address of the registered business and shall inform the registered business of
its right to a hearing. The notice will indicate that a response must be
submitted within ten business days of the date of the notice, or the right to a
hearing will be waived.
      (2)   The registered business will be given an opportunity for a hearing
before the city’s Hearing Officer before final action to fine or suspend a
registration. Provided, the registered business has submitted a written
application for appeal within ten business days after the notice was served.
The Hearing Officer shall give due regard to the frequency and seriousness of
the violations, the ease with which such violations could have been cured or
avoided and good faith efforts to comply and shall issue a decision to fine or
suspend the registration only upon written findings. The decision of the
Hearing Officer shall be final. Appeals of any decision made by the Hearing
Officer must be filed in the district court for the city in which the alleged
violation occurred.
   (C)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Manager or designee, a
registered business poses an imminent threat to the health or safety of the
public, the city may immediately suspend the registration and provide notice of
the right to hold a subsequent hearing as prescribed in division (B)(2).
   (D)   Reinstatement. The city may reinstate a registration if it determines
that the violations have been resolved. The city shall reinstate a registration
if the OCM determines the violations have been resolved.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24)
§ 127.06 COMPLIANCE CHECKS.
   (A)   The city shall complete at minimum one compliance check per calendar
year of every registered business to assess if the business meets age
verification requirements, as required under M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 4(b) and M.S.
§ 342.24 and any applicable cannabis or hemp regulations adopted by the city.
   (B)   The city shall conduct at minimum at least one unannounced age
verification compliance check per calendar year. Age verification compliance
checks shall involve persons at least 17 years of age but under the age of 21
who, with the prior written consent of a parent or guardian if the person is
under the age of 18, attempt to purchase adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products under the direct supervision of a law enforcement officer or an
employee of the city.
   (C)   Any failures under this section are a basis for enforcement action and
must be reported to the OCM.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24)
§ 127.07 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Cannabis retailers are prohibited from making retail sales of cannabis,
cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived
consumer products between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m., Monday through
Saturday; and 2:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m., Sunday.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24)
§ 127.08 TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   Temporary cannabis events must obtain a permit and meet the requirements of
§
152.905 of this code.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24)
§ 127.09 REQUIREMENTS FOR LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE RETAILERS.
   (A)   The city will not issue a lower-potency hemp edible retailer a
registration if the proposed location is within 300 feet of a school. The
distance is measured from entry door to entry door.
   (B)   Location must comply with Tables 152.609.1 and 152.707.1 of this code.
   (C)   On-site consumption of lower-potency hemp edibles is permitted at all
locations licensed for on-sale liquor pursuant to M.S. Chapter 340A.
   (D)   Except for lower-potency hemp edibles that are intended to be consumed
as a beverage and are being sold at an exclusive liquor store, all lower-
potency hemp edibles must be sold from behind a counter and stored in a locked
case.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1318, passed 10-13-25)
§ 127.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply
with any of its requirements constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as
defined by law. Each day each violation continues or exists, constitutes a
separate offense. Violations of this chapter can occur regardless of whether or
not a permit is required for a regulated activity listed in this chapter.
Violations of this chapter may also be addressed under
Chapter 37 of this code.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter shall be grounds for enforcement against any
business license or retail registration issued by the city.
(Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1318, passed 10-13-25)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
         
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE
         
132.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
         
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
         
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
         
135.   DRUG OFFENSES
         
136.   WEAPONS
         137.   PREDATORY OFFENDERS RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
 
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Loitering prohibited
   
130.02   Attempted offenses and liability
   
130.03   Use of motor powered craft on Shingle Creek
§ 130.01 LOITERING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Petty misdemeanors. Whoever commits any of the following acts is
guilty of a petty misdemeanor:
      (1)   Lingering about the doorway of any building, or sitting or
lingering upon the steps, window sills, railing, fence, or parking area
adjacent to any building in such a manner so as to obstruct or partially
obstruct ingress to or egress from such building or in such a manner to annoy
the owner or occupant.
      (2)   Remaining for more than five minutes on any private business
premise which is posted with a conspicuous sign containing the words “No
Loitering” when the business establishment is closed; or the person charged
does not visibly demonstrate any intent to conduct business at the
establishment or to leave the premise after having conducted such business.
      (3)   Remaining for more than five minutes on any public business premise
which is posted with a conspicuous sign containing the words “No Loitering”
when such premise neither has been nor will be open for business within 30
minutes.
      (4)   Remaining for more than five minutes on any public or private non-
business premise which is posted with a conspicuous sign containing the words
“No Loitering.”
      (5)   Lingering for any length of time upon any public or private
premises or moving in a slow and deliberate manner without purpose or otherwise
interfering with, obstructing, or rendering dangerous or unreasonable for
passage, any public highway, sidewalk, parking area or right-of-way after
having been warned within the preceding four months, either orally or in
writing, by the owner, agent, manager or person in charge thereof, or by any
law enforcement agent or official, that such conduct will result in a charge
under this section.
   (B)   Misdemeanors. Whoever commits any of the following acts is guilty of a
misdemeanor:
      (1)   Failing or refusing to vacate or leave any premises after being
requested or ordered, either orally or in writing, to do so by the owner,
agent, manager or person in charge thereof, or by any law enforcement agent or
official or returning at any time thereafter to any such premise after having
been so requested or ordered to vacate such premise.
      (2)   Any of the acts described in division (A) of this section within
one year of being found guilty of any violation of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Premises. For purposes of this section, PREMISES includes any yard,
lot, parcel, sidewalk, boulevard, street, highway, alley, park, playground,
restaurant, café, church, school, any car or other motor vehicle, parking lot,
drive-in, building used for business, commercial or industrial purposes,
washroom or lavatory, apartment hallway or other location whether public or
private in the City of Brooklyn Park. Business premises include all premises,
whether public or private, which include a facility that has established open
and closed hours. Non-business premises include all other premises in the City
of Brooklyn Park.
('72 Code, § 914:00) (Ord. 1993-733, passed 9-27-93)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.02 ATTEMPTED OFFENSES AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   Attempts. Whoever, with intent to commit a penal offense or
misdemeanor, does an act which is a substantial step toward, and more than
preparation for, the commission of the penal offense or misdemeanor is guilty
of an attempt to commit that penal offense or misdemeanor.
   (B)   Liability for illegal acts of another. A person is guilty of a penal
offense and is personally liable for any penal offense or misdemeanor committed
by another if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or
conspires with or otherwise procures the other to commit the penal offense or
misdemeanor.
('72 Code, § 980:00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.03 USE OF MOTOR POWERED CRAFT ON SHINGLE CREEK.
   It is unlawful to operate a motor operated or powered watercraft or boat,
including waterborne aircraft, on Shingle Creek within the city.
('72 Code, § 985:00) (Ord. 1978-256(A), passed 1-9-78)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE
Section
Obstructing Justice
   
131.01   Threats
   
131.02   Conspiracy
   
131.03   Obstructing legal process or arrest
   
131.04   Resisting arrest
   
131.05   Falsely reporting crime
OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE
§ 131.01 THREATS.
   It is unlawful to directly or indirectly address any threat or intimidation
to a public officer or to a referee, arbitrator, appraiser or assessor or to
any other person authorized by law to hear or determine any controversy or
matter with intent to induce the person contrary to the person's duty to do or
make or to omit or delay any act, decision or determination.
('72 Code, § 940:00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.02 CONSPIRACY.
   It is unlawful for two or more persons to conspire to commit any act
injurious to public health, public morals, trade or commerce or for the
perversion or obstruction of public justice or the due administration of the
law.
('72 Code, § 940:05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.03 OBSTRUCTING LEGAL PROCESS OR ARREST.
   It is unlawful to intentionally obstruct, hinder, or prevent the lawful
execution of any legal process, civil or criminal, or apprehension of another
on a charge or conviction of a criminal offense or interfere with a peace
officer while the officer is engaged in the performance of the officer's
official duties.
('72 Code, § 940:10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.04 RESISTING ARREST.
   It is unlawful to resist in any way any police officer engaged in the lawful
discharge of the officer's duty in attempting to take such person into custody.
('72 Code, § 940:11) (Ord. 1973-142(A), passed 5-14-73; Am. Ord. 1984-445(A),
passed 2-27-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.05 FALSELY REPORTING CRIME.
   It is unlawful to inform a law enforcement officer that a crime has been
committed, knowing that it is false and intending that the officer shall act in
reliance upon it.
('72 Code, § 940:15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 132: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
132.01   Curfew for minors
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
   OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by Hennepin County
Dispatch.
   PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
   PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for providing
food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor. The person
providing primary care or custody to the minor must not be another minor.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   Minors under the age of 12 years. It is unlawful for a minor under
the age of 12 years to be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; or in or
upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; or in or upon any
vacant lot, after 9:00 p.m., official city time, on Sunday through Thursday
nights, and after 10:00 p.m., official city time, on Friday and Saturday
nights.
      (2)   Minors ages 12 to 14. It is unlawful for a minor of the age of 12,
13, or 14 years to be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds
or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; or in or upon places
of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; or in or upon any vacant lot, after
10:00 p.m., official city time, on Sunday through Thursday nights, and after
11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.
      (3)   Minors ages 15 years to 18 years. It is unlawful for a minor of the
age of 15, 16 or 17 years to be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; or in or
upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; or in or upon any
vacant lot, after 11:00 p.m., official city time, on Sunday through Thursday
nights, and after 12:01 a.m. on Friday and Saturday.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section will be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor will this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of the
minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of such business trade, profession, or occupation and the minor's
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception must carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor's presence at work.
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor's
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor.
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew.
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city's designated law enforcement provider about the minor's
presence.
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. It is unlawful for a
parent, guardian, or other adult having the primary care or custody of any
minor to permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. It is unlawful for a person operating or in
charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment to permit any
minor to enter or remain in the person's place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by the minor's
parent, guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this section apply.
   (H)   Defense. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the city's
designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Penalty, see § 132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of §
132.01 may be adjudicated delinquent and is subject to the dispositional
alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as amended.
   (B)   Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of §
132.01 is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced up to the maximum
penalty authorized by state law for a misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
Trespassing on Private Property
   
133.01   Purpose
   
133.02   Definitions
   
133.03   When trespass notice may issue
   
133.04   Prohibited conduct
   
133.05   Additional provisions
Injury to Property
   
133.15   Injury to property
   
133.16   Crops
   
133.17   Buildings
Smoking of Cannabis or Hemp in Public Places
   133.25   Definitions
   133.26   Prohibited conduct
 
   133.99   Penalty
TRESPASSING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 133.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to enable private owners of real property,
situated within the city and to which the public has some implicit right of
access, to exclude persons from that property where the person has committed a
crime on the premises or violated the properly posted rules of conduct for the
property.
('72 Code, § 912:00) (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93)
§ 133.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMON AREAS. All areas of the property which are maintained for the common
use of its tenants or the general public incidental to the conduct of the
normal and legitimate activities upon the premises, including but not limited
to parking lots and ramps, private roadways, reception areas, rotunda, waiting
areas, hallways, restroom facilities, elevators, escalators, and staircases.
   COVERED PREMISES. Any improved real property, or portion thereof, to which
the public has an implicit right of access including, but not limited to,
places of worship, shopping malls, retail sales facilities, hotels, motels,
nursing homes, restaurants, multiple-family residential buildings, hospitals,
medical and dental offices, clubs, lodges, office buildings, banks and
financial institutions, transit stations, athletic and recreational facilities,
personal service establishments, theaters, and day care facilities.
   PROPERTY MANAGER. Any owner of a covered premises or the agent thereof who
is authorized to exercise control over the property, including common areas.
The term PROPERTY MANAGER includes any tenant who is an owner of the property
or agent of the owner and authorized to exercise control over the property,
including common areas.
   TENANT. Any authorized occupant of a covered premises, or the agent thereof.
   TRESPASS NOTICE. A written notice which contains minimally the following
information:
      (1)   A verbatim copy of §
133.04 hereof.
      (2)   The name, date of birth, and address of the person to whom the
notice is issued and the name of the person's custodial parent or guardian
where that person is a juvenile.
      (3)   A description of the specific conduct which serves as a basis for
the notice's issuance.
      (4)   A description of the specific property to which the trespass notice
applies.
      (5)   The period during which the trespass notice is in effect, including
the date of its expiration.
      (6)   The name, title, and telephone number of a person with authority to
modify, amend, or rescind the trespass notice prior to its normal expiration.
      (7)   The method by which the trespass notice was served upon the person
to whom it was issued.
('72 Code, § 912:05) (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93)
§ 133.03 WHEN TRESPASS NOTICE MAY ISSUE.
   A property manager or tenant may issue a trespass notice as provided under
this subchapter only under the following circumstances:
   (A)   Where there is probable cause to believe that the person has committed
an act prohibited by state statute or city ordinance while on the covered
premises, whether on common areas or a tenant's space; or
   (B)   Where there is probable cause to believe that the person has violated
the rules of conduct for the property which have been conspicuously posted at
all public entrances to the property or have been personally provided to the
person in writing by the property manager or tenant.
('72 Code, § 912:10) (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93)
§ 133.04 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   It is unlawful to trespass in or upon any private property and,
without claim of right, refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the property
manager or tenant.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person who has been served with a trespass notice
in conformity with this section to enter the premises described therein during
its effective period without the written permission of the issuing property
manager or tenant or the authorized agent thereof named in the notice.
   (C)   It is unlawful to enter any area of private property in violation of
conspicuously posted signs prohibiting or restricting access thereto, including
but not limited to the following signs: “No Trespassing,” “Authorized Personnel
Only,” “Private,” “Employees Only,” or “Emergency Exit Only.”
('72 Code, § 912:15) (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 2022-1281, passed
8-22-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.05 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Where a trespass notice is issued by a tenant, who is not the property
manager, the notice is effective only as to that portion of the premises over
which the tenant is entitled to exercise control.
   (B)   No trespass notice will be effective for more than one year from the
date of its original issuance.
   (C)   All trespass notices issued pursuant to this section must be properly
served upon the person named therein as follows:
      (1)   Personal service documented by either a receipt signed by the
person to whom it was issued or an affidavit of the issuer; or
      (2)   Where the person named in the trespass notice is arrested by a
police officer for an act prohibited by state statute or city ordinance, the
arresting officer may personally serve the notice on behalf of the property
manager or tenant and so document that fact in the officer's official police
report detailing the incident.
('72 Code, § 912:20) (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93)
INJURY TO PROPERTY
§ 133.15 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful to wilfully or maliciously displace, remove, injure or
destroy:
   (A)   A highway or private way laid out by authority of law or bridge upon
such public or private way;
   (B)   A tree, rod, post or other monument which has been erected or marked
for the purpose of designating a point in any boundary or any mark or
inscription thereon;
   (C)   A mile board, milestone or guide post erected upon a highway or any
inscription thereon;
   (D)   A line of telegraph or telephone or any part thereof or any
appurtenance or apparatus connected with the working of any magnetic or
electric telegraph or telephone or the sending or conveying of messages
thereby;
   (E)   The pipe or main for conducting gas or water or heat or any works
erected for supplying building with gas or water or heat or any appurtenance or
appendage connected therewith;
   (F)   A sewer or drain or a pipe or a main connected therewith or forming a
part thereof.
('72 Code, § 935:00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 133.16 CROPS.
   It is unlawful to maliciously injure or destroy any standing crops, grain,
cultivated fruits or vegetables, the property of another, in any case for which
punishment has not been otherwise prescribed.
('72 Code, § 935:05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 133.17 BUILDINGS.
   It is unlawful in any manner to wilfully damage any building or part
thereof, throw any stone or other missile at or break any window therein or
aid, counsel, hire or procure any persons to do so.
('72 Code, § 935:10) Penalty, see §
10.99
SMOKING OF CANNABIS OR HEMP IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 133.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS FLOWER, CANNABIS PRODUCTS, and HEMP-DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS shall
have the meanings given to them in M.S. § 342.01, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   PUBLIC PLACE. The following locations when owned or operated by a
governmental entity:
      (1)   Places where smoking is prohibited under the Minnesota Indoor Clean
Air Act; and
      (2)   Parks, trails, the parking lots of city-owned facilities, and
locations within 100 feet of the public entrance(s) of city-owned or operated
buildings, but does not include the driving range, practice areas, and course
area of city-owned golf courses.
(Ord. 2024-1302, passed 6-24-24)
§ 133.26 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   No person shall consume by means of smoking, vaporizing, or otherwise
consuming smoke or vapor produced by heating or igniting cannabis flower,
cannabis products, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place.
(Ord. 2024-1302, passed 6-24-24) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   Notwithstanding any other penalty provision in the city code, a violation of
§§
133.25 and
133.26 shall be considered a petty misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of
$100.
(Ord. 2024-1302, passed 6-24-24)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
134.01   Assault
   
134.02   Lurking
   
134.03   Noisy parties
   
134.04   Social host
   
134.05   Access to multi-unit housing structures by United States Census Bureau
Employees
Disorderly Conduct
   
134.15   Disorderly conduct defined
   
134.16   Exclusions
   
134.17   Offense
   
134.18   Noise in residential areas
   
134.19   Radios, tapes, and disc players, and the like
Conduct on School Grounds
   
134.30   Defacement of school buildings
   
134.31   Breach of peace on school grounds
   
134.32   Offensive language and conduct
   
134.33   Improper conduct while school in session
   
134.34   Loitering
   
134.35   Trespassing on school property
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 134.01 ASSAULT.
   Whoever commits an act with intent to cause fear in another of immediate
bodily harm or death or intentionally inflicts or attempts to inflict bodily
harm upon another commits an assault and is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.02 LURKING.
   It is unlawful for any person in a public or private place to lurk, lie in
wait or be concealed with intent to do any mischief or to commit any crime or
unlawful act.
('72 Code, § 922:00) (Ord. 1978-274(A), passed 8-28-78)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.03 NOISY PARTIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., to
congregate because of or participate in any party or gathering of people from
which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace, quiet
or repose of persons residing in any residential area.
   (B)   It is unlawful to visit or remain within any residential dwelling unit
wherein such party or gathering is taking place except persons who have gone
there for the sole purpose of abating the disturbance.
('72 Code, § 965:00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.04 SOCIAL HOST.
   (A)   Purpose and findings.  
      (1)   The Brooklyn Park City Council seeks to reduce underage possession
and consumption of alcohol by imposing criminal penalties on those person(s)
who host events or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age possess or
consume alcohol.
      (2)   The Brooklyn Park City Council finds that:
         (a)    Alcohol is an addictive drug, which, if used irresponsibly,
could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are
affected by the actions of the irresponsible user.
         (b)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 are harmful to
those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health, safety, and
welfare requiring prevention or abatement.
         (c)   Holding persons criminally responsible for hosting or permitting
an event or gathering where underage possession or consumption of alcohol
occurs will help deter underage consumption.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine,
liqueur, cordials, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits
including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever
process produced.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains
one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other
substances.
      ADULT. Any person 18 years of age or older.
      EVENT or GATHERING. Any group of three or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity. An event or
gathering shall not include assemblies or gatherings occurring on the licensed
property of a retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor licensee,
municipal liquor store, or bottle club permit holder who is regulated by M.S. §
340A.503.
      HOST. To permit, aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, or control
an event or gathering.
      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as a natural
parent, adoptive parent, step parent, legal guardian, or a person to whom legal
custody has been given by order of the court.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
      RESIDENCE or PREMISES. Any home, yard, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
      UNDERAGE PERSON. Any person under the age of 21 years.
   (C)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to:
         (a)   Host an event or gathering;
         (b)   At any residence, premises, or on any other private or public
property;
         (c)   Where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present; and
         (d)   When the person knows or has reason to know that an underage
person will or does:
            1.   Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
            2.   Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it.
      (2)   It is a violation of this division (C) if the person intentionally
aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with another or otherwise procures
another to commit the prohibited act.
      (3)    A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be
present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible for a violation
of this division (C).
   (D)   Penalty. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of division (C)
that the defendant is the parent of the underage person and that the defendant
gave or furnished the alcoholic beverage to that person solely for consumption
in the defendant's household.
      (2)    It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of division (C)
that the conduct was part of a legally protected religious observance.
   (F)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, part,
provision, phrase, word, or other portion of this section is, for any reason,
held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or in part by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter, which remaining portions shall continue in
full force and effect.
(Ord. 2011-1125, passed 4-4-11)
§ 134.05 ACCESS TO MULTI-UNIT HOUSING STRUCTURES BY UNITED STATES CENSUS BUREAU
EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Declaration; purpose.
      (1)   The United States Constitution directs a decennial census count of
all persons living in the United States.
      (2)   Complete, accurate census data is of critical importance to all
residents of Brooklyn Park for equal political representation, fair
distribution of federal and state funding, and sound planning and investment in
infrastructure, real estate, business development, and public policy and
programming.
      (3)   During the decennial census, the United States Census Bureau
conducts Non-Response Follow-up Operations (NRFU), when employees of the United
States Census Bureau visit households that have not yet submitted a census
form.
      (4)   Renters and others who live in multi-unit housing structures have
historically been at higher risk of being undercounted in the decennial census,
with the number of renter households in an area being the most influential
variable affecting an area's census self-response rate; in other words, the
more renters in an area, the lower the self-response rate of that area.
      (5)   The risk of an undercount is compounded in areas with high
concentrations of communities that have been consistently undercounted in the
past and who are more likely to be renters, including low income households,
communities of color, Native American/ American Indian communities, immigrants
and refugees, and young people.
      (6)   Multi-unit housing structures can be difficult for Census Bureau
employees to enter due to security barriers.
      (7)   It is critical that Census Bureau employees have access to multi-
unit housing structures during the decennial census, so they can reach
households that have not yet participated.
      (8)   13 U.S. Code § 223 authorizes Census Bureau employees to access
"any hotel, apartment house, boarding or lodging house, tenement, or other
building."
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person, either directly or indirectly, to deny
access to an apartment building, dormitory, nursing home, manufactured home
park, other multi-unit structure used as a residence, or an area in which one
or more single-family dwellings are located on private roadways to employees of
the United States Census Bureau who display current, valid Census Bureau
credentials and who are engaged in official census counting operations during
the Census Bureau's standard operational hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. (local
time) during the decennial census.
   (C)   Census Bureau employees granted access must be permitted to leave
census materials in an orderly manner for residents at their doors, except that
the manager of a nursing home may direct that the materials be left at a
central location within the facility.
   (D)   This section does not prohibit:
      (1)   Denial of admittance into a particular apartment, room,
manufactured home, or personal residential unit;
      (2)   Denial of permission to visit certain persons for valid health
reasons, in the case of a nursing home or a Registered Housing with Services
Establishment providing assisted-living services meeting the requirements of
M.S. § 144G.03, Subd. 2;
      (3)   Limiting visits to a reasonable number of census employees;
      (4)   Requiring a prior appointment or notification to gain access to the
structure; or
      (5)   Denial of admittance to or expulsion of an individual employee from
a multi-unit housing structure for good cause.
(Ord. 2020-1250, passed 2-10-20)
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 134.15 DISORDERLY CONDUCT DEFINED.
   A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with a purpose to cause danger,
alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if with the knowledge that the person is likely
to create such public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, the person
willfully:
   (A)   Creates a disturbance of the public order by an act of violence or by
any act likely to produce violence; or
   (B)   Engages in fighting, or in violent, threatening or tumultuous
behavior; or
   (C)   Makes any unreasonably loud noise; or
   (D)   Addresses abusive language or threats to any person present which
creates a clear and present danger of violence; or
   (E)   Causes likelihood of harm or serious inconvenience by failing to obey
a lawful order of dispersal by a police officer, where three or more persons
are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity; or
   (F)   Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or property of another so
as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; or
   (G)   Disturbs any assembly, or meeting not unlawful in its character or the
peace and quiet of any family or neighborhood; and
   (H)   Lewdly exposes his or her person or the private parts thereof or
procuring another to expose himself or herself and any open or gross lewdness
or lascivious behavior or any act of public indecency;
   (I)   Uses profane, vulgar or indecent language in or about any public
building, store or place of business or upon any of the streets, alleys, or
sidewalks of this municipality so as to be audible and offensive;
   (J)   Drinks intoxicating liquor on any street or in a vehicle upon a public
street;
   (K)   Commits a trespass on residential, public, or commercial or business
property. Trespass for the purpose of this ordinance means:
      (1)   Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any residential property of
another, either where such property has been posted with “NO TRESPASSING”
signs, or where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent thereto, notice
is given by the owner or occupant, orally or in writing, that such entry, or
continued presence, is prohibited.
      (2)   Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any public property in
violation of regulations promulgated by the official charged with the security,
care or maintenance of the property and approved by the governing body of the
public agency owning property, where such regulations have been conspicuously
posted or where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent thereto, such
regulations are made known by the official charged with the security, care or
maintenance of the property, or designated agent or a police officer.
      (3)   Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any commercial or business
property, including semi-public areas such as parking lots, malls, corridors,
and commons, where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent thereto,
notice is given by the owner or lessee, or designated agent, orally or in
writing, that such entry, or continued presence, is prohibited.
('72 Code, § 920:00) (Am. Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.16 EXCLUSIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking or
other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws.
('72 Code, § 920:05)
§ 134.17 OFFENSE.
   It is unlawful to engage in disorderly conduct in the City of Brooklyn Park.
('72 Code, § 920:10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.18 NOISE IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   It is unlawful, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., to
congregate because of or participate in any party or gathering of people from
which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace, quiet
or repose of persons residing in any residential area.
   (B)   It is unlawful to visit or remain within any residential dwelling unit
wherein such party or gathering is taking place except persons who have gone
there for the sole purpose of abating the disturbance.
   (C)   A police officer may order all persons present, other than the owners
or tenants of the dwelling unit, to immediately disperse in lieu of being
charged under this subchapter. Owners or tenants of the dwelling unit must
immediately abate the disturbance and if they do not abate the disturbance they
are in violation of this subchapter.
('72 Code, § 920:15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.19 RADIOS, TAPES, AND DISC PLAYERS, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to play, use, or operate any radio, tape or disc
player, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the
production of sound in such a manner, considering the time and place and the
purpose for which the sound is produced, as to unreasonably disturb the peace,
quiet, or repose of a person or persons of ordinary sensibility.
   (B)   The play, use, or operation of any radio, tape or disc player, musical
instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the production of sound
in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from said
machine or device is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (C)   When sound violating this section is produced by a machine or device
that is located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle's owner is not present, the
person in charge of the vehicle at the time is guilty of the violation.
   (D)   This section does not apply to sound produced by the following:
      (1)   Amplifying equipment used in connection with activities for which
permits have been granted;
      (2)   Anti-theft devices; and
      (3)   Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in authorized
emergency vehicles.
   (E)   With the exception of the machines and devices listed in division (D)
of this section, this section applies to all radios, tape and disc players,
musical instruments, phonographs, and machines and devices for the production
of sound, whether on public or private property.
   (F)   A violation of this section is punishable as a petty offense.
('72 Code, § 920:20) (Ord. 1994-762, passed 5-23-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CONDUCT ON SCHOOL GROUNDS
§ 134.30 DEFACEMENT OF SCHOOL BUILDINGS.
   It is unlawful to mark with ink, paint, chalk or other substance, or post
hand bills on, or in any other manner deface or injure any school building or
structure used or usable for school purposes within the city, or to mark,
deface or injure fences, trees, lawns, or fixtures appurtenant to or located on
the site of such buildings, or to post hand bills on such fences, trees or
fixtures, or to place a sign anywhere on any such site.
('72 Code, § 910:00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.31 BREACH OF PEACE ON SCHOOL GROUNDS.
   It is unlawful to willfully or maliciously make or assist in making on any
school grounds adjacent to any school building or structure any noise,
disturbance or improper diversion or activity by which peace, quiet and good
order shall be disturbed.
('72 Code, § 910:05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.32 OFFENSIVE LANGUAGE AND CONDUCT. 
   It is unlawful to use offensive obscene or abusive language or engage in
boisterous or noisy conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or
resentment in others on any school grounds or in buildings or structures.
('72 Code, § 910:10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.33 IMPROPER CONDUCT WHILE SCHOOL IN SESSION.
   It is unlawful to, in any school room or in any building or on the grounds
adjacent to the same, disturb or interrupt the peace and good order of such
school while in session. It is unlawful for a person not in immediate
attendance in such school and being in such building or upon the premises
belonging thereto to conduct or behave himself or herself improperly. It is
unlawful for a person, upon the request of a teacher of such school or the
person in charge thereof to leave said building or premises, to neglect or
refuse so to do.
('72 Code, § 910:20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.34 LOITERING.
   It is unlawful to loiter on any school grounds or in any school building or
structure.
('72 Code, § 910:20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.35 TRESPASSING ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms defined in this
section have the meanings given them.
   PUBLIC SCHOOL. Any school building, school grounds, play area, parking lot
or athletic field owned or leased by Independent School District 11, 279, 281
or 287.
   SCHOOL OFFICIAL. The licensed administrators or instructional staff or any
other person so authorized by the school boards named in the definition for
“public school.”
   VEHICLE. This term includes: automobiles; motorcycles; trucks; snowmobiles;
recreational vehicles or any other type of vehicle used to transport people
and/or goods.
   (B)   Trespassing prohibited. It is unlawful to trespass in or upon any
public school by remaining upon the school premises after being ordered to
leave the public school by a school official.
   (C)   Permission required for re-entry. It is unlawful for a person, having
been ordered by a school official to leave a public school and having left the
premises, to re-enter the public school without the written permission of the
school administrator in charge or the school official who gave the order to
leave the public school.
   (D)   Operation of vehicles. It is unlawful to operate or be in actual
physical control of any vehicle in or upon any public school premises, except
for the purpose of using designated parking areas for parking in connection
with a school or school sanctioned function. The parking areas are as
designated and appropriately marked by the officials of each school.
('72 Code, § 910:25) (Ord. 1982-390(A), passed 5-24-82)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 135: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
   
135.01   State statute incorporated
   
135.02   Prohibited acts
   
135.03   Possession defined
   
135.04   Excepted lawful businesses and professions
   
135.05   Unlawful procuring, purchase, delivery or possession
   
135.06   Confiscation and disposition of controlled substances
   
135.07   Use of original containers and labels required
   
135.08   Possession of injection implement
§ 135.01 STATE STATUTE INCORPORATED.
   The five schedules of controlled substances listed in M.S. § 152.02, as
amended, are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this chapter as
completely as if set out herein in full. For the purposes of this chapter, a
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE is any substance listed in the five schedules of
controlled substances in M.S. § 152.02.
('72 Code, § 961:00) (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84; Am. Ord. 1991-686(A),
passed 12-23-91)
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.02 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to grow, cultivate, manufacture, possess,
constructively possess, sell, give away, barter, exchange, distribute, or
otherwise transfer any controlled substance, except on a lawful prescription by
a person licensed by law to prescribe and administer controlled substances.
('72 Code, § 961:05) (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84; Am. Ord. 1991-686(A),
passed 12-23-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.03 POSSESSION DEFINED.
   POSSESSION means having the controlled substance on one's person or in
constructive possession including, but not limited to, constructive possession
by that owner of a motor vehicle or by that driver of a motor vehicle if the
owner is not present who keeps or allows to be kept in the motor vehicle a
controlled substance.
('72 Code, § 961:10) (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)
§ 135.04 EXCEPTED LAWFUL BUSINESSES AND PROFESSIONS.
   Section
135.02 of this chapter does not apply to the following in the ordinary course
of their trade, their business, or profession provided, however, this exception
is not a defense to the doing of the acts prohibited in §
135.05 of this chapter:
   (A)   Practitioners, persons licensed by law to prescribe and administer
controlled substances.
   (B)   Pharmacists duly registered and licensed with the Minnesota State
Board of Pharmacy.
   (C)   Manufacturers.
   (D)   Pharmacists as manufacturers.
   (E)   Wholesalers.
   (F)   Warehouse person.
   (G)   Persons engaged in transporting such controlled substances as agent or
employee of a practitioner, pharmacist, manufacturer, warehouse person,
wholesaler, common carrier.
   (H)   Public officers or public employees in the performance of official
duties requiring possession or control of such controlled substances, or
persons aiding such officers or employees in the performance of such duties.
   (I)   Any patient as herein defined with respect to procuring, possession
and use of a controlled substance in accordance with the terms of a
prescription and prescribed treatment.
   (J)   Persons who procure, possess or use such controlled substance for the
purpose of lawful research, teaching or testing, and not for sale.
   (K)   Lawfully licensed and registered hospitals or bona fide institutions
wherein sick or injured persons are cared for and treated, or by bona fide
hospitals for the treatment of animals.
('72 Code, § 961:15) (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)
§ 135.05 UNLAWFUL PROCURING, PURCHASE, DELIVERY OR POSSESSION.
   It is unlawful to procure, purchase, deliver or possess, or attempt to
procure, purchase, deliver or possess a controlled substance in any of the
following manners:
   (A)   By fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge; or
   (B)   By the forgery or alteration of a prescription; or
   (C)   By the concealment of a material fact; or
   (D)   By the use of a false name or the giving of a false address; or
   (E)   By making a false statement in any prescription, order, report, or
record relative to a controlled substance; or
   (F)   By falsely assuming the title of, or falsely representing any person
to be a manufacturer, wholesaler, warehouse person, pharmacist, practitioner or
other person described in §
135.04 of this chapter.
   (G)   By making, issuing or uttering any false or forged prescription.
('72 Code, § 961:20) (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.06 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   Any controlled substance found in the possession of any person convicted of
a violation of this chapter will be confiscated and must be forfeited to the
Chief of Police who will make proper and timely disposition thereof by
destroying it.
('72 Code, § 961:25) (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)
§ 135.07 USE OF ORIGINAL CONTAINERS AND LABELS REQUIRED.
   All patients having possession of any controlled substance, by lawful
prescription of practitioner while such controlled substance is lawfully in
such person's possession, must keep such controlled substance in the original
container in which it was delivered until used in accordance with such
prescription, and must not remove the pharmacist's original label identifying
the prescription from the original container.
('72 Code, § 961:30) (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 135.08 POSSESSION OF INJECTION IMPLEMENT.
   It is unlawful, except for dealers in surgical instruments, apothecaries,
physicians, dentists, veterinarians, nurses, attendants and interns of
hospitals, sanitoriums or any other institution in which persons are treated
for disability or disease, to at any time have or possess any hypodermic
syringe or needle or any instrument adapted for the use of cocaine or narcotic
drugs or any dangerous drugs defined in M.S. § 152.01, Subdivision 5, or as
defined in 21 USC 321 (Section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act
(v)) by subcutaneous injections and which is possessed for that purpose, unless
such possession be authorized by the certificate of a physician issued within a
period of one year prior to any time of such possession.
('72 Code, § 961:35) (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 136: WEAPONS
Section
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Prohibition
   
136.03   Aiming prohibited
   
136.04   Selling to minors
   
136.05   Possession by minors
   
136.06   Concealed weapons
   
136.07   Use of weapons for defense purposes
   
136.08   Permits
   
136.09   Issuance of permits
   
136.10   Transporting firearms and facsimile firearms
   
136.11   Hunting prohibited
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEADLY WEAPONS. This term includes the following:
      (1)   All firearms;
      (2)   Bows and arrows when the arrows are pointed tipped;
      (3)   All instruments used to expel at high velocity any pellets of any
kind, including, but not limited to B-B guns and air rifles;
      (4)   Sling shots;
      (5)   Sand clubs;
      (6)   Metal knuckles; and
      (7)   Daggers, dirks, stilettos, switch blade knife, spring blade knife,
push button knife, or figures or discs with sharpened points or edges (commonly
known as “throwing stars”).
   FACSIMILE FIREARMS. This term includes the following:
      (1)   Any object which is a replica of an actual firearm, which
substantially duplicates an actual firearm or which could reasonably be
perceived to be an actual firearm, unless:
         (a)   The entire exterior surface of such object is colored white,
bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright green, bright blue, bright
pink or bright purple, either singly or as the predominant color in combination
with other colors in any pattern, or such object is constructed entirely of
transparent or translucent materials which permit unmistakable observation of
the object's complete contents; and
         (b)   Such object has a blaze orange extension that extends at least
six millimeters from the muzzle end of the barrel of such object which is as an
integral part of the object and is permanently affixed; and
         (c)   Such object does not have a laser pointer attached to it.
      (2)   FACSIMILE FIREARM does not include any actual firearm as otherwise
regulated by the terms of this chapter or by the Minnesota Statutes.
('72 Code, § 950:00) (Am. Ord. 1984-457(A), passed 6-11-84; Am. Ord. 2008-1084,
passed 2-4-08)
§ 136.02 PROHIBITION.
   Except as authorized by law, all discharging, use and possession of deadly
weapons within the corporate limits of Brooklyn Park are prohibited except for
the possession of bows and arrows at a city-authorized archery target range.
('72 Code, § 950:05) (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 136.03 AIMING PROHIBITED.
   Except as authorized by law, the aiming of any deadly weapon or facsimile
firearm, whether loaded or not, at or toward any human being, building or
occupied vehicle is prohibited.
('72 Code, § 950:10) (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 136.04 SELLING TO MINORS.
   The selling, giving, loaning, or furnishing in any way of any deadly weapon
or facsimile firearm to a minor under the age of 18 years without the written
consent of the minor's parents or guardian, or of a police officer or
magistrate is prohibited.
('72 Code, § 950:15) (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 136.05 POSSESSION BY MINORS.
   It is unlawful for a minor under the age of 18 years to handle or have in
the minor's possession or under the minor's control, except while accompanied
by or under the immediate charge of the minor's parent or guardian, any deadly
weapon or facsimile firearm.
('72 Code, § 950:20) (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 136.06 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   Except for a pistol or antique firearm carried in compliance with M.S. §§
624.714 and 624.715, the possession by any person other than a law enforcement
officer of any deadly weapon or facsimile firearm concealed or furtively
carried on the person is prohibited.
('72 Code, § 950:25) (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 136.07 USE OF WEAPONS FOR DEFENSE PURPOSES.
   Nothing in this section is to be construed to include any firing of a gun or
use of other weapons when done in the lawful defense of persons or property or
family, or the necessary enforcement of the law.
('72 Code, § 950:30)
§ 136.08 PERMITS.
   Subject to reasonable regulation by the Council for the protection of
persons and property, the Council may issue special permits to duly organized
clubs and their members for shooting or practicing on lands owned or leased by
the club or trap shooters shooting on grounds selected for that purpose, or to
persons firing salutes over the graves of deceased persons.
('72 Code, § 950:35)
§ 136.09 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   The permits provided by the previous sections will be issued at the
discretion of the Chief of Police. Appeals may be taken from the Chief's
determination to the Council. No permits issued under this section are deemed
valid unless they are in writing and in the possession of the person using the
permit.
('72 Code, § 950:45) (Am. Ord. 1987-578(A), passed 10-12-87)
§ 136.10 TRANSPORTING FIREARMS AND FACSIMILE FIREARMS.
   (A)   Except for a pistol or antique firearm carried in compliance with M.S.
§§ 624.714 and 624.715, it is unlawful to transport any firearm including a
muzzle loading firearm or a facsimile firearm, on the person or in a motor
vehicle or airplane, snowmobile, or ATV unless:
      (1)   The firearm or facsimile firearm and magazines are unloaded and
contained in a gun case expressly made for that purpose which is fully enclosed
by being zipped, snapped, buckled, tied or otherwise fastened, with no portion
of the firearm or facsimile firearm being left exposed; or
      (2)   The firearm or facsimile firearm is unloaded and in the trunk of a
car with the trunk door closed.
   (B)   It is also unlawful to transport a bow on the person or in a motor
vehicle, airplane, snowmobile, or ATV unless it is:
      (1)   Unstrung;
      (2)   Completely contained in a case; or
      (3)   Contained in the trunk of the car with the trunk door closed.
   (C)   A muzzle loading firearm with a flintlock ignition is fully unloaded
if it has no priming powder in any pan and a muzzle loading firearm with
percussion ignition is fully unloaded if it has no percussion cap on any
nipple.
   (D)   As used in this section, TRANSPORT means to carry by any means on the
person or in a motor vehicle, airplane, snowmobile, or ATV, except where the
act of transportation occurs on property owned or leased by the transporter or
the employer of the transporter if such act of transportation is required by
said employer.
   (E)   This section does not apply to law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duties.
('72 Code, § 950:50) (Ord. 1986-552(A), passed 12-8-86; Am. Ord. 2008-1084,
passed 2-4-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 136.11 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful, within the city, to hunt or shoot any animals or birds
except as follows:
      (1)   Law enforcement officers working in an official capacity.
      (2)   For the destruction of diseased, injured, or dangerous birds,
animals, or reptiles by persons specifically authorized to do so by the Chief
of Police or the City Manager.
      (3)   Persons authorized by the City Manager or Chief of Police for
purposes of protecting the health, safety, or general welfare.
   (B)   The Council or the Manager, as the case may be, may limit type of
animal or bird to be hunted or shot and the manner and means of accomplishing
this task.
('72 Code, § 950:55) (Ord. 1990-645(A), passed 2-26-90; Am. Ord. 2008-1084,
passed 2-4-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 137: PREDATORY OFFENDERS RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
Section
   
137.01 Purpose and intent
   
137.02 Definitions
   
137.03 Prohibited location of residence
   
137.04 Exceptions
   
137.05 Renting property in violation of this chapter
 
   
137.99 Penalty
§ 137.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 244.052, Subd. 4a, it is the intent of this chapter to
serve the city’s compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the
health, safety and welfare of its residents by establishing areas around
locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers, wherein
certain predatory offenders are prohibited from establishing temporary or
permanent residence.
(Ord. 2025-1315, passed 7-14-25)
§ 137.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings as follows, except where the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
   CHILD. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   CHILDCARE FACILITY. A facility licensed by the State Department of Human
Services or the county to provide childcare, including facilities having
programs for children known as nursery schools, day nurseries, childcare
centers, day care centers, cooperative day care centers and Head Start
programs.
   DESIGNATED OFFENDER. Any person who has been categorized as a level III
predatory offender under M.S. § 244.052, a successor statute, or a similar
statute from another state in which that person’s risk assessment indicates a
high risk of re-offense.
   PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for 14
or more consecutive days.
   PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building or portion thereof, together with its accessory
buildings and use, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and
related social events and which building, together with its accessory buildings
and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain
religious ceremonies and purposes.
   PROTECTED PLACE. A public park or playground, childcare facility, school, or
place of worship.
   PUBLIC PARK. A public recreation center or area, created, established,
designated, maintained, provided, or set aside by the city, county or state,
for the purposes of public rest, recreation and enjoyment, and all buildings,
facilities and structures located thereon.
   SCHOOL. Any public or nonpublic early childhood, pre-school, elementary,
middle or secondary school.
   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a
period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which
is not the person’s permanent residence, or a place where the person routinely
abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or
nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person’s permanent
residence.
(Ord. 2025-1315, passed 7-14-25)
§ 137.03 PROHIBITED LOCATION OF RESIDENCE.
   (A)   Prohibited location of residence from certain protected places.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any designated offender to establish a permanent
or temporary residence within 500 feet of any public park or playground, or
within 1,000 feet of any childcare facility, school, or places of worship.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any designated offender to establish a permanent
or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of the residence of another designated
offender.
   (B)   Measurement of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum
distance separation required by this section, the distance shall be measured by
following a straight horizontal line from any property line of the lot or
parcel on which the subject residence is located to the nearest property line
of the protected place.
   (C)   Official map. The Chief of Police shall maintain an official map
showing approximate prohibited locations as defined by this chapter. The Chief
of Police shall update the map at least annually to reflect any changes in the
location of prohibited locations. The map shall not be deemed conclusive or
all-encompassing, or relieve any person subject to this chapter from their duty
to comply with this chapter. The actual measurement of the minimum distance
separation of 500 feet or 1,000 feet between the residence and the protected
place shall govern.
(Ord. 2025-1315, passed 7-14-25)
§ 137.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   A designated offender does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of
the following apply:
   (A)   The designated offender established a permanent residence and reported
and registered the residence pursuant to M.S §§ 243.166 or 243.167 or a
successor statute(s), prior to the effective date of this chapter;
   (B)   The designated offender was a minor when the designated offender
committed the offense and designated offender was not convicted as an adult;
   (C)   The designated offender is a minor;
   (D)   The protected place was opened after the designated offender
established the permanent residence and reported and registered the residence
pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166 or 243.167 or a successor statute;
   (E)   The designated offender’s permanent or temporary residence is also the
primary residence of the designated offender’s parents, grandparents, siblings,
spouse or children; or
   (F)   The designated offender owned and resided at the residence at the time
of committing the designated sexual offense and retains ownership of the
residence at all times relevant to application of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-1315, passed 7-14-25)
§ 137.05 RENTING PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   It is unlawful for any person to let or rent any place, building, trailer or
structure, or part thereof, with the knowledge that it will be used as a
residence by a designated offender if such place, building, trailer or
structure, or part thereof, is located within a location prohibited by this
chapter.
(Ord. 2025-1315, passed 7-14-25)
§ 137.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and subject to the
penalties set forth in § 10.99 of this code.
   (B)   The city may enforce this chapter by mandamus, injunction, or other
appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction, or through any
administrative penalties program established by this code.
(Ord. 2025-1315, passed 7-14-25)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   SIGNS
         
151.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
152.   ZONING CODE
         
153.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 150: SIGNS
Section
Administration
   
150.01   Short title
   
150.02   Purpose and intent
   
150.03   Definitions
   
150.04   General provisions applicable to all zoning districts
   
150.05   Prohibited signs
   
150.06   Temporary signs
   
150.07   Non-conforming signs
   
150.08   Variances
   
150.09   Sign application
   
150.10   Bond and license
   
150.11   Construction standards
   
150.12   Permit and fee exemptions
   
150.13   Enforcement
   
150.14   Violations
   
150.15   Right of appeal
District Regulations
   
150.25   Single- and Two-Family Residential Districts
   
150.26   Multiple Residential Districts
   
150.27   B-1 Office Park District
   
150.28   B-2 Neighborhood Retail Business District, B-3 General Business
District, and B-4 Vehicle Sales and Showroom District
   
150.29   BP Business Park and I General Industrial Districts
   
150.30   PI Public Institutional District
   
150.31   Transit Oriented Development (TOD) and Mixed Use (MU) District
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may hereafter be known and cited as the “Brooklyn Park Sign
Code.”
('72 Code, § 356:00) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 2024-1304,
passed 7-29-24)
§ 150.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   This chapter is established to protect and promote the health, safety,
general welfare and order within the City of Brooklyn Park through the
establishment of a comprehensive and impartial series of standards, regulations
and procedures governing the type, numbers, size, structure, location, height,
lighting, erection, maintenance, use and/or display of devices, signs or
symbols serving as a visual communicative media to persons situated within or
upon public rights-of-way or properties.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are intended to establish an
opportunity for effective communication, and a sense of concern for visual
amenities on the part of those designing, displaying or otherwise utilizing
needed communicative media of the types regulated by this chapter; while at the
same time, assuring that the public is not endangered, annoyed or distracted by
the unsafe, disorderly, indiscriminate or unnecessary use of such communicative
media.
   (C)   The city’s sign code is not intended to and does not restrict speech
on the basis of its content, viewpoint, or message. Any provision in this code
that permits speech by reason of the type of sign, identity of the sign user or
otherwise, shall permit any type of speech or message on the sign. No part of
this code shall be construed to favor commercial speech over non-commercial
speech. To the extent that any provision of this code is ambiguous, the term
shall be interpreted to not regulate on the basis of speech content and the
interpretation resulting in the least restriction on the content of the sign
message shall prevail.
('72 Code, § 356:05) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 2024-1304,
passed 7-29-24)
§ 150.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The singular number
includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The present tense
includes the past and future tenses and the future the present. The word “must”
is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive. The masculine gender includes
the feminine and neuter genders. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter
appears in the text of this chapter, its meaning is construed as set forth in
such definition thereof. All measured distances must be expressed in feet and
inches.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The officer charged by the City Manager with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL PROPERTY. Includes property used to cultivate soil, produce
crops, raise animals, harvest timber, harvest fish and other animals from a
farm, ranch, or natural habitat.
   ALTERATION. This refers to any alteration to a sign excluding routine
maintenance, painting, or change of copy of an existing sign.
   AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign containing primarily the name of the
individual or establishment occupying the premises, and which may also include
the street address, telephone number or other information identifying the use.
   AWNING. A temporary roof like structure or cover which projects from the
wall of a building or projects over any entrance and can be retracted, folded
or collapsed against the face of a supporting building.
   BANNER. Refers to temporary sign made from non-rigid material, which is
secured or mounted to a structure by its ends or corners.
   BENCH SIGN. A sign which is affixed to or painted on a bench, such as at a
public transit terminal or stop.
   BILLBOARD SIGN. An off-premises, double faced sign erected primarily
alongside highways, which is constructed in a monopole or bi-pole fashion.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure
for persons, animals or chattel, and when the structure is divided by party
walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated is deemed a
separate building.
   BUILDING FACADE. That area of any exterior elevation of a building extending
from grade to the top of the exterior wall and the entire width of the building
elevation, including parapets, awnings, canopies, mansards or other appendages
or architectural treatments to the wall. The facade does not include flat roof
sections of multi- level buildings nor the shingled faces of hip roofs or gable
roofs.
   CANOPY/WALKWAY. A permanent roof-like structure or cover which projects from
the wall of a building, or projects over any entrance or walkway.
   CANOPY/VEHICULAR SERVICE. A permanent roof-like structure, either attached
or detached from a permitted building, designed to provide cover for off-street
vehicle service areas, (such as gasoline station pump islands, drive-in
establishments, truck loading berths, and the like).
   CITY CODE. The 1972 Ordinance Code of the City of Brooklyn Park, as amended
from time to time. Also referred to as the Code of Ordinances. This sign
ordinance is part of the city code.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE SIGN. A temporary free-standing sign erected on premises
on which development is taking place during the period of such development.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGNS. A sign indicating entrances and exits, including those
for parking lots, garages, and structures.
   DWELLING. A building of one or more portions thereof occupied or intended to
be occupied for residential purposes; but not including rooms in motels,
hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, trailers, tents, cabins or trailer
coaches.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single-family dwelling.
   FEATHER FLAG. A free-standing, temporary sign constructed of a singular
vertical pole, tube, or post supporting one edge of a single sheet of weather
resistant cloth, vinyl, or similar material incorporating movement only as
provided by surrounding winds or other unassisted ambient air movement.
   FLASHING SIGN. A sign which contains rotating, flashing, or intermittent
lights, animation, or exhibits noticeable changes in color, intensity, texture,
shape, pattern or light intensity.
   FREE-STANDING SIGN. Any stationary, self-supporting sign not affixed to any
other structure and supported by a pole(s). A reader board or electronic
message center may be attached to the free- standing sign structure, but the
reader board must not exceed 30% of the area containing the sign copy. The
reader board must be included in calculating the allowable sign square foot
area as required in the individual district.
   GOVERNMENTAL SIGN. A sign which, is erected by a governmental unit.
   GRADE. The main elevation of curb along public street frontage closest to
the sign to which reference is made, or center line of street-if no curb is
available.
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN (NAME PLATE). Any sign which identifies the address or
the structure on which they are located, in compliance with the Minnesota
Building Code.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which is designed to be and/or is lighted by an
artificial light source either directed upon it or illuminated from an interior
source. All illuminated signs must have light sources shielded to confine
direct illumination to the face area of the sign.
   INSTITUTION. Includes churches, schools, sanitariums, hospitals, government
buildings, nursing homes.
   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. A sign and/or reader located on institutional property
within any zoning district and allowed by zoning code.
   INTEGRAL SIGN. A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of erection,
monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into
stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other
permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the building walls.
   MONUMENT SIGN. A sign which is attached to or supported by a monument
structure which bears entirely on the ground, extending horizontally for a
minimum of 80% of the entire length of the sign face. The sign base must be
constructed of any one or combination of the following materials: brick, stone,
decorative masonry, plastic, aluminum, colored metals, or decay resistive wood.
The base and supporting material must constitute at least 25% of the total
allowable sign square footage. A reader board or electronic message center may
be attached to the monument sign but must not exceed 30% of the area. The sign
copy, reader board or message must have a minimum clearance of three feet above
grade. The area containing sign copy, including reader board, and the area of
the monument structure itself must be combined for determining the total square
footage and height. A sign attached to a retaining wall is considered to be a
monument sign provided the message or copy does not exceed the allowable sign
area as specified for the applicable zoning district, and all other provisions
for a monument sign are met.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5460_5748x4800.jpg]
 
   An example of a 100 square foot monument sign.
   MOTION SIGN. Any sign which revolves, rotates, has any moving parts or gives
the illusion of motion, electronically or otherwise.
   MURAL. A hand-painted, hand-tiled, or digitally printed work of visual art
that is either affixed to or painted directly on the exterior wall of a
structure with the permission of the property owner. A MURAL does not include
displays with electrical or mechanical components or changing image art
display.
   NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION. An incorporated organization organized under the
laws of the state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for
intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, a congressionally
chartered veterans' organization, or religious institution. For the purposes of
this chapter, this definition includes the governments of the City of Brooklyn
Park, Hennepin County, State of Minnesota, United States of America, and any
school district within the city limits.
   OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that is located on the same pole and
beneath an existing street name sign. No more than one off-site directional
sign may be located on a single pole, the sign must have same color, size and
font as the accompanying street name sign and must contain only the name of the
use and a directional arrow and must be constructed and maintained by the city
at the expense of the benefitting property.
   PEDESTRIAN SIGN. A temporary sign, which is constructed of durable materials
and is designed to be readily moved from one location to another (ex. sandwich
board sign or any item containing a message). For purposes of this chapter, any
sign mounted to, or conveyed by means of, a vehicle shall not be considered a
pedestrian sign.
   PENNANT. Attention getting devices (such as streamers) constructed of paper,
cloth, plastic or similar materials, (excluding banners and flags).
   PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign which is not a temporary sign.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A temporary sign and/or reader board so designed as to be
movable from one location to another and which is not permanently attached to
the ground, or any permanent structure.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a wall sign, which is affixed to a
building and which has sign faces extending perpendicular from the building
wall.
   READER BOARD (ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER). That portion of the sign used for
removable or electronically changeable graphics, letters, and/or numbers to
convey messages.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign which is erected, constructed or attached wholly or in
part upon or above the roof of a building.
   SEARCHLIGHT. An apparatus containing a source of light and a reflector that
projects the light produced in a concentrated, far- reaching beam for the
purpose of advertisement.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance from the closest part of a sign to
the property line, or public street easement or right-of-way.
   SIGN. Any structure, device, advertisement, or visual representation
intended to advertise, identify, or communicate information, or attract the
attention of the public for any purpose; and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing includes: any symbols, letters, figures,
illustrations, or wall graphics painted or otherwise affixed to a building or
structure.
   SIGN AREA. That area measured within the perimeter lines of the sign which
bears the advertisement; or in the case of messages, figures, or symbols,
including those attached directly to any part of a building. That area which is
included in the smallest rectangle which can be made to circumscribe the
message, figure, or symbol displayed for the purpose of advertisement. The
specified maximum sign area for a free-standing or monument sign refers to a
single facing and not to the aggregate area of both faces. The sign area for a
monument sign includes the sign structure.
   SIGN, MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from grade or other
reference elevation as herein specified to the upper limit of such a sign.
   SIGN, MINIMUM HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from grade or other
reference elevation as herein specified to the lower limit of such sign.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. The base, supports, uprights, bracing and framework for a
sign including the sign area.
   STREET. Refers to a public highway, road, or thoroughfare which affords the
principal means of access to adjacent lots.
   STREET FRONTAGE. The linear length in feet of the property line adjacent to
public street(s). An interior lot has one street frontage and a corner lot has
two street frontages.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign which is erected or displayed with or without a
permit for a specified period of time (such as banners, portable signs,
searchlights, window signs, and the like).
   UNLAWFUL SIGN. A sign which exists prior to or after the passage of this
chapter or amendments thereto, which does not conform with the regulations of
this chapter and is not an existing legal, or is not a legal nonconforming
sign, or is not a sign erected with a sign permit, is an unlawful sign.
   WALL. The building facade area that defines the front of the building. The
front is the continuous line of a building that connects side wall to side wall
and faces one public right-of-way. For a multi-tenant building on a corner lot,
the front is the continuous line of a building which faces either a public
right-of-way or a private road in a planned unit development.
   WALL SIGN. A sign with permanent lettering which is affixed to the exterior
wall of a building and has a sign face which is parallel to the building wall.
A wall sign must not project more than 12 inches from the surface to which it
is attached, nor may it extend beyond the top of the building wall.
   WALL GRAPHICS. A graphic design or decorative mural not intended for
identification or advertising purposes, which is painted directly on or affixed
to an exterior wall surface.
   WINDOW SIGN. A temporary sign affixed to the interior of a window in view of
the general public. This does not include merchandise that is for sale and on
display.
   ZONING DISTRICT. Refers to a specific zoning district as defined in the
Brooklyn Park Zoning Code,
Chapter 152.
('72 Code, §§ 356:10 - 356:15) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord.
1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1994-766, passed - -94; Am. Ord. 1999-900,
passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 1999-914, passed - -99; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-
13-00; Am. Ord. 2000-939, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2003-1002, passed 8-25-03;
Am. Ord. 2004-1026, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2012-1152, passed 10-22-12; Am.
Ord. 2014- 1165, passed 2-3-14; Am. Ord. 2014-1186, passed 12-15-14; Am. Ord.
2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 150.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter will be interpreted as authorizing the
erection or construction of any sign not permissible under the zoning code of
the city, or the Minnesota Building Code.
   (B)   All electrical signs, temporary or permanent, are subject to the State
Electrical Code and approval of the Electrical Inspector.
   (C)   No sign other than bench signs at public transit stops and
governmental traffic safety or roadway information signs and off-site
directional signs as defined in §
150.03 may be permanently or temporarily erected within any street right-of-way
or upon any public easement.
   (D)   Directional signs are permitted in all districts provided the
directional signs are located on the property referred to by the sign or within
a planned unit development. The area of such signs must not exceed ten square
feet per sign face for a single tenant building or 20 square feet per sign face
for a multiple tenant building or a multi-building complex. Such signs must not
have more than two sign faces. Maximum sign height for free-standing or
monument-type directional signs is six feet above grade.
   (E)   Businesses that utilize permanent, legal outdoor sales, (such as
lumber yards, nurseries, and the like) are allowed signs. These signs must not
exceed 36 square feet in area, nor exceed eight feet in height, and may be
illuminated. These signs are allowed for orientation information purposes only
and must not be visible from public streets. These product identification signs
must be setback 100 feet or more from all public streets.
   (F)   If a free-standing sign or monument sign is constructed so that the
faces are not constructed so as to be back to back, the total area of all sides
added together must not exceed the maximum allowable sign area for the
district.
   (G)   Architectural building extensions such as awnings or canopies, other
than vehicular service canopies, primarily built as shelter for entrances or
for aesthetic purposes, are allowed to display signage. These signs are
considered as wall signs for the purpose of determination of the maximum
allowable sign area.
   (H)   Vehicular service canopy signs are not to exceed ten percent of each
canopy face area or ten square feet on each canopy face, whichever is smaller.
Service station canopy signs are restricted to two faces of the canopy and must
not be located above or below the canopy area.
   (I)   Service stations may advertise gasoline prices on reader boards
attached to a permitted free-standing sign or attached to canopy supports. If
attached to the canopy supports, these signs must be no larger than 15 square
feet in area. In no case may a free-standing sign be constructed for the sole
purpose of advertising prices. Service stations may have gas pump topper signs,
not to exceed two square feet per gas pump.
   (J)   No sign except bench signs and billboards, may in its entirety,
separately advertise a product, commodity, service, or contain other
miscellaneous language that is not directly related to the business name,
except as allowed by §
150.06(B)(5)(h).
   (K)   A product identification sign may be integrated into a permitted free-
standing, monument or wall business sign and will be included as part of the
maximum allowable sign area. Product identification sign area must not exceed
ten percent of the maximum allowable sign area.
   (L)   Buildings, premises or lots are not allowed to have pennants,
pinwheels, or other attention attracting devices, or temporary signs except in,
accordance with §
150.06 of this chapter.
   (M)   One flagpole may be erected for each 100 feet of street frontage, not
to exceed a total of three flagpoles. Height of the poles must not exceed the
building height regulations, as specified by the zoning code for the district
where the poles are located, and flag length must not exceed 25% of the pole
height, and no more than two flags per pole are permitted.
   (N)   It is unlawful for a sign permitted by this chapter, by reason of its
location, color intensity, to create hazard to the safe, efficient movement of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. A private sign must not contain alarming words
which might be construed as traffic controls, such as “stop,” “caution,”
“warning,” and the like, unless such sign is intended to direct traffic on the
premises.
   (O)   A sign must not contain any indecent or offensive picture or written
matter.
   (P)   State and federal government agencies and their political subdivisions
are exempt from the provisions of the sign ordinance except for setback
requirements.
   (Q)   All sign permits for multiple tenant buildings require the signature
of the property owner or the property owner's agent.
   (R)   Projecting signs are permitted in all districts provided the
projecting signs are located on the property referred to by the sign or within
a planned unit development. The area of such signs must not exceed ten square
feet per sign face for a single tenant building or 20 square feet per sign face
for a multiple tenant building or a multi-building complex. Such signs must not
have more than two sign faces. Minimum sign height for projecting signs is
eight feet above grade. The area of the projecting sign faces are to be
included in the total area of signs placed on a single facade when the total
area of signage on that facade is limited in area.
('72 Code, § 356:20) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-939, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2014-1165, passed
2-3-14; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.05 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are specifically prohibited in all districts:
   (A)   Motion signs - exempted are temporary search lights and permanent
electronic message center signs which only display time and/or temperature
information or have a message that does not change more frequently than once
every sixty seconds.
   (B)   Flashing signs except electronic motion signs as exempted above.
   (C)   Roof signs - signs installed above the building facade.
   (D)   Signs which have more than two sign faces.
   (E)   Signs which are attached to trees, fences, utility poles or other such
permanent supports, not specifically intended as sign structures.
   (F)   Signs painted directly on building walls. Exempted are murals in
accordance with §
150.03 of this chapter.
   (G)   Wall signs are not permitted on any building wall facing an abutting
residential property or properties, unless separated by a city street or
highway right-of-way.
   (H)   Signs affixed to the exterior side of windows, except addresses and
other minor directional information.
   (I)   Billboards in the T.H. 610 Corridor as delineated in the T.H. 610
Corridor Plan.
   (J)   Portable reader board signs unless specifically allowed in other
sections of this code.
('72 Code, § 356:25) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1994-766, passed 9-12-94; Am. Ord. 1999-900, passed 5-
24-99; Am. Ord. 2010-1121, passed 12-6-10; Am. Ord. 2017-1227, passed 12-4-17;
Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.06 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Multi-family apartment, commercial, industrial, organization, and
institutional users in all zoning districts. The following sections concern
temporary signs in all zoning districts. The signs are regulated according to
the requirements set forth below:
      (1)   Temporary banner signs in the form of durable, weather resistant
banners, may be erected with a sign permit, provided:
         (a)   A temporary sign permit is necessary for all signs identified in
this section.
         (b)   Minimum setbacks: All temporary signs in the form of banners and
feather flags must be set back at least 10 feet from all property lines and may
in no case be permitted within the 30 foot clear-view triangle at public or
private streets or driveway intersections.
         (c)   The total area of all temporary signs in the form of banners
must not exceed 200 square feet.
         (d)   Banners are allowed to be displayed on existing fences,
accessory buildings, and principle building facades providing they meet the
setback requirements.
         (e)   In a multi-tenant structure the banner must not exceed the width
of the front of the space to be occupied or 200 square feet, whichever is less.
          (f)   Businesses possessing a valid and current temporary sign permit
may display for that allotted time period (in addition to the permitted
banner), up to three feather flags for advertising purposes. Feather flags must
be less than or equal to 15 feet in height, displayed on the property where the
permit holding business is located, may not impede vehicle or pedestrian
traffic, and are not allowed to be displayed in a public right-of-way or other
prohibited areas.
      (2)   Permit required. Each business concern or organization is allowed a
maximum of three permits in a calendar year, except temporary non-profit
organization events which are allowed an unlimited number of permits. Each
permit for a banner will be for 30 consecutive days. Permit fee is set by the
City Council. No temporary sign permit will be issued to any business,
institution, or organization found guilty of violating the provisions of the
temporary sign code more than once in a calendar year for the period of one
year from the second occurrence.
         (a)   Exception - grand opening banner. A business must receive a one-
time permit at no cost to place a "grand opening" banner for 60 consecutive
days from the opening date. The banner must follow size and setbacks described
in the section above. This permit will not count towards the three allotted
annual permits.
      (3)   Window signs. Window sign area must not exceed 25% of the total
area of the window(s) located on the wall face in which it is displayed. No
permit is required for signs located on the inside of windows or for interior
store displays.
      (4)   Itinerant produce sales signs. No permit is required for signs
associated with a farmer’s market that has been approved in accordance with the
zoning code. Signs can only be displayed the day and time of the sale. This
sign limitation does not include small price signs, less than one-half square
foot in size, located on or near the produce. The signs must be removed from
the site at the end of each sale day.
      (5)   Pedestrian signs. Each business is allowed one pedestrian sign not
to exceed 10 square feet on each of two sides displayed outside only during
regular business hours. Pedestrian signs must be located within 20 feet of a
customer entrance to the building in which the business is located, but must
not block pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian signs must be located on the same
parcel as the business and must not be located within the public right-of-way.
      (6)   Flashing or rotating signs prohibited. Flashing or rotating signs
or lights are not permitted on temporary signs. However, search lights may be
used on site for four days for the calendar year.
   (B)   All zoning districts. The following sections concern temporary
campaign signs, temporary construction signs, temporary real estate signs,
temporary non-profit organization event signs, and temporary residential garage
and/or rummage sale signs in all zoning districts, and the signs are regulated
according to the requirements set forth below:
      (1)   Temporary campaign signs. Temporary campaign signs posted by a
candidate for public office or by a person or group promoting a political issue
or a political candidate may be erected subject to the following:
         (a)   Signs must not exceed sizes authorized by state statute for
state general elections.
         (b)   Pursuant to M.S. § 211B.045, campaign signs may be posted 46
days before the state primary in a state general election year until ten days
following the state general election.
         (c)   Minimum setbacks: There is no setback requirement; however,
these signs must not be erected on the public right-of-way, on public property
or in the public street intersection 30 foot clear-view triangle.
         (d)   Maximum height of signs: No temporary campaign sign may exceed
12 feet above grade.
      (2)   Temporary construction sign. One temporary identification sign may
be installed upon a construction site provided:
         (a)   Sign area must not exceed 100 square feet.
         (b)   Sign must be removed within two years after issuance of first
building permit or upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is
sooner.
         (c)   Minimum setbacks: These signs must comply with setback
requirements of subdivision (B)(1)(c) of this section. Signs must be erected
only on the property where work is being done.
         (d)   Maximum height of signs: No temporary construc tion sign may
exceed 12 feet above grade.
      (3)   Temporary real estate signs.
         (a)   Free-standing sign. A temporary free-standing sign may be
erected provided:
            1.   Sign area must not exceed six square feet for residential
property and 20 square feet for non-residential property.
            2.   Sign must be removed within seven days following the closing
of a sale or lease of the property.
            3.   Minimum setbacks: There is no setback requirement; however,
these signs must not be erected on the public right-of-way nor in the public
street intersection 30 foot clear-view triangle. Sign must be erected only on
the property being sold or leased.
            4.   Maximum height of signs: No temporary free standing real
estate sign may exceed eight feet above grade.
            5.   Banners, streamers, pennants, balloons, directional signs, and
the like, may be erected for two 21-day periods per year to coincide with the
spring “Preview of Homes” and the fall “Parade of Homes.”
            6.   Temporary open house and/or directional signs: Temporary open
house and/or directional signs may be placed in public view no earlier than 9:
00 a.m. on the actual day of the open house and must be removed no later than
9:00 p.m. on the same day. Only one sign per intersection is allowed for each
open house. Placement of open house directional signs should not block
pedestrian or bicycle pathways or sidewalks. Signs must not be placed within
the 30 foot clear view triangle at public street intersections. Open house
directional signs may not be attached to federal, state, county or city sign
posts. The signs may not be placed on center medians or street islands or
within four feet of the roadway surface.
         (b)   Area identification sign on residential or non-residential
project sites. A temporary area identification sign may be erected provided:
            1.   Sign area must not exceed 100 square feet.
            2.   Such sign must be removed when the project is 80% sold or
leased.
            3.   Minimum setbacks: All temporary area identification signs must
be set back at least 25 feet from all property lines. Sign must be erected only
on the impacted property.
            4.   Maximum height of sign: No temporary real estate area
identification sign may exceed eight feet above grade.
      (4)   Temporary commercial signs on residential property.
         (a)   Sign area must not exceed four square feet.
         (b)   Signs must be erected for no longer than four days and must be
removed by the owner immediately following this time. Signs which remain in
place for more than four days are deemed litter. The beginning and end date of
sale, and address of the sale must be prominently displayed on every sign
erected.
         (c)   Minimum setbacks: There is no setback requirement; however,
these signs must not be erected in the public right-of-way, on public property,
or in the public street intersection 30 foot clear-view triangle. Signs may be
erected on private properties other than the property where the sale is
conducted with the permission of the property owner.
         (d)   Maximum height of signs: No temporary commercial sign on
residential property may exceed six feet above grade.
      (5)   Temporary non-profit organization signs.
         (a)   Signs must not exceed eight square feet per sign face.
         (b)   An unlimited number of signs are allowed per event, but must be
located as follows:
            1.   No more than one sign per event may be located on a single
parcel, and
            2.   No more than four signs per event may be located in a single
street intersection.
         (c)   A map or list of addresses designating the specific sites of
each sign must be kept by the applicant.
         (d)   Signs must not be posted in excess of 15 days prior to the event
and must be removed no later than two days following the final date of the
event. The promoting organization, location and date(s) of the event must be
prominently placed on each sign.
         (e)   Minimum setbacks: There is no setback requirement; however,
these signs must not be erected on the public right-of-way, on public property,
or in the public street intersection 30 foot clear-view triangle.
         (f)   Maximum height of signs: A temporary non-profit organizational
event sign must not exceed six feet in height above grade.
         (g)   A portable reader board must not be used off the premises from
which the event is being held nor may this type of promotion precede or exceed
the actual dates of the event. A portable reader board must not be used on
public property. An on- site reader board must not exceed 32 square feet. These
signs must be set back 15 feet from all property lines but not within the 30
foot clear-view triangle of entrances or public street intersections.
         (h)   A non-profit organization may display messages on the reader
board of any lawful sign with the permission of the sign owner.
      (6)   Temporary roadside signs on agricultural property. Temporary
roadside signs may be erected with a sign permit, provided:
         (a)   Signs are in compliance with this chapter of the City Code.
         (b)   Maximum size: Signs may not exceed 16 square feet in area per
sign face. No more than three signs are allowed, per property, and only two of
which may be permitted off the site of the agricultural property. For all off-
site signs, written permission from the property owner of the proposed sign
location shall be submitted with the sign application.
         (c)   Signs are allowed to be posted for a period of time not to
exceed three months. The specific time period requested must be specified in
the permit application.
         (d)   Minimum setbacks: There is no setback requirement; however,
these signs may not be erected on the public right-of-way, on public property,
or in the clear view triangle as defined in this chapter of the City Code.
         (e)   Maximum height of signs: No temporary roadside agricultural
products advertisement sign may exceed eight feet in height above grade.
('72 Code, § 356.35) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1990-657(A),
passed 8-27-90; Am. Ord. 1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1997-848, passed 6-
9-97; Am. Ord. 2000-933, passed 10-9-00; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00;
Am. Ord. 2004-1026, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2012-1147, passed 8-20-12; Am.
Ord. 2012-1152, passed 10-22- 12; Am. Ord. 2014-1165, passed 2-3-14; Am. Ord.
2024-1304, passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.07 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Any lawfully constructed non-conforming or any legal sign existing
upon the effective date of this chapter may be maintained and continued at the
size and in the manner of operation existing upon such date except as
hereinafter specified.
   (B)   Upon adoption of this chapter, a non-conforming sign must not be:
      (1)   Changed to another non-conforming sign.
      (2)   Structurally altered or moved except to bring such nonconforming
sign into conformance with this chapter.
      (3)   Expanded or enlarged.
      (4)   Repaired or otherwise rehabilitated after damage or deterioration
of more than 50%, except to bring into conformance with this chapter.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing divisions of this section, all signs
which are made non-conforming by this sign ordinance, must be brought into
conformance, on a sign-by-sign basis, at the time that a sign face or copy is
changed or altered except for routine maintenance as required by this chapter.
Billboard signs must be brought into conformance at the time that the main
structure is removed and must follow the provisions of §
150.29(F).
   (D)   Temporary signs as provided in §
150.06 are not entitled to non-conforming status. Such signs must be brought
into compliance with §
150.06 as directed by the sign enforcement office, or it may be summarily
removed from display by the enforcement officer.
('72 Code, § 356:40) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.08 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Purpose. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 6, as it may be amended
from time to time, the City Council, acting as a Board of Appeals and
Adjustments, may issue variances from the provisions of this zoning code. A
variance is a modification or variation of the provisions of this zoning code
as applied to a specific piece of property.
   (B)   Review standards.
      (1)   Variances shall only be permitted:
         (a)   When they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of
the chapter; and
         (b)   When the variances are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   Variances may be granted when the applicant for the variance
establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with the zoning
code. Practical difficulties, as used in connection with the granting of a
variance, means that:
         (a)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by the zoning code;
         (b)   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property not created by the landowner;
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality; and
         (d)   Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties.
('72 Code, § 356.45) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 2024-1304,
passed 7-29-24)
§ 150.09 SIGN APPLICATION.
   (A)   Permits required. Except as specifically provided by this chapter, it
is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate within the city any
sign, without first obtaining a permit(s) from the Sign Code Administrator and
making payment of the fee required. Application for permits must be made upon
application forms provided by the City of Brooklyn Park and must be accompanied
by:
      (1)   A site plan drawn to scale based on and accompanied by a
certificate of survey, or on a certificate of survey, showing the relation of
the sign to the nearest buildings, private and public streets, right-of-ways
and property lines.
      (2)   Sign plans, specifications and methods of construction.
      (3)   A copy of structural calculations and details showing the structure
is designed for live and dead loads including wind velocity in the amount
required by all ordinances of the city. Electrical permits will be required by
the State Board of Electricity.
   (B)   Permit issued if application in order. It is the duty of the Sign Code
Administrator, upon the filing of the application for a permit, to examine such
plans and specifications and other data, and the premises upon which the sign
is proposed to be erected, and if it appears that the proposed structure is in
compliance with all other laws and ordinances of Brooklyn Park, the Sign Code
Administrator must then issue the permit. If the work authorized under a permit
has not been completed within 90 days after the date of issuance, the permit
will become null and void.
   (C)   Permit fees. Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder,
must pay to the city the permit fee for each sign regulated by this code in an
amount as established by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this
code.
   (D)   Permit revocable at any time. All rights and privileges acquired by
obtaining a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any amendment
thereto are mere licenses, revocable for cause at any time by the Council, and
all such permits must contain this provision.
('72 Code, § 356.50) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 2024-1304,
passed 7-29-24)
§ 150.10 BOND AND LICENSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to engage in the business of erecting signs, and no
person is entitled to a permit to erect a sign under this chapter unless
licensed to do so by the City of Brooklyn Park, except as provided in division
(B) of this section. Such license may be granted on written application
accompanied by an annual license fee in the amount set by the Council, to the
Sign Code Administrator in such form as the Sign Code Administrator prescribes.
The license may be terminated by the Council at any time for cause. No license
will take effect until the licensee files with the city a bond with corporate
surety in a form approved by the City Attorney in the penal sum of $2,000,
conditioned that the licensee will pay all permit fees required under this
chapter, pay any fines imposed upon the licensee for violation thereof, will
conform to all of the provisions of this chapter, and will indemnify and hold
the city, its officers and agents harmless from any damage or claim resulting
from or related to the erection or maintenance of any sign in the city by the
licenses.
   (B)   Bonding and licensing requirements are not required of a property
owner(s) erecting signs on their own property. All other provisions of this
chapter apply.
('72 Code, § 356.55) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.11 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The design and construction standards for signs and sign structures as set
forth in the Minnesota Building Code as amended from time to time are adopted
by reference, a copy of which is on file and on record with the City Clerk.
('72 Code, § 356.60) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 2024-1304,
passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.12 PERMIT AND FEE EXEMPTIONS.
   The exemptions permitted by this section apply only to the requirement of a
permit and/or fee, and are not construed as relieving the installer of the
sign, or the owner of the property upon which the sign is located, from
conforming with the other provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Temporary signs erected by non-profit organizations must obtain a
permit but are exempted from any fee.
   (B)   No permit or fee is required for the following:
      (1)   Temporary signs displayed in accordance with §
150.06(A)(2), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4) and (B)(5).
      (2)   Integral signs.
      (3)   Residential identification (name plate) signs.
      (4)   Directional signs.
      (5)   Signs which are located completely on the interior of a building
and not visible from the outside of the building.
('72 Code, § 356.65) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92)
§ 150.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Unsafe, non-maintained and unlawful signs.
      (1)   If the Sign Code Administrator finds that any permanent sign
regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or adversely affects the health safety
and general welfare of the public, or has been constructed or erected or is
being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter; the Sign Code
Administrator must give written notice by mail to the permittee thereof.
      (2)   If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to
comply with the standards herein set forth within 14 days after the mailing
notice, the sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered at
the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located
or legal action may be taken to force compliance with this chapter. The Sign
Code Administrator must refuse to approve and the City of Brooklyn Park must
refuse to issue a permit to any permittee or owner who refuses to pay costs so
assessed.
      (3)   The Sign Code Administrator may cause any sign or other advertising
structure which is a safety hazard to persons to be removed summarily and
without notice. The Sign Code Administrator may cause any temporary sign
erected not in conformance with the sign ordinance to be removed summarily and
without notice or legal action may be taken to force compliance with this
chapter.
   (B)   Painting required. The owner of any sign as defined and regulated by
this chapter is required to have the sign and sign structure properly painted
upon order of the Sign Code Administrator. It is the intent of this provision
that the sign appearance does not create a blighting influence upon the
neighborhood where the sign is located.
   (C)   Wood supports to be decay resistive. All posts, anchors and bracing of
wood must be decay resistive or approved wood preventative treated to protect
them from physical or aesthetic deterioration.
   (D)   Premises to be kept free of weeds, and the like. All the premises
surrounding signs must be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary
and inoffensive manner and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish
and weeds.
('72 Code, § 356.70) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1997-848, passed 6-9-97; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-
29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.14 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   If the Sign Code Administrator finds any permanent sign in violation
of the terms of this chapter, a written notice will be issued to the owner,
and/or possessor (tenant in possession, operator or manager of the premises on
which the sign is located), specifying the violation and allowing the time
period specified in § 150.13(A) above in which to correct or remove the
violation. After the expiration of the time period specified by written notice,
if the violation is not corrected or discontinued, the owner and/or possessor
of the property will be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day of violation
after the initial time period as specified by written notice constitutes a
separate offense.
   (B)   It is unlawful to display any temporary sign in violation of the terms
of this chapter. The owner, and or possessor (tenant in possession, operator,
or manager of the premises on which the sign is located) of the property is
guilty of a misdemeanor and each day of the violation constitutes a separate
offense.
('72 Code, § 356.75) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1997-848,
passed 6-9-97; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.15 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   When it is alleged by any person to whom a compliance order is directed that
such compliance order is based upon erroneous interpretation of this chapter,
or upon a misstatement or mistake of fact, the person may appeal the compliance
order to a Board of Appeals and Adjustments as established in the zoning code
portion of the city code. The Board as an advisory body must forward their
recommendation to the City Council. Such appeals must be in writing, must
specify the grounds for the appeal, must be accompanied by a filing fee as
designated by the City Council in cash or cashier's check, and must be filed
with the compliance official within five business days after service of the
compliance order. The filing of an appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed unless such a stay would cause imminent peril to life,
health or property.
('72 Code, § 356.76) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 150.25 SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions concern signs in the Single- and Two-family
Residential Districts and said signs are regulated according to the
requirements set forth below:
   (A)   Identification signs (name plate). One free-standing or wall sign/name
plate per dwelling unit, not greater than two square feet in area, indicating
the name and/or address of the occupant. A sign must not be constructed so as
to have more than two surfaces.
   (B)   Institutional signs. Institutional uses which do not meet the criteria
stated in §
150.03 of this chapter for area identification signs, are allowed only one
monument sign per street frontage. Such sign must not exceed 60 square feet in
area.
   (C)   Residential development signs. These signs shall be reviewed and
approved as part of a preliminary plat, site plan review, conditional use
permit, or development plan application. Sign area shall be determined by the
text copy area only and be limited to 60 square feet per structure face.
   (D)   Home occupation signs. One non-illuminated sign with a maximum square
footage of two feet for each dwelling unit wherein a permitted home occupation
exists.
   (E)   Minimum setbacks. A sign must not be erected in the public right-of-
way. For divisions (A) and (B) of this section, signs must be set back at least
15 feet from front property lines, at least ten feet from side and rear
property lines and at least 15 feet from the property lines of corner lots. For
division (C) signs, no setback is required. For division (D) of this section,
signs must be set back at least 20 feet from front property lines. All signs
must allow for an unobstructed view of traffic at intersections of streets or
driveways.
   (F)   Maximum height of signs. For signs described in divisions (A) and (D)
of this section, no sign may exceed six feet above grade. For signs described
in divisions (B) and (C) of this section, no sign may exceed ten feet above
grade.
   (G)   Residential development signs. Signs must be constructed of durable
materials. Residential development signs may be placed in median islands,
roundabouts, or cul-de-sac islands provided that the island is a separate
platted lot privately owned and maintained by a homeowners association,
management company, or the like, and approved through the preliminary plat,
site plan review, or conditional use permit application.
('72 Code, § 356.30(1)) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2003-1002, passed
8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.26 MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following sections concern signs in the Multiple Residential Districts
and said signs are regulated according to the requirements set forth below:
   (A)   Identification signs (name plate). One wall sign/name plate per
institution or multiple residential building, not to exceed six square feet in
area, or one wall sign/name plate per dwelling unit where separate entrances
occur, not to exceed two square feet in area.
   (B)   Institutional signs. Institutional uses which do not meet the criteria
stated in §
150.03 of this chapter for area identification signs, are allowed only one
monument sign per street frontage, not to exceed 60 square feet in area.
   (C)   Residential development signs. These signs shall be reviewed and
approved as part of a preliminary plat, site plan review, conditional use
permit, or development plan application. Sign area shall be determined by the
text copy area only and be limited to 60 square feet per structure face.
   (D)   Minimum setbacks. For division (B) of this section, monument signs
must be set back at least 15 feet from front property lines and at least ten
feet from side and rear property lines. On corner lots, all monument signs must
be set back at least 15 feet from front and side corner property lines. All
signs must be set back a minimum of three feet from driveways to edge of sign,
and a 30 foot clear-view triangle must be maintained at public street
intersections. All signs must allow for an unobstructed view of traffic at
intersections of streets or driveways.
   (E)   Maximum height of signs. For division (B) of this section, no sign may
exceed eight feet above grade. For division (C) of this section, no sign may
exceed ten feet above grade.
   (F)   Residential development signs. Signs must be constructed of durable
materials. Residential development signs may be placed in median islands,
roundabouts, or cul-de-sac islands provided that the island is a separate
platted lot privately owned and maintained by a homeowners association,
management company, or the like, and approved through the preliminary plat,
site plan review, or conditional use permit application.
('72 Code, § 356.30(2)) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-69,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2003-1002, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed
7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.27 B-1 OFFICE PARK DISTRICT.
   The following sections concern signs in the B-1 Office Park District, and
said signs are regulated according to the requirements set forth below:
   (A)   In B-1 Districts, a business property may erect only signs described
in subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (1) and (4) below, or in
subdivision (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (4) below, or in
subdivision (5) unless modified by a planned unit development.
      (1)   Free-standing or monument sign. One free-standing sign, not to
exceed 75 square feet in area, or one monument sign not to exceed 120 square
feet.
      (2)   Area identification sign. One free-standing or monument sign per
development, as described by §
150.03 of this chapter not to exceed 100 square feet in area.
      (3)   Wall signs. One and two story, single or multiple tenant buildings:
Signs attached to two walls, immediately adjacent to a public street or the
parking lot which serves customers of the site, not to exceed ten percent of
the building facade to which the signs are attached.
      (4)   Wall signs. Multiple story buildings (three or more stories).
         (a)   Identification signs: One identification sign per building
facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not to exceed ten
percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached or 300 square
feet, whichever is less. The measured area is that building facade above the
second story.
         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described above in
subdivision (a), wall signs may be attached to only one wall not to exceed ten
percent of the building facade to which it is attached and must be located on
the first story. The measured area is that building facade of the first and
second story.
      (5)   Three wall signs. Wall signs are allowed on up to three walls only
when immediately adjacent to a public street or the parking lot that serves
customers of the site, subject to City Manager approval. The wall signs on each
wall must individually conform to the area limitations defined in subdivisions
(3) or (4) of this division.
   (B)   Institutional signs. Institutional uses which do not meet the criteria
stated in § 150.03 of this chapter for area identification signs, are allowed
only one monument sign with reader board per street frontage. The sign and
reader board must not exceed 60 square feet in area.
   (C)   Minimum setbacks. Free-standing signs must be set back at least 25
feet from the front property line and at least ten feet from side and rear
property lines; monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet from the front
property line and at least ten feet from side and rear property lines. On
corner lots, all monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet from front
and side corner property lines, and all free-standing signs must be set back at
least 25 feet from all front and side corner property lines. All signs must be
set back a minimum of three feet from driveways to edge of sign, and a 30 foot
clear-view triangle must be maintained at public street intersections.
   (D)   Maximum height of signs. Signs described in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2)
and (B) of this section may not exceed 15 feet above grade for monument signs
and 25 feet above grade for free-standing signs.
   (E)   Minimum height of signs. Free-standing signs must have a minimum
height of seven feet from grade to the bottom of sign.
('72 Code, § 356.30(3)) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2003-1002, passed
8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2014-1186, passed 12-15-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.28 B-2 NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT, B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT, AND B-4 VEHICLE SALES AND SHOWROOM DISTRICT.
   The following sections concern signs in the B-2 Neighborhood Retail Business
District and in the B-3 General Business District, and said signs are regulated
according to the requirements set forth below:
   (A)   In B-2 and B-3 Districts, a business property may erect only signs
described in subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (1) and (4)
below, or in subdivisions (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (4)
below, or (5) below, unless modified by a planned unit development.
      (1)   Free-standing or monument sign. One free-standing sign not to
exceed 100 square feet in area, or one monument sign not to exceed 120 square
feet in area.
      (2)   Area identification sign. One free-standing or monument per
development, as described by §
150.03 of this chapter not to exceed 320 square feet in area.
      (3)   Wall signs. One and two story, single or multiple tenant buildings:
Signs attached to two walls immediately adjacent to a public street or the
parking lot which serves customers of the site, not to exceed ten percent of
the building facade to which the signs are attached.
      (4)   Wall signs. Multiple story buildings (three or more stories):
         (a)   Identification signs: One identification sign per building
facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not to exceed ten
percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached or 300 square
feet, whichever is less. The measured area is that building facade above the
second story.
         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described above in
subdivision (a), wall signs must be attached to only one wall, not to exceed
ten percent of the building facade to which the signs are attached and must be
located on the first story. The measured area is that building facade of the
first and second story.
      (5)   Three wall signs. Wall signs are allowed on up to three walls only
when immediately adjacent to a public street or the parking lot that serves
customers of the site, subject to City Manager approval. The wall signs on each
wall must individually conform to the area limitations defined in subdivisions
(3) or (4) of this division.
   (B)   Institutional signs. Institutional uses which do not meet the criteria
stated in §
150.03 of this chapter for area identification signs are allowed only one
monument sign with reader board per street frontage. The sign and reader board
must not exceed 60 square feet in area.
   (C)   Minimum setbacks. Free-standing signs must be set back at least 25
feet from the front property line and at least ten feet from side and rear
property lines; monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet from the front
property line and at least ten feet from side and rear property lines. On
corner lots, all monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet from front
and side corner property lines, and all free-standing signs must be set back at
least 25 feet from all front and side corner property lines. All signs must be
set back a minimum of three feet from driveways to edge of sign, and a 30 foot
clear-view triangle must be maintained at public street intersections.
   (D)   Maximum height of signs. Signs described in division (A)(1), (A)(2)
and (B) of this section may not exceed 15 feet above grade for monument signs
and 25 feet above grade for free-standing signs.
   (E)   Minimum height of signs. Free-standing signs must have a minimum
height of seven feet from grade to the bottom of sign.
('72 Code, § 356.30(4)) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2003-1002, passed
8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2014-1186, passed 12-15-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.29 BP BUSINESS PARK AND I GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following sections concern signs in the BP Business Park District and I
General Industrial District, and said signs are regulated according to the
requirements set forth below:
   (A)   In BP and I Districts, a business property may erect only signs
described in subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (1) and (4)
below, or in subdivisions (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (4)
below, or subdivision (5) below unless modified by a planned unit development.
      (1)   Free-standing or monument sign. One free-standing sign, not to
exceed 100 square feet in area, or one monument sign not to exceed 120 square
feet.
      (2)   Area identification sign. One free-standing or monument sign per
development, as described by § 150.03 of this chapter not to exceed 220 square
feet in area.
      (3)   Wall signs. One and two story buildings, single or multiple tenant
buildings: Signs attached to two walls, not to exceed ten percent of the
building facades to which the signs are attached.
      (4)   Wall signs. Multiple story buildings (three or more stories).
         (a)   Identification signs: One identification sign per building
facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not to exceed ten
percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached or 300 square
feet, whichever is less. The measured area is that building facade above the
second story.
         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described above in
subdivision (a), wall signs must be attached to only one wall not to exceed ten
percent of the building facade to which it is attached and must be located on
the first story. The measured area is that building facade of the first and
second story.
      (5)   Three wall signs. Wall signs are allowed on only three walls only
when immediately adjacent to a public street or the parking lot that serves
customers of the site, subject to City Manager approval. The wall signs on each
wall must individually conform to the area limitations defined in subdivisions
(3) or (4) of this section.
   (B)   Institutional signs. Institutional uses which do not meet the criteria
stated in § 150.03 of this chapter for area identification signs are allowed
only one monument sign and/or reader board per street frontage. The sign and
reader board must not exceed 60 square feet in area.
   (C)   Minimum setbacks. For subdivisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section,
free-standing signs must be set back 25 feet from the front property line and
ten feet from side and rear property lines; monument signs must be set back at
least 15 feet from the front property lines and ten feet from side and rear
property lines. For division (B) of this section, signs must be set back at
least 15 feet from the front property line and at least ten feet from side and
rear property lines. On corner lots, all free-standing signs must be set back
at least 30 feet from all property lines, and all monument signs must be set
back at least 15 feet from all property lines. All signs must be set back a
minimum of three feet from driveways to edge of sign, and a 30 foot clear-view
triangle must be maintained at public street intersections.
   (D)   Maximum height of signs. For signs described in subdivisions (A)(1)
and (A)(2) of this section, signs may not exceed 15 feet above grade for
monument signs and 25 feet above grade for free-standing signs. For signs
described in division (B) of this section, no sign may exceed 15 feet above
grade.
   (E)   Minimum height of signs. Free-standing signs must have a minimum
height of seven feet from grade to the bottom of sign.
   (F)   Billboard signs. Billboard signs are allowed in the I District by
conditional use permit as provided by the zoning code. A billboard sign must be
the principal use on the lot on which it is located. The lot must meet the
minimum lot requirements for the I District in accordance with the zoning code.
A billboard must not be erected within 300 feet of any Residential District. A
billboard must not be located within a 1,320 foot radius of an existing or
approved billboard.
      (1)   Sign area. Billboard signs must not exceed one square foot of sign
area for each lineal foot of street frontage nor may sign area exceed 300
square feet on any side. On corner lots or lots with more than one street
frontage, only one street frontage will be considered in determining the sign
area. Signs must have no more than two sides.
      (2)   Minimum setbacks. Billboard signs must be set back at least 50 feet
from front and rear property lines and at least 25 feet from side property
lines.
      (3)   Maximum height of signs. Billboard signs may not exceed 25 feet
above grade.
      (4)   Minimum height of signs. Billboard signs must have a minimum height
of 12 feet from grade to the bottom of the sign.
      (5)   Sign illumination. Billboard sign illumination must meet the
requirements of §
150.03 of this chapter.
('72 Code, § 356.30(5)) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1994-766, passed 9-12-94; Am. Ord. 1999-914, passed
11- -99; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2010-1117, passed 9-7-
10;. Am. Ord. 2014-1186, passed 12-15-14; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.30 PI PUBLIC INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.
   The following sections concern signs in the PI Public Institutional
District, and said signs are regulated according to the requirements set forth
below:
   (A)   In PI Districts, a property may erect only signs described in
subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (1) and (4) below, or in
subdivisions (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (4) below, or
subdivision (5) below unless modified by a conditional use permit.
      (1)   Free-standing or monument sign. One freestanding sign, not to
exceed 50 square feet in area, or one monument sign not to exceed 120 square
feet.
      (2)   Area identification sign. One free-standing sign or monument sign
per development, as described by §
150.03 of this chapter not to exceed 320 square feet in area.
      (3)   Wall signs. One and two story, single or multiple tenant buildings:
Signs attached to one wall not to exceed ten percent of the building facade to
which the signs are attached.
      (4)   Wall signs. Multiple story buildings (three or more stories):
         (a)   Identification signs: One identification sign per building
facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not to exceed ten
percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached or 300 square
feet, whichever is less. The measured area is that building facade above the
second story.
         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described above in
subdivision (a), wall signs may be attached to only one wall, not to exceed ten
percent of the building facade to which the signs are attached and must be
located on the first story. The measured area is that building facade of the
first and second story.
      (5)   Two wall signs. Wall signs are allowed on only two walls. The wall
signs on each wall must individually conform to the area limitations, defined
in subdivisions (3) or (4) of this division.
   (B)   Minimum setbacks. For subdivisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section,
all signs must be set back at least 15 feet from the front property line and at
least ten feet from side and rear property lines. On corner lots, all signs
must be set back at least 15 feet from all property lines. All signs must be
set back a minimum of three feet from driveways to edge of sign, and a 30 foot
clear-view triangle must be maintained at public street intersections.
   (C)   Maximum height of signs. For signs described in subdivision (A)(1) of
this section, no sign may exceed 20 feet above grade. For signs described in
subdivision (A)(2) of this section, no sign may exceed 25 feet above grade.
   (D)   Minimum height of signs. Free-standing signs must have a minimum
height of seven feet from grade to the bottom of sign.
('72 Code, § 356.30(7)) (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2014-1186, passed
12-15-14; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.31 TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD) AND MIXED USE (MU) DISTRICT.
   (A)   In the TOD or MU Districts, a property used for single-family, two-
family, residential townhouse or apartment use may erect only signs as allowed
by §
150.25 and §
150.26 of this chapter, as established for Residential Districts.
   (B)   In TOD and MU Districts, a business property may erect only signs
described in subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (1) and (4)
below, or in subdivisions (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (4)
below, or (5) below, unless modified through the approval of a sign plan at the
time of Site Plan Review as approved by City Council.
      (1)   Monument sign. One monument sign not to exceed 120 square feet in
area.
      (2)   Area identification sign. One monument per development, as
described by §
150.03 of this chapter not to exceed 320 square feet in area.
      (3)   Wall signs. One and two story, single or multiple tenant buildings:
Signs attached to two walls immediately adjacent to a public street or the
parking lot which serves customers of the site, not to exceed ten percent of
the building facade to which the signs are attached.
      (4)   Wall signs. Multiple story buildings (three or more stories):
         (a)   Identification signs: One identification sign per building
facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not to exceed ten
percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached or 300 square
feet, whichever is less. The measured area is that building facade above the
second story.
         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described above in
subdivision (a), wall signs must be attached to only one wall, not to exceed
ten percent of the building facade to which the signs are attached and must be
located on the first story. The measured area is that building facade of the
first and second story.
      (5)   Three wall signs. Wall signs are allowed on up to three walls only
when immediately adjacent to a public street or the parking lot that serves
customers of the site, subject to City Manager approval. The wall signs on each
wall must individually conform to the area limitations defined in subdivisions
(3) or (4) of this division.
   (C)   Institutional signs. Institutional uses which do not meet the criteria
stated in §
150.03 of this chapter for area identification signs are allowed only one
monument sign with reader board per street frontage. The sign and reader board
must not exceed 60 square feet in area.
   (D)   Minimum setbacks. Monument signs must be set back at least 1 foot from
the front property line and at least ten feet from side and rear property
lines. On corner lots, all monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet
from front and side corner property lines. All signs must be set back a minimum
of three feet from driveways to edge of sign, and a 30 foot clear-view triangle
must be maintained at public street intersections.
   (E)   Maximum height of signs. Signs described in division (A)(1), (A)(2)
and (B) of this section may not exceed 8 feet above grade for monument signs.
(Ord. 2023-1297, passed 11-13-23; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Purpose
   
151.002   Definitions
   
151.003   Procedural requirements
   
151.004   Pre-application procedural requirements
   
151.005   Procedure, preliminary plat, fees and deposit
   
151.006   Procedure; final plat
   
151.007   Procedures for time extensions
   
151.008   Conditional use permit special zoning procedures
   
151.009   Registered land surveys
   
151.010   Conveyance by metes and bounds
   
151.011   Structures abutting public streets
   
151.012   Resubdividing combined parcels
   
151.013   Building permits
   
151.014   Subdivision and zoning fees
Preliminary Plat
   
151.025   Preliminary plat requirements
   
151.026   Supplementary information required
   
151.027   Qualifications governing approval of a preliminary plat
Final Plat
   
151.040   Final plat requirements
   
151.041   Name and location
   
151.042   Scale and point
   
151.043   Map
   
151.044   Surveyor's certificate
   
151.045   Signature of owners and dedication
   
151.046   Recording form
Design Standards
   
151.055   General requirements
   
151.056   Streets
   
151.057   Alleys
   
151.058   Easements
   
151.059   Blocks
   
151.060   Lots
   
151.061   Public sites and open space and park land dedication
Road Naming and House Numbering
   
151.070   Road designations
   
151.071   House numbering system
Required Improvements
   
151.085   Purpose
   
151.086   Listed and described
   
151.087   Payment for installation
   
151.088   Entryway signs; dedication and maintenance
   
151.089   Agreement providing for proper installation of improvements
   
151.090   Financial guarantee
   
151.091   Construction plans
   
151.092   Improvements completed prior to the approval of final plat
Variances
   
151.100   Variances generally
   
151.101   Fees
   
151.102   Variance for certain homesteads
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter may hereafter be known and cited as the “Brooklyn Park
Subdivision Code.”
   (B)   The process of dividing raw land into home sites, or separate parcels
for other uses, is one of the most important factors in the growth of any
community. Few activities have a more lasting effect upon its appearance and
environment. Once the land has been subdivided and the streets, homes and other
structures have been constructed, the basic character of this permanent
addition to the community has become firmly established. It is then virtually
impossible to alter its basic character without substantial expense. In most
subdivisions, roads and streets must be maintained and various public services
must be provided. The welfare of the entire community is thereby affected in
many important respects. It is, therefore, to the interest of the general
public, the developer, and the future owners that subdivisions be conceived,
designed and developed in accordance with sound rules and proper standards.
   (C)   All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval must fully
comply, in all respects, with the regulations set forth herein. It is the
purpose of these regulations to:
      (1)   Encourage well planned, efficient, and attractive subdivisions by
establishing reasonable standards for design and construction;
      (2)   Provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of
residents by requiring properly designed streets, park land, and adequate
sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water service;
      (3)   Place the cost of improvements against those benefitting
financially from their construction; and
      (4)   Secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and
waters.
   (D)   The Council of the City of Brooklyn Park deems these regulations to be
necessary for the preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of
this community. These regulations have been developed under the authority
contained in M.S. § 462.358, and are supplemented by appropriate sections of §
150.01, as indicated.
('72 Code, § 345:00) (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 2024-1304,
passed 7-29-24)
§ 151.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The City Manager or designee duly appointed and charged with
enforcement of this chapter.
   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee made up of representatives from
various city departments, as designated by the City Manager.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by a
street or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake.
   BUTT LOTS. Any lot, or lots, at the end of a block, located between two
corner lots.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A compilation of policy statements, goals, text,
standards and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development,
both public and private, of the municipality and its environs, as defined in
the Minnesota Metropolitan Land Planning Act, M.S. §§ 473.851 to 473.868, and
includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to
such plan or parts thereof.
   EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for the specific use of the land for a
public or quasi-public purpose.
   FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plan
of a subdivision is presented to the City Council for approval and which, if
approved, will be submitted to the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles.
   LOT. A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated
from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of
survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having proprietary interest in the
land being subdivided under this chapter.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Brooklyn Park.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY or WALKWAY. A public right-of-way across or within a block to
provide access for pedestrians.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A tentative map, drawing, or chart of a proposed
subdivision meeting requirements herein enumerated.
   REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT (DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT). A lot extending between two
streets with vehicular access which may be limited to one street at the time of
subdividing.
   STREETS AND ALLEYS.
      (1)    STREET. A public way for vehicular traffic whether designated as a
street, highway, thoroughfare, collector, collector parkway, minor collector
and minor collector parkway, throughway, road, arterial, minor arterial,
avenue, lane, place, or however otherwise designated. The width of a street is
measured between right of way lines.
      (2)    COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from subdivision
streets to arterial streets. It includes the principal access streets to a
residential development and streets for circulation within such a development.
      (3)    CUL-DE-SAC. A short, minor street having only one outlet and a
vehicular turnabout.
      (4)    FRONTAGE ROAD. A minor street which is somewhat parallel and
adjacent to a minor arterial or higher functional classification and which
provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
      (5)    SUBDIVISION STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily
for access to the abutting properties and the local needs of the neighborhood.
      (6)    PRIVATE STREET. A street serving as vehicular access to two or
more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public but is owned by one
or more private parties.
      (7)    ALLEY. A minor way of providing secondary vehicular access to the
side or rear of two or more properties abutting on a street.
      (8)    MINOR ARTERIAL AND COLLECTORS. Streets designated on the
comprehensive plan and used primarily by fast moving traffic at heavy volumes
as traffic arteries for intercommunication between and among neighborhoods and
other large areas. These streets are so designated for the purposes of applying
the subdivision design standards found in § 151.056 of this chapter.
      (9)    COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL STREET. A street designed for the primary
purpose of serving industrial, multiple residential, or commercial property.
      (10)    MINOR COLLECTOR. A street which connects neighborhoods within
subregions and which carries traffic from subdivision streets to the nearest
major streets; however, traffic levels on a minor collector cannot reasonably
be expected to exceed 3,000 ADT due to certain roadway design elements intended
to reduce speeds and discourage use by through traffic.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a
subdivision of land for that person or for others.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of an area, parcel or tract of land into two or
more parcels, tracts, lots, or long-term leasehold interests where the creation
of the leasehold interest necessitates the creation of streets, roads, or
alleys, for residential, commercial, industrial, or other use or any
combination thereof, except those divisions when a new street is being created
by a governmental agency which results in a division of a parcel of land. The
term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to
the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided or for adjustments in
boundary lines.
('72 Code, § 345:02) (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1992-705,
passed 9-14-92)
§ 151.003 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Before dividing any tract of land into two or more lots or parcels, or
adjusting any boundaries not covered by M.S. § 462.352, Subd. 12, the
procedures set forth in this chapter must be followed.
('72 Code, § 345:04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.004 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the subdividers or
owners must meet with the Administrator and other appropriate officials in
order to be made fully aware of all applicable ordinances, regulations and
plans in the area to the subdivided. At this time, or at subsequent informal
meetings, the subdivider must submit a general sketch plan of the proposed
subdivision and drainage plan. The sketch plan can be presented in simple form
but must show any zoning changes which would be required, and must show that
consideration has been given to the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
existing community facilities that would serve it, to neighboring subdivisions
and development, and to the topography of the site. The Administrator may
require the subdivider to provide an area-wide concept platting plan for all
neighboring properties if deemed necessary for coordinated planing.
   (B)   The subdivider is urged to avail the subdivider of the advice and
assistance of the city staff in order to facilitate the approval of the
preliminary plat. However, such advice should not be construed to predict final
action by the City Council.
('72 Code, § 345:06)
§ 151.005 PROCEDURE, PRELIMINARY PLAT, FEES AND DEPOSIT.
   (A)   (1)   After the pre-application meeting, the subdivider must file with
the Department of Community Development an application completed in compliance
with all city regulations and 20 copies of the preliminary plat which has been
prepared in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. At the
time of submission of the preliminary plat, a non-refundable subdivision filing
fee and a minimum subdivision cash escrow as established in the fee resolution,
set forth in the Appendix to this code, must be paid in cash to the City
Treasurer. The fee will be placed in the general fund and the cash escrow must
be held in a special subdivider's cash escrow account credited to the
subdivider. Costs of city services, legal expenses and materials provided in
reviewing and processing of the preliminary plat will be charged to the
subdivider's cash escrow account and must be credited to the City of Brooklyn
Park. The fees and costs to be paid by the subdivider are not contingent upon
approval or denial of the preliminary plat or final plat.
      (2)   The Council must promulgate and adopt a set of rules, regulations
and fees for services rendered by city personnel, and the rules, regulations
and fee schedules are on file with the City Clerk for inspection. A copy
thereof must be furnished upon request to the subdivider. The city must itemize
all time, services and materials billed to any subdivider's cash escrow
account. The subdivider making the deposit(s) in the subdivider's cash escrow
account must upon request, be furnished a copy of the itemized charges.
      (3)   If, at any time, the balance in the subdivider's cash escrow
account is depleted to less than 5% of the originally required cash escrow
amount, the subdivider must deposit additional funds in the subdivider's cash
escrow account in an amount as determined by the Planning Director and City
Engineer, sufficient to cover all costs to be incurred by the city in
implementing the platting process. Any balance remaining in the account upon
completion of all platting conditions must be returned to the depositor by the
Finance Department after all claims and charges thereto have been paid and
after approval by City Council.
      (4)   Park dedication in the form of land or cash will be computed prior
to approval of preliminary plat; however any amount of cash in lieu of
dedication of land must be collected prior to the time the final plat is
released for recording.
   (B)   The planning staff must refer copies of the preliminary plat to the
Engineering Department. An engineering review will be made and a written report
attached prior to forwarding to the Planning Commission.
   (C)   The planning staff must refer copies of the preliminary plat to the
Parks and Recreation Department. A park and recreation staff review will be
made, as needed, and forwarded to the planning staff prior to forwarding an
overall staff report to the Planning Commission.
   (D)   The planning staff must refer copies of the preliminary plat to the
Planning Commission. The planning staff will arrange for a public hearing to be
held within 45 days of the filing date. The required legal publication must be
made and notices must be sent to all property owners of record within 350 feet
of the exterior boundary of the proposed plat.
   (E)   The subdivider or a duly authorized representative must attend the
Planning Commission meetings at which this proposal is scheduled for
consideration.
   (F)   (1)   The Planning Commission and City Council must study the
practicability of the preliminary plat taking into consideration the
requirements of the city. Particular attention must be given, but not limited
to, the arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation to the
topography of the land, flood plain regulations, water supply, sewage disposal,
drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the present and future development of
adjoining lands, and the requirements of the comprehensive plan, and the zoning
ordinance.
      (2)   The Planning Commission must study and must make recommendations
and the City Council must consider the following: whether the proposed
subdivision is consistent with applicable specific area plans or the
comprehensive plan; whether the design is consistent with applicable
development plans or policies; whether the physical characteristics of the
site, including but not limited to, topography, vegetation, susceptibility to
erosion, siltation, flooding and water storage or retention and flood plain
regulations, are suitable for the type and/or density of development or use
contemplated; the environmental impact of the subdivision design or proposed
improvements; whether the design of the subdivision or the type of improvement
is consistent with easements of record or easements established by judgment of
a court; traffic considerations; and any other aspect affecting the public
health, safety or welfare. The Planning Commission may recommend and the City
Council may approve reasonable conditions on the plat to negate any problem
areas.
   (G)   At the public hearing all persons interested in the proposed plat must
be heard and the Planning Commission must within 30 days of the closing of the
hearing, recommend approval, modify, or recommend disapproval of the
preliminary plat or waiver of platting and submit to the City Council, the
applicant and the City Manager, their findings and recommendations. The City
Council must act upon the preliminary plat and send written notification of
their action to the applicant. Failure of the governing body to act within 120
days of the filing of an application in complete compliance with the ordinance
is deemed approval of the plat. The grounds for any refusal to approve a plat
must be set forth by the Council in a resolution and reported to the applicant
in writing. Should the subdivider desire to amend the preliminary plat as
approved by the Council, the subdivider must submit the amended plat following
the original procedure set forth, except for the public hearing and fees unless
the Planning Commission considers the scope of the revisions to constitute a
new plat, then the hearing and fees are required.
('72 Code, § 345:08) (Am. Ord. 1975-215(A), passed 12-8-75; Am. Ord. 1984-447
(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1994-756, passed 5-9- 94)
§ 151.006 PROCEDURE; FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The subdivider, within one year, unless extensions are granted by the
City Council by resolution, after the approval of the preliminary plat, must
file with the Director of Community Development, 15 copies of the final plat
prepared by a land surveyor duly registered in the State of Minnesota. Failure
of the subdivider to submit the final plat within those times designated by
City Council resolutions will cause the preliminary and final plats to become
null and void.
   (B)   The subdivider must also submit to the City Attorney, at the same
time, an up-to-date certified abstract of title or registered property abstract
and such other evidence as the City Attorney may require showing title or
control of the land by the subdivider.
   (C)   The subdivider must have incorporated all changes or modifications
required by the City Council, but in all other respects the final plat must
conform to the preliminary plat.
   (D)   If the subdivider requests that any special assessments which have
been levied against the property described be divided and allocated to the
respective lots in the proposed plats, the Department of Public Works must
estimate the clerical cost of preparing a revised assessment roll, filing the
same with the County Auditor, and making such division and allocation, and upon
approval by the City Manager of such estimated cost, the same must be paid by
the subdivider to the Finance Department from the subdivider's escrow account.
   (E)   The required utility layout must be submitted by the subdivider to the
City Engineer for the City Engineer's cost estimate. A copy of the City
Engineer's report must be submitted to the Director of Community Development
for the preparation of the contract required in §
151.089 of this chapter.
   (F)   The Director of Community Development, upon receipt of the final plat,
must retain one copy of the final plat for the Director's records, and must:
      (1)   Refer 14 copies of the final plat to the Administrative Review
Committee, who must review the final plat with respect to its conformance with
the approved preliminary plat.
      (2)   Refer the current abstract of title or registered property abstract
to the City Attorney for the Attorney's examination and report. The City
Attorney's written report must be submitted to the Director of Community
Development within 30 days of its receipt by the Attorney.
      (3)   Obtain a written report or statement from the Finance Director
certifying the payment by the subdivider of all fees due the city pursuant to
this chapter.
   (G)   The City Council must, by resolution, authorize the Mayor and City
Manager to sign the final plat.
   (H)   If a report from the Director of Community Development indicates, in
the Director of Community Development's judgment, there is a substantial
deviation in the final plat from the approved preliminary plat, the City
Council may determine if the submission represents a new plat. If the
submission does represent a new plat, the City Council must deny the final plat
and direct the subdivider to resubmit the subdivider's proposal following
preliminary plat requirements.
   (I)   The subdivider must, if the final plat is signed by the Mayor and City
Manager, record the final plat with the County Recorder or the Registrar of
Titles within 180 days of the date of the Council resolutions approving the
final plat, or within 180 days after the plat is considered approved by reason
of the City Council's failure to act within the 120 day statutory period. Any
plat not filed and recorded in accordance with this section becomes null and
void.
   (J)   Changes, erasures, modifications or revisions must not be made in any
final plat after approval has been given by the City Council and endorsed in
writing on the plat, unless the plat is first resubmitted to the City Council
and that body approves any modifications. In the event that any such final plat
is recorded without complying with this requirement, the same is considered
null and void and the City Council must institute proceedings to have the plat
stricken from the records of the city.
('72 Code, § 345:10) (Am. Ord. 1977-248(A), passed 8-22-77; Am. Ord. 1984-447
(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1992-705, passed 9-14- 92)
§ 151.007 PROCEDURES FOR TIME EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   If a time extension is to be requested, for a preliminary or
final plat as previously approved by the City Council, the one year extension
must be requested and must appear on a City Council agenda for approval within
one year of the date of the original Council approval of the plat or last
Council action to extend that approval. A time extension request which
encounters delays in the review process and through no fault of the applicant
cannot be scheduled for Council action as anticipated may proceed through the
process to final resolution without jeopardy.
      (2)   The provisions of this division do not apply to original Council
approvals or time extensions granted prior to the effective date of this
chapter. All original Council approvals or time extensions granted subsequent
to the effective date of this chapter are bound by the provisions of this
division.
   (B)   This request must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and a
recommendation forwarded to the City Council addressing such items as potential
conflicts with the comprehensive plan or specific area plans; potential
conflicts with policy changes; changing transportation conditions and sidewalk
policies; or applicable changes to any city, state or federal ordinances.
   (C)   The city staff may recompute park dedication fees and other financial
guarantees as required by the city code to reflect current cost estimates.
These revised costs must be included in the time extension resolution.
   (D)   Any negative escrow amounts must be paid and the escrow amount must be
brought up to current minimum requirements with the request for time extension.
   (E)   A current property owners list from Hennepin County must be submitted
every two years based upon the original date of Council approval only in
instance where such lists are necessary for the notification of owners of
property not lying within the Brooklyn Park corporate limits but within the
standard notification area.
('72 Code, § 345:11) (Ord. 1992-705, passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 1993-746, passed
12-13-93)
§ 151.008 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT SPECIAL ZONING PROCEDURES.
   The City Council upon receiving a report from the Planning Commission may
grant a variance in these regulations in case of a subdivision which is part of
a conditional use permit special procedure approved under the provisions of the
zoning ordinance for the City of Brooklyn Park.
('72 Code, § 345:82) (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84)
§ 151.009 REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS.
   It is the intention of this chapter that all registered land surveys in the
city must be presented to the Planning Commission in the form of a preliminary
plat and in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter for
preliminary plats. A registered land survey must be treated as any other
subdivision, and the Planning Commission must approve the arrangement, sizes,
and relationships of proposed tracts and such registered land surveys and
tracts to be used as easements or roads must be dedicated as in any other plat
or division. Unless such approvals in accordance with the standards set forth
in this chapter have been obtained, building permits will be withheld for
building on tracts which have been so subdivided by registered land surveys
without compliance with the ordinance and Council approval. The City Council
may refuse to take over tracts, streets, roads or to improve, repair or
maintain any such tracts or areas unless so approved.
('72 Code, § 345:88)
§ 151.010 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.
   (A)   No conveyance of land, in which the land conveyed is described by
metes and bounds or by reference to a plat made after the effective date of
this chapter which has not been approved as provided herein, and no conveyance
which results in the division of a platted lot will be made or recorded unless
the parcel described in the conveyance and the residue parcel meet the
following standards:
      (1)   Was a separate parcel of record April 1, 1945, or the date of
adoption of subdivision regulations by the city under Minnesota Laws of 1945,
Chapter 287, whichever is the later;
      (2)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior
to such time and was recorded in the office of the County Recorder or the
Registrar of Titles within one year thereafter; or
      (3)   Was a separate parcel of not less than two and one-half acres in
area and 150 feet in width on January 1, 1966; or
      (4)   Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in area and 300
feet in width on July 1, 1980; or
      (5)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less
than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance
does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels,
any of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet in width; or
      (6)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less
than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and its conveyance
does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels,
any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet in width.
   (B)   In any case in which compliance with the foregoing restrictions will
create an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does not interfere with
the purpose of the subdivision regulations, the City Council may waive such
compliance by adoption of a resolution to that effect pursuant to §§
151.100 et seq., and other provisions of these subdivision regulations. All
requests for waivers require a public hearing and must follow the same
procedure as required in public hearings for plats.
('72 Code, § 345:91) (Am. Ord. 1973-147(A), passed 6-11-73; Am. Ord. 1974-170
(A), passed 7-22-74; Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4- 9-84)
§ 151.011 STRUCTURES ABUTTING PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   With respect to parcels of land not subject to the provisions of M.S.
§ 462.358, Subd. 4b, and §
151.010 of this chapter, a building or structure must not be constructed or
erected on such parcels, nor must any building permit be issued for such
construction or erection, unless such parcels have access to a public street
which has been dedicated to and accepted by the city. This provision does not
apply if the structure is to be used solely for agricultural purposes and the
property is served by a private street or private easement.
   (B)   This requirement may be waived by the City Council if the Council
makes the following findings:
      (1)   That the proposed structure is located on a properly designed
private street, as approved by the City Engineer; and
      (2)   The development is not in conflict with the city's growth
management principles.
('72 Code, § 345:92) (Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.012 RESUBDIVIDING COMBINED PARCELS.
   Any parcel of land, either platted or unplatted, that has been combined for
tax purposes or for other reasons cannot be reseparated without a waiver of
platting or plat approved by the City Council in a manner prescribed in §
151.003.
('72 Code, § 345:93) (Ord. 1986-528(A), passed 5-27-86)
§ 151.013 BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permits will be issued by the city for the construction of any
building or structure on any lot in the subdivision as defined herein which has
been approved for platting until all requirements of this chapter have been
fully complied with. No building permit will be issued for a lot not having the
required right-of-way frontage on a public street in the zoning district in
which it is located.
('72 Code, § 345:94)
§ 151.014 SUBDIVISION AND ZONING FEES.
   Subdivision and zoning fees are established by the fee resolution set forth
as an Appendix to this code.
('72 Code, § 520:00(6)) (Am. Ord. 1981-374(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 1986-
540(A), passed 8-18-86; Am. Ord. 1990-660(A), passed 10-8-90)
PRELIMINARY PLAT
§ 151.025 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Survey and design information required. The preliminary plat must be
clearly and legibly drawn at a scale ranging from 1”:10', 1”:20', 1”:30', 1”:
40' or 1”:50' as accepted by the Department of Community Development or the
Planning Commission and must contain the information set forth in the divisions
of this section which follow.
   (B)   Identification and description.
      (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision, which name must not duplicate
or be alike in pronunciation to the name of any plat previously recorded in the
county.
      (2)   The location of the subdivision by section, township, and range or
by other legal description.
      (3)   The name(s) and address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owner
(s), and/or petitioner(s), subdivider, surveyor and/or designer.
      (4)   Graphic scale, north point, date of preparation and revision dates.
   (C)   Existing conditions.
      (1)   A boundary line drawing of the proposed subdivision, including
measured distances and angles, which must be tied into the nearest section or
quarter section corner by traverse.
      (2)   Existing zoning classifications for land within the subdivision and
on abutting property.
      (3)   Total acreage.
      (4)   Location, width, and name of every existing or previously platted
street or other public way showing present and proposed width, railroad and
utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings
and structures, easements, section lines, flood plain limits, and corporate
lines within the proposed subdivision and to a distance of 150 feet beyond.
      (5)   If the proposed subdivision is a rearrangement or replat of any
former plat, the lot and block arrangement of the original plat along with its
original name indicated by dotted or dash lines. Also, any revised or proposed
to be vacated roadways of the original plat must be so indicated.
      (6)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, pipelines, high
voltage lines, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract and to
a distance of 150 feet beyond the tract, including such data as grades, invert
elevations and locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants.
      (7)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided lands within
150 feet.
   (D)   Subdivision design features.
      (1)   Layout of proposed streets showing right-of-way widths and proposed
street names. If the proposed street is an extension of an existing named
street that name must be used. In all other cases the name of any street
previously used within the county must not be used, unless such use is
consistent with the county or community street naming system.
      (2)   Locations and widths of alleys, pedestrian ways, utilities,
easements, and drainage plan.
      (3)   Layout, numbers and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks,
including the area in square feet of each proposed lot.
      (4)   Areas intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use including
their size in acres or square footage.
      (5)   Areas intended for uses other than residential or public.
      (6)   Minimum front and side street building setback lines as required in
the zoning district in which the subdivision is located.
      (7)   A proposed lot must not be divided by a boundary line between
registered land and abstract property.
('72 Code, § 345:13)
§ 151.026 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   The information set forth in this section must be filed with the preliminary
plat:
   (A)   A complete topographic map at a scale of 1”:100', 1”:50', 1”:40' or
1”:20' and with contour intervals not greater than two feet showing water
courses, flood plain limits, marshes, rock outcrops and other significant
features, at least 150 feet beyond the boundary of the proposed plat, at least
one print of the preliminary plat must be superimposed on a copy of the
topographic map. U.S. Geodetic Survey datum must be used for all topographic
mapping. Fulfillment of this requirement may be requested by the city staff,
Planning Commission or City Council.
   (B)   Soil absorption tests where septic tanks are proposed, and any other
subsoil information requested by the city staff, including soil bearings and
water table.
   (C)   Plans for water supply, sewage disposal, proposed grades, drainage and
flood control including the proposed locations, size and gradient of proposed
sewer lines and water mains and such other supporting data as may be required
by the city staff, Planning Commission, or the City Council.
   (D)   Center line gradients of proposed streets and alleys.
   (E)   Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being
proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Commission may require that the
subdivider submit a sketch plan of the rest of the subdivider’
   (F)   Indicate if the land is registered or abstract property.
   (G)   Indicate other information as requested by the Departments of
Community Development, Public Works or Parks and Recreation such as sidewalks,
walkways, bikeways, berming or landscaping with a schedule of plantings or
anticipated ground level building elevation(s).
   (H)   All plats within the Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area Overlay
District as adopted in the Brooklyn Park Zoning Map, and defined by Executive
Order No. 79-19 of the Critical Area Act of 1973, M.S. Chapter 116G, must
indicate:
      (1)   Existing and proposed grades at two foot contour intervals.
      (2)   A landscaping plan as requested by the City Manager to compensate
as transitioning, erosion control or improving the living environment.
      (3)   Submit an erosion and sedimentation control plan as requested by
the City Engineer.
      (4)   Calculate and graphically describe the amounts and location of cut
and fill determined in cubic yards. Length of storage and prevention measures
for wind and water erosion must also be indicated.
   (I)   Drainage ponds. Determination shall be made between drainage ponds
designed to hold water on a continuous basis and those designed to hold water
on an infrequent basis. Areas designed for intermittent water storage shall be
landscaped and maintained in accordance with required landscape provisions.
Creation of larger, regional ponds is encouraged.
   (J)   Erosion and sediment control shall be addressed as follows:
      (1)   The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented
by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
      (2)   Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with
the different stages of construction. Appropriate control measures shall be
installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion.
      (3)   Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that
adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one
period of time.
      (4)   When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest
feasible period of time, as specified in the development agreement.
      (5)   Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient topsoil shall be set aside
for respreading over the developed area. Topsoil shall be restored or provided
to a minimum depth of three inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to
the soil quality prior to development.
      (6)   Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever practical.
      (7)   Runoff shall be diverted to a sedimentation basin before being
allowed to enter the natural drainage system.
      (8)   Development shall comply with and follow the applicable best
management practices for erosion and sedimentation control as described in the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s (MPCA) Best Management Practices Handbook
as may be amended.
      (9)   All stormwater facilities are subject to inspection for conformance
to approved plans prior to acceptance by the city.
      (10) Projects initiated or directed by the city shall not be exempt from
these rules.
('72 Code, § 345:16) (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 2001-961,
passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2002-985, passed 11-25-02; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed
7-29-24)
§ 151.027 QUALIFICATIONS GOVERNING APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   The approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council only
constitutes acceptance of the design as a basis for the preparation of the
final plat by the owners or subdividers. Subsequent approval by appropriate
officials having jurisdiction will be required of the engineering proposals
pertaining to water supplies, storm drainage, sewage disposal, sidewalks,
grading, gradients and roadway widths, and the surfacing of streets prior to
the approval of the final plat by the city.
   (B)   No plan will be approved for a subdivision which includes any area
subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage
facilities which would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots
impossible, unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in
the opinion of the City Engineer, make the area completely safe for occupancy
and provide adequate street and lot drainage and is not in conflict with the
city's flood plain regulations.
('72 Code, § 345:20)
FINAL PLAT
§ 151.040 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   The final plat must be prepared in accordance with M.S. § 505.08, Subd. 1.
The plat may consist of more than one sheet, numbered progressively.
('72 Code, § 345:22)
§ 151.041 NAME AND LOCATION.
   The plat must contain the name of the subdivision, lettered in large print
at the top of the plat, together with the location of the subdivision by
section, range, and township and by city and county.
('72 Code, § 345:25)
§ 151.042 SCALE AND POINT.
   The plat must contain a graphic scale and north point.
('72 Code, § 345:28)
§ 151.043 MAP.
   The plat must contain an accurate map of the proposed subdivision at a scale
acceptable to the County Recorder's Office which must show the information set
forth in the divisions of this section which follow and meet the requirements
of M.S. § 505.02:
   (A)   A boundary line survey including the measured distances and angles and
the true distance and bearing between a known point on the boundary and the
nearest official monument which must be accurately described on the plat. One
permanent monument must be placed on one corner of any plat of four or more
lots.
   (B)   The accurate location of all monuments.
   (C)   Accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles and
curvatures used to describe the boundaries, streets, alleys, easements, areas
to be reserved for public use, and other important features within the proposed
subdivision. All linear dimensions must be shown in feet and hundredths of feet
and all angles and bearings must be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. The
radius, angle of curvature, point of tangent, point of curvature and length of
arc must be shown for every curve. No ditto marks will be permitted in
indicating dimensions.
   (D)   All lots and blocks numbered in numerical order.
   (E)   All municipal, township, county or sections lines within the proposed
subdivision.
   (F)   Identification and accurate boundaries of any areas to be dedicated or
reserved for public use or for the exclusive use of property owners within the
subdivision.
   (G)   The names of all streets and alleys.
   (H)   If the subdivision is a replatting or rearrangement of a legal
subdivision, the original platting shown by dotted lines.
   (I)   Low land and water areas.
   (J)   A letter, certified by an engineer or surveyor, attesting to lot
square footage.
   (K)   A 1:500 scale and a 1:200 scale mylar of each final plat must be
submitted to the Director of Community Development prior to release of the
final plat for recording.
('72 Code, § 345:31) (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1988-596
(A), passed 7-11-88)
§ 151.044 SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE.
   The plat must contain a notarized certification by a registered land
surveyor that the plat represents a survey made by that surveyor and that the
monuments shown therein exist as located and that all dimensions are correct,
as required by M.S. § 505.03, Subd. 1.
('72 Code, § 345:34)
§ 151.045 SIGNATURE OF OWNERS AND DEDICATION.
   The plat must contain a notarized certification by owner or owners and by
any mortgage holder of record of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of
streets and other public areas as required by M.S. § 505.03, Subd. 1.
('72 Code, § 345:37)
§ 151.046 RECORDING FORM.
   The plat must contain a form for recording the approval of the City Council
as follows:
   Approved by the City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota, this        day of
                    ,
   20     .
   Signed                                 
      Mayor
   Attest                                 
      City Manager
('72 Code, § 345:40)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 151.055 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission and the City Council, in their review of the
preliminary plat, will take into consideration the requirements of the
community and the best use of the land being subdivided.
   (B)   The subdivision must conform to the adopted zoning ordinance and must
be in substantial conformance to the goals and policies set forth in the
comprehensive plan.
   (C)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, and location of all streets
must be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of
storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
Wherever possible and necessary, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions
must provide for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas. Where
adjoining unsubdivided areas may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a
new subdivision must make provision for the proper projection of streets into
adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new
subdivision at appropriate locations.
   (D)   No street dedications will be accepted which require a crossing of a
railroad, collector street, minor arterial, or intermediate arterial unless
sufficient land is dedicated to provide for approaches sufficient for grade
crossing or safe intersections.
   (E)   Mailbox design. The subdivider shall submit design details and plans
for mailboxes on all new residential plats. Mailboxes shall be similar in
design and be architecturally consistent with homes in the subdivision.
('72 Code, § 345:43) (Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.056 STREETS.
   (A)   Widths. Street right-of-way widths must be as shown on the
comprehensive plan and where not shown therein, must be not less than as
follows:
      (1)   Principal Arterial: variable.
      (2)   "A" or "B" Minor Arterial: 100 feet.
      (3)   Class I Collector: 80 feet.
      (4)   Class II Collector: 70 feet (may be adjusted upwards as necessary
at intersection with arterial).
      (5)   Local street: 60 feet.
      (6)   Commercial and/or industrial street: 80 feet.
   (B)   Intersections. Insofar as practical streets must intersect at right
angles. The angle formed by the intersection of two streets must be not less
than 60 degrees. Intersections having more than four corners are prohibited.
Intersections must not be closer than 150 feet as measured from centerline to
centerline.
   (C)   Deflections. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at
any point by more than ten degrees, they must be connected by a curve with a
radius of not less than 100 feet, except in those cases specifically approved
by the City Council.
   (D)   Gradients. All center line gradients must be at least 0.5 percent and
must not exceed the following:
      (1)   Arterial streets and collector streets: four percent;
      (2)   Subdivision streets and frontage roads: six percent.
   (E)   Vertical curves. Different connecting street gradients must be
connected with vertical curves. Minimum length in feet of these curves must be
30 times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of the two adjacent
slopes.
   (F)   Street jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 150
feet are prohibited as measured from centerline to centerline.
   (G)   Subdivision streets. Subdivision streets must be laid out so that
their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
   (H)   Cul-de-sacs. The maximum length of a street terminating in a cul-de-
sac must be 600 feet, measured from the center line of the street or origin to
the center of the cul-de-sac and must have a radius of 60 feet.
   (I)   Access to collectors or arterials. In the case where a proposed plat
is adjacent to a collector arterial street, the applicant is advised not to
direct vehicle or pedestrian access from individual lots to such thoroughfares.
Where possible, the subdivider must attempt to provide access to all lots via
subdivision streets.
   (J)   Platting of small tracts. In the platting of small tracts of land
fronting on arterials where there is no convenient access to existing entrances
and where access from such plat would be closer than one-quarter mile from an
existing access point, every effort must be made in such plats for the
connection of roads to neighboring land. As the neighboring land is platted and
developed, and access becomes possible at a preferred location, direct access
will be prohibited.
   (K)   Half streets. Half streets are prohibited except where it will be
practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half street may be
permitted. The probable length of time elapsing before dedication of the
remainder will be considered in this direction.
   (L)   Private streets. Private streets are not permitted and public
improvements will not be approved for any private street unless approved by the
City Council as part of a conditional use permit for an overall development
plan.
   (M)    Hardship to owners of adjoining property. The street arrangements
must not be such as to cause hardship of adjoining property in platting their
own land and providing convenient access to it.
   (N)   Dedication of streets. Except for private streets as designated in
§ 151.056, all proposed streets shown on the plat must be offered for
dedication as public streets.
   (O)   Medians. Landscaped medians shall be required for Class I and II
collector streets and cul-de-sac islands, as determined by the City Council,
and constructed in accordance with standards established by the City Engineer.
('72 Code, § 345:46) (Am. Ord. 1984-447, passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1992-705,
passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.057 ALLEYS.
   (A)   Locational requirements. Except in the case of a shopping center,
planned as a unit, with off-street parking and loading space, either a public
or private alley must be provided in a block where commercially zoned property
abuts a major thoroughfare or a major street. Alleys in residential areas other
than those zoned for multiple use will not be permitted except by special
permission of the City Council.
   (B)   Widths. Alleys, where permitted by the City Council, must be at least
20 feet in width in residential areas and at least 30 feet wide in commercial
areas, with adequate provisions for snow storage. Such snow storage locations
must be approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Grades. All center line gradients in alleys must be at least 0.5
percent and must not exceed eight percent.
('72 Code, § 345:49)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.058 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Provided for utilities. Easements to a width as determined by the City
Engineer, or at least 15 feet wide centered on rear or other lot lines must be
provided for utilities where necessary. They must have continuity of alignment
from block to block and at the deflection points easements for a pole line
anchor must be provided where necessary.
   (B)   Drainage. Easements must be provided along each side of the center
line of any water course or drainage channel whether or not shown in the
comprehensive plan, to a width sufficient to provide proper maintenance and
protection and to provide for storm water runoff and installation and
maintenance of storm sewers. Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding
with lot lines must be provided. Such easements for drainage purposes must not
be less than five feet in width, each side of the lot line. Except where an
overall drainage and utility development plan for subdivisions have been
approved by the City Engineer, all lots must be graded in such a manner to
avoid additional drainage encroachment onto adjacent properties. This
restriction applies during, as well as after, construction is completed.
   (C)   Dedication. All easements must be dedicated for the required uses by
appropriate language on the plat, as required by M.S. § 505.03, Subd. 1.
('72 Code, § 345:52)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.059 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Length. The maximum length of a block is1,500 feet and the minimum
length is 400 feet. Blocks over 900 feet long may require pedestrian ways at
least ten feet wide at their approximate center. The use of additional
pedestrian ways to schools, parks and other destinations may be required.
   (B)   Arrangements. A block must be so designed as to provide two tiers of
lots unless it adjoins a railroad, collector or arterial street system, or
other types of barriers in the form of schools, parks, major developments,
corporate limits or other major uses, where it may have a single tier of lots.
('72 Code, § 345:55)
§ 151.060 LOTS.
   (A)   Location. All lots must abut for their full frontage on a publicly
dedicated street.
   (B)   Size. The lot dimensions must be such as to comply with the minimum
lot areas specified in the zoning ordinance. Lot square footages must be
designated on the preliminary plat. A letter must accompany the final plat,
certified by an engineer or surveyor, stating that all lot sizes meet plat
requirements.
   (C)   Transition lots. When platting is adjacent to incompatible land uses,
except parks, depth of lots must be increased to allow for space, berming or
other landscaping techniques to buffer each land use.
   (D)   Side lot lines. Side lines of lots must be substantially at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   (E)   Water courses. Lots abutting upon a water course, drainageways,
channel, or stream must have sufficient depth and width to provide a minimum
area of land not subject to flooding equal to the minimum lot dimensions
specified in the zoning ordinance for the district in which the lots are
located.
   (F)   Drainage. Lots must be graded so as to provide drainage away from
building locations. All landscaping features, such as retaining walls, and
filling or grading, within drainage and utility easements must be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer and the City Manager.
   (G)   Natural features. In the subdividing of land, due regard must be shown
for all natural features, such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots,
or similar conditions, and plans must be adjusted to preserve those which will
add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
   (H)   Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after
subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than
allowed to remain as unusable or non-conforming parcels.
   (I)   Adequate setbacks. All plats with lots or tracts abutting on collector
or arterial streets must have adequate width and depth to provide for the
minimum setbacks to build in accordance with all city codes.
   (J)   Minimum rear lot line. Where practical, all lots should have a minimum
of 30 feet in width at the rear lot line.
   (K)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage (lots with frontage on two
parallel streets) or reverse frontage lots are not permitted except where lots
back against a collector or arterial street. Such lots must have additional
depth to allow for screening and/or planting along the back lot line in
accordance with the Zoning Code, Environmental Quality. Vehicular access may be
restricted as a condition of the plat.
   (L)   Cul-de-sac lots. If the front line of any lot is a curve or partly a
curve with a radius of 175 feet, the frontage for purposes of minimum
requirements, will be measured at the building line. In addition thereto, the
front footage of the front lot line will be 60 feet or as modified under
special procedure provisions as established by the zoning ordinance.
('72 Code, § 345:58) (Am. Ord. 1978-266(A), passed 6-12-78; Am. Ord. 1984-447
(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1996-801, passed 3-25-96; Am. Ord. 2024-1304,
passed 7-29-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.061 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACE AND PARK LAND DEDICATION.
   (A)   Public sites and open spaces. Where a proposed park, playground, or
other public site shown on the adopted comprehensive plan or official map is
embraced in part or in whole by a boundary of a proposed subdivision, and such
public sites are not dedicated to the city, such public ground must be shown as
reserved land on the preliminary plat to allow the city the opportunity to
consider and take action toward acquisition of such public ground or park by
purchase or other means prior to approval of the final plat.
   (B)   Park land dedication.
      (1)   In every plat, replat or subdivision of land allowing development
for residential, commercial, industrial, or other uses or combination thereof,
or where a waiver is granted, a reasonable portion of such land and/or cash
must be set aside and dedicated by the tract owner or owners to the general
public as open space for park and playground purposes, public open space for
park and playground purposes, public open space or public ponds, except where
adjustment to lot lines do not create additional lots.
      (2)   A minimum of ten percent of the buildable land to be used for
residential, multiple-family residential, or uses other than commercial
business or industrial purposes, is deemed a reasonable portion. BUILDABLE LAND
means the gross acreage of all property in the proposed plat or subdivision
excluding wetlands designated by federal or state agencies and those classified
by the Wetland Conservation Act. The land must be suitable for public use as
parks and playgrounds or for one of the aforedescribed purposes and the city is
not required to accept land which will not be usable for parks and playground
or which would require extensive expenditures on the part of the public to make
them usable. The city has the option to require cash contribution in lieu of
setting aside dedicated land or in requiring a part of the land as a parkland
dedication and the balance of the land value in cash. Any such cash
contribution will be a set amount determined annually based on a minimum of ten
percent of the total fair market land value of the land within such plat,
replat, waiver or subdivision, for residential and multiple-family residential
uses. The amount is then established by equating the fair market value to a per
unit fee based on the net density. In establishing the amount of land to be
dedicated or preserved or the amount of the cash contribution, the city will
give due consideration to the open space, recreational, or common areas and
facilities proposed by the applicant to be open to the public.
      (3)   Any park dedication money so paid to the city must be placed in a
special fund. The money shall be used only for:
         (a)   The acquisition of land for parks and playgrounds;
         (b)    Development of existing park and playground sites or
facilities;
         (c)   Redevelopment or rehabilitation of existing park and playground
sites or facilities; or
         (d)   Debt retirement in connection with land previously acquired for
parks and playgrounds.
      (4)   The city must require a minimum cash park dedication for commercial
or industrial plats or waivers of 5% of fair market land value. However, where
the City Council deems it in the public interest (i.e. comprehensive plan or
flood plain ordinance), it may require a minimum land dedication of five
percent of the commercial or industrial land to be subdivided in lieu of a cash
dedication. The lands must be indicated on the city's comprehensive plan or
amendments, or must be designated on specific area plans for flood plain
preservation, parks, trails, public open space or any combination thereof.
      (5)   Any lands which obtain a waiver of the subdivision requirements are
subject to these regulations for the land being subdivided.
      (6)   Park dedication determinations (cash or land) are made by the city
at the time of presentation of preliminary plats. If land is the required
contribution, the property must be deeded to the city at the time of final plat
approval. If cash in lieu of land is required, the amount will be determined
upon the amounts set forth in this chapter in place at the time of application
for final plat and paid as a part of the approval of the final plat.
      (7)   For purposes of this section, FAIR MARKET LAND VALUE is defined as
the market value of the land within such plat, replat, or subdivision as of the
date the preliminary plat, replat, or subdivision is presented to the City
Council for approval. The City Assessor must establish values in the same
manner as the Assessor determines the market value of the land for tax
purposes, excluding, in determining such value, all value added to such land by
improvements other than utilities, streets, and other public improvements
serving such land, but including in such determination the highest and best use
for which the land can be used under the existing zoning districts.
      (8)   The city must annually review the here and after stated fees and
determine that they are consistent with current “fair market land values.” The
required park dedication fees must be established after review of current
values by the City Assessor, who must advise the City Council of current values
for the different zoning classifications.
      (9)   Land areas dedicated as park land must be based on the
comprehensive plan, the Mississippi River Critical Area Plan, or subsequent
localized planning studies.
      (10)   Upon the advice of the City Assessor, the park dedication fees are
as established by the fee resolution set forth as an Appendix to this code.
      (11)   Park land dedication or a cash contribution is not required on an
existing residential parcel that is being subdivided if park land dedication on
the parcel has previously been satisfied or if a house will remain on the
parcel after it has been subdivided. Park land dedication or a cash
contribution will be required for any new lots created by the subdivision.
('72 Code, § 345:59) (Ord. 1977-233(A), passed 1-10-77; Am. Ord. 1992-705,
passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 1996-801, passed 3-25-96; Am. Ord. 1998-887, passed 8-
10-98; am. Ord. 1999-905, passed 10-11-99; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01;
Am. Ord. 2005-1040, passed 6-6-05; Am. Ord. 2006-1061, passed 7-24-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
ROAD NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING
§ 151.070 ROAD DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   The use of avenue, parkway, trail, drive, boulevard, way, court,
terrace and circle suffixes must be used in identifying location and direction
of roads.
   (B)   Roads must be designated as follows:
      (1)   Roads that run north and south are alphabetical avenues or
terraces.
      (2)   Roads that run east and west are numerical avenues, trails or ways.
      (3)   Roads that both originate and terminate on the same street, avenue
or boulevard, are circles.
      (4)   Cul-de-sacs (dead ends) are named courts.
      (5)   A road must have only one name for its entire length.
      (6)   Two roads must not be named alike, that is, have the same name or
have similar sounding names.
      (7)   The name of a road may change only if the road changes direction 45
degrees or more at the point of deviation.
      (8)   All private roads must be labeled lanes and must maintain numerical
and alphabetical sequence.
      (9)   Meandering roads must be labeled boulevard, drive or parkway.
      (10)    If the proposed street is an extension of an existing named
street that name must be used. In all other cases the name of any street
previously used within the county must not be used, unless such use is
consistent with the county or community street naming system.
      (11)    The above named requirements may be modified in cases where the
Fire and/or Police Departments recommend modifications to facilitate their
providing for the safety of occupants of the subdivided lands. In some areas,
changing the name of a street would confuse rather than assist the Fire and
Police Departments.
('72 Code, § 345:61(1))
§ 151.071 HOUSE NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   The standard method of assigning house numbers to each side of the street is
as follows:
   (A)   On the east and west avenue, the even numbers to be assigned to the
north side of the avenue and the odd numbers assigned to the south side of the
avenue.
   (B)   On the north and south avenue, the even numbers to be assigned to the
east side of the avenue and the odd numbers assigned to the west side of the
avenue.
   (C)   On avenues with a deviation of more than 45 degrees from the north-
south base line, the even numbers to be assigned to the north side of the
avenue and the odd numbers assigned to the south side of the avenue.
   (D)   On avenues with a deviation of 45 degrees or less from the north side
base line, the even numbers to be assigned to the east side of the avenue and
the odd number to be assigned to the west side of the avenue.
   (E)   Circle streets are assigned numbers in staggered sequence to the
number sequence of the drive, avenue or parkway on which it originates and
terminates.
   (F)   Dead end roads are assigned numbers as if the road continued through,
beginning with the smallest number of sequence at the road origin.
   (G)   Courts are assigned numbers conforming to the numerical sequence of
the drive, avenue or parkway on which it originates.
   (H)   On a street that deviates 45 degrees or more (measured at the point of
deviation) the number sequence will change accordingly.
   (I)   One-family dwellings and duplexes: one number will be assigned to each
residential unit determined by the location of the principal entrance.
   (J)   Multiple-family dwellings: a number will be assigned to the entire
structure with individual numbers or letters assigned to each dwelling unit
starting with the number “1.” Multiple dwelling units consisting of two or more
floors must designate each floor starting from the bottom up in a sequential
order.
   (K)   Hotels and motels: a number will be assigned to the front entrance of
the hotel and motel with individual numbers of letters assigned to each unit
starting with the number “1.”
   (L)   Business structures: a number will be assigned to each entrance, but
only one number per building establishment for each street frontage.
   (M)    Split lots: a structure located on two or more lots will be assigned
a number determined by the location of the fronting entrance measured from the
preceding grid line.
   (N)   Blocks: a structure located on the entire length or width of a grid
block will be assigned a number determined by the location of the fronting
entrance.
   (O)   Corner lots: a structure located on a corner lot will be assigned a
number determined by the principal entrance. If the structure is so located
that it would be considered fronting on either street, then it would be
assigned a number determined by the north-south number sequence.
   (P)   Each principal building or structure must display address numbers.
Address numbers must be a minimum of four inches in height. Address numbers
must be placed on the structure with an unobstructed view from the street.
Numbers must be illuminated, reflectorized or of a contrasting color to the
background. Background must maintain a minimum six inch perimeter around
numbers.
('72 Code, § 345:61(2)) (Am. Ord. 1974-176(A), passed 12-9-74; Am. Ord. 1977-
243(A), passed 4-11-77; Am. Ord. 1979-303(A), passed 11-13-79)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 151.085 PURPOSE.
   M.S. § 462.358, Subd. 2A, authorizes the city to condition approval of the
subdivision of property on the construction and installation of certain
utilities. The intent of this section is to specifically set out the required
improvements which promote and protect the public health, safety and general
welfare. The city reserves the right to require additional improvements if
deemed necessary by circumstances and conditions unique to these particular
lands. No subdivision of land is allowed unless storm sewer, sanitary sewer and
a municipal water supply are constructed to serve the area being divided unless
some other ordinance or statute specifically authorizes said division.
('72 Code, § 345:64) (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84)
§ 151.086 LISTED AND DESCRIBED.
   Prior to the approval of a final plat by the City Council, the subdivider
must have agreed in the manner set forth below to install, in conformity with
utility construction plans approved by the City Engineer and in conformity with
all applicable standards and ordinances of the City of Brooklyn Park, the
improvements on the site, as described in this section as follows:
   (A)   Monuments. Monuments of a permanent character as required by M.S. §
505.02, must be placed at each corner or angle on the outside boundary of the
subdivision and pipes or steel rods must be placed at each corner of each lot
and each intersection of street center lines.
   (B)   Streets and alleys. The full width of the right-of-way of each street
and alley dedicated in the plat must be graded and improved. All streets and
alleys must have an adequate sub-base and must be improved with an all-weather
permanent surface in accordance with the design standards specified by the
Minnesota Department of Transportation Specifications for Highway Construction
on file in the office of the City Engineer. Boulevard areas must be sodded
including those areas under state and county jurisdiction.
   (C)   Curb and gutter. A concrete curb and gutter must be installed on both
sides of each street dedicated in the plat.
   (D)   Water supply.
      (1)   Water mains must be provided to serve the subdivision by extension
of an existing community system. Service connections must be stubbed into the
property line and all necessary fire hydrants must also be provided. Extensions
of the public water supply system must be designed so as to provide public
water in accordance with the standards of the City of Brooklyn Park.
      (2)   In areas being platted for rural estate development with large
lots, as specified in the zoning ordinance, individual wells must be provided
on each lot, properly placed in relationship to the individual sewage disposal
facilities on the same and adjoining lots. Well location plans must be
submitted for approval to the Building Department.
   (E)   Sewage disposal.
      (1)   Sanitary sewer mains and service connections must be installed to
serve all the lots in the subdivision and must be connected to the public
system.
      (2)   In areas being platted for rural estate development with large
lots, as specified in the zoning ordinance, individual on-site sewage disposal
facilities must be provided for each lot, properly located with reference to
the wells on the same and adjoining lots, and the disposal facilities on
adjacent lots. The subdivider must have made and submit the results of tests to
ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions in such a
subdivision. Plans for individual on-site facilities must be submitted for the
approval of the City Engineer and the Building Department and must comply with
all requirements of the Minnesota Department of Health.
   (F)   Drainage. The grade and drainage requirements for each plat must be
established by the City Engineer at the expense of the applicant. Every plat
presented for final signature must be accompanied by a certificate of the City
Engineer that the grade and drainage requirements have been met. In an area not
having municipal storm sewer trunk service, the applicant is responsible,
before platting, to provide for a storm water disposal plan, without damage to
properties outside the platted area, and the storm water disposal plan must be
submitted to the City Engineer who must report to the Council on the
feasibility of the plan presented. No plat will be approved before an adequate
storm water disposal plan is presented to and approved by the City Engineer and
City Council. The use of dry wells for the purpose of storm water disposal is
prohibited.
   (G)   Landscaping.
      (1)   Two trees, balled and burlapped, must be planted or exist within
the front yard setback of each newly created single family lot and must be at
least two and one-half inch caliper as measured in accordance with the most
current edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock. Two trees, balled and
burlapped, of one and one-half inch caliper may be substituted for one of the
required two and one-half inch trees. Trees must not be planted within public
rights-of-way except by specific City Council approval.
      (2)   The city contains a number of cottonwood trees which are weed trees
and which have a tuft of cotton hairs on the seed. These tufts of cotton hairs
become airborne and float to other properties, fouling up air conditioning
units and other mechanical devices which need to breathe, and are a general
nuisance. Cottonwood trees or members of the cottonwood tree family which have
these tufts of cotton hairs on their seeds must not planted in the subdivision
or in the city, and the subdivider is encouraged to remove any such trees which
are located within the subdivision.
   (H)   Traffic control and street signs. Traffic control signs pursuant to
M.S. § 169.06 and street signs of standard design approved by the City of
Brooklyn Park must be installed at each street intersection or at such other
locations within the subdivision as designated by the Director of Public Works.
   (I)   Shorelines. Where a subdivision includes any portion of the shoreline
of a meandered stream, or river, no less than 5 percent of the portion of the
shoreline lying within a subdivision may be dedicated for use by the public
along with sufficient land to allow access to a publicly dedicated street. This
land may be a part of, or equal to, the percent of land or cash requirement per
acre required for dedication as public land under §
151.071 of this chapter.
   (J)   Public utilities. All utility lines for franchised utility services
must be placed underground and may be placed in the street right-of-way or
adjacent easements. However, first consideration for the placement of all
franchised utilities will be within easements along rear lot lines. Allowances
are made for appurtenances and associated equipment such as surface mounted
transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets. All above-
ground equipment associated with the provision of franchised utility services
within newly created subdivisions must be screened from ground level view when
such equipment is adjacent to and/or visible from a public right-of- way. Live
plant material, which at maturity will provide the necessary screening, must be
used for this purpose.
   (K)   Street lights. Street lights must be installed per city specifications
at all intersections and at other locations as required by the City Engineer.
The city strongly encourages the use of decorative lighting fixtures.
   (L)   Sidewalks. All plats with lots or tracts abutting on principal
arterials, "A" or "B" minor arterials, Class I and II collectors, or commercial
and/or industrial streets must have concrete sidewalks installed on both sides
of the dedicated street right-of-way in accordance with city specifications.
Sidewalks will be required on one side of the right-of-way of local streets
where it is necessary to provide linkages to proposed or existing trail systems
or sidewalks, resulting in a continuous pedestrian network within and between
subdivisions. However, sidewalks will not be required on residential cul-de-sac
streets which do not exceed 600 feet in length.
   (M)    Driveways. In all subdivisions the subdivider must provide concrete
or bituminous driveways in accordance with the following standards:
      (1)   There must be installed a concrete or bituminous driveway extending
from the back of the curb or from the edge of the service street to the garage
floor or garage floor apron for each lane or lanes of vehicular access to the
street. If a building permit is issued and no garage is to be constructed, the
concrete or bituminous driveway must be completed to the depth of the front
yard setback as established in the zoning code of the city.
      (2)   No curb or driveway opening into any public street may be made
unless the aforesaid construction of concrete or bituminous apron is installed
in accordance with the preceding subdivision.
      (3)   All concrete or bituminous driveways must be constructed in
accordance with the city specifications and reference therein to the Minnesota
Department of Transportation Specifications for Highway Construction. The plans
and specifications are on file in the office of the City Engineer.
   (N)   Walkways-pedestrian ways. Walkways must be incorporated into
subdivisions for the purpose of enhancing pedestrian travel through and between
subdivisions, to provide linkages to residential sidewalk systems and to
enhance the quality of life through their value as residential and recreational
amenities. Walkway locations must be determined by the City Council in
accordance with these guidelines. Installation of a walkway should be completed
by the developer prior to the sale of the abutting properties and designated on
the approved plat as a walkway easement. Specifications for location and
construction are as follows:
      (1)   Public walkway to a park or school must be provided at a separation
distance of no greater than 1,000 feet from another existing or proposed
walkway or sidewalk access. Exact distance is at the discretion of the City
Council.
      (2)   Walkways must be constructed of bituminous or concrete material in
accordance with city specifications.
      (3)   Fencing or shrubs will be considered at the discretion of the City
Council.
      (4)   The unsurfaced area within the walkway easement must be sodded.
      (5)   The minimum corridor width for all trails and walkways must be at
least 30 feet.
      (6)   Walkways must be maintained by the city in cooperation with the
adjacent property owner unless otherwise agreed to as part of an approved
conditional use permit development.
   (O)   Sodding of single family lots. All lots for new single family homes
must be sodded from the public curb to the rear property line except as
follows:
      (1)   In the R-1 District.
      (2)   Existing native plant communities. Existing native plant
communities and ecosystems maintained in the natural state do not require sod.
Native plant communities may be reestablished as a part of site development.
      (3)   Contiguous, undeveloped areas which have been disturbed during
construction and are equal to or larger than one-third of the total size area
must be seeded and maintained as a minimum. Disturbed areas less than one-third
of the total area must be sodded and maintained. Within these undeveloped areas
the following must be sodded: berms, swales, drainage ponds with slopes greater
than four to one; and on corner lots all green areas in the yard abutting the
public right-of-way from the front street curb to the rear property line and
from the side street curb to the existing building setback.
      (4)   All open areas of the site not sodded or used as gardens must be
planted with an approved ground cover. Ground cover must be planted in such a
manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage
within 12 months after planting with proper erosion control during plant
establishment. Exceptions include areas designated as wetland, existing wooded
areas or undisturbed areas containing natural vegetation, all of which must be
maintained free of foreign and noxious materials as defined in
Chapter 97 of this code.
      (5)   Landscape rock and mulch may be substituted for sod in shrub and
flower planting beds and building maintenance strips.
('72 Code, § 345:64) (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1986-501
(A), passed ; Am. Ord. 1992-705, passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-
26-01)
§ 151.087 PAYMENT FOR INSTALLATION.
   The required improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider,
which are listed and described above, are to be furnished and installed at the
sole expense of the subdivider and at no expense to the city provided, however,
that in the case of an improvement the cost of which would, by general policy
of the city, be assessed only in part to the improved property and the
remaining cost paid out of general tax levy, the City Council may make
provision for payment of a portion of the cost by the city. If any improvement
installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond
the boundaries of the subdivision, the City Council may make provision for
causing a portion of the cost of the improvement representing the benefit to
such lands to be assessed against the same and in such case the subdivider will
be required only to pay for such portions of the whole cost of the improvements
as will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision.
('72 Code, § 345:67)
§ 151.088 ENTRYWAY SIGNS; DEDICATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   For every plat or subdivision of land in which there is to be placed a
permanent entryway identification sign, a homeowners association or similar
body shall be established to assume sole responsibility for the construction
and maintenance of such sign(s). Estimated costs for sign construction shall be
incorporated into the calculation of on-site development bonds.
('72 Code, § 345:68) (Ord. 1992-705, passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed
11-26-01)
§ 151.089 AGREEMENT PROVIDING FOR PROPER INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to installation of any required improvements, the subdivider
must enter into a development contract prepared by the city and must submit the
sureties required by §
151.090 of this chapter.
   (B)   The development contract shall require the subdivider to furnish and
construct the improvements at the sole cost of the subdivider and in accordance
with the plans and specifications approved by the City Council. The development
contract shall provide for sufficient funds to be escrowed to cover the cost of
construction. The City Engineer may require the developer to have their
contractor or subcontractor coordinate the work to be done under the contract
and also coordinate any other work being done or contracted by the city in the
vicinity.
   (C)   In accordance with the terms of the contract, the subdivider must
provide sureties to the city as set forth in §
151.090 of this chapter. A reduction to the sureties prior to the recording of
the final plat may be granted to the subdivider, at the subdividers request,
based on completion of part or all of the off-site improvements which have been
accepted and approved by the city. If any work begins prior to final platting,
one-third of the required grading estimate must be posted as a cash bond prior
to commencement of any improvements. The time for completion of work must be
determined by the City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer after
consultation with the subdivider and must be reasonable in relation to the work
to be done, the season of the year, and proper correlation with construction
activity in the subdivision.
   (D)   No reduction in the cash escrow as required by §
151.090 will be made until all items covered in the subdivider's contract have
been accepted by the city.
   (E)   Once the necessary improvements have been completed and approved by
the city, the developer shall provide to the city a one year 100% warranty
maintenance bond. Said bond shall run from date of acceptance by the city of
all construction items.
('72 Code, § 345:70) (Am. Ord. 1994-756, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord. 2008-1092,
passed 8-25-08)
§ 151.090 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
   The development contract provided by §
151.089 of this chapter must require the subdivider to provide sureties to the
city by a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, or a
performance bond as follows:
   (A)   Required sureties.
      (1)   Off-site surety.  
         (a)   A surety must be provided to the city in a sum equal to 150% the
total cost of the improvements as estimated by the City Engineer. Of the total
amount, 5% or $2,000, whichever is the greater, must be posted as a cash bond
escrow to be held in a non-interest bearing account, and 95% of the total shall
be posted as cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, a subdivision bond or a
performance bond. This financial security must be automatically renewed and
shall not expire until released by the city. These guarantees must be filed
with the city prior to release of the final plat for recording.
         (b)   Items covered by these guarantees must include, but not be
limited to, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, bituminous streets with
concrete curb and gutter, street lights, and sidewalks. These financial
guarantees are for all of the improvements to be furnished and installed by the
subdivider, pursuant to the development contract, and which have not been
completed prior to filing of the final plat.
         (c)   The city is entitled to reimburse itself out of the cash bond
escrow for any costs and expense incurred by the city for completion of the
work in case of default by the subdivider. Upon completion of the work and
termination of any liabilities to the city by the subdivider under the
contract, the balance remaining of the cash bond escrow must be refunded to the
subdivider.
      (2)   On-site surety.
         (a)   A surety to the city must be provided by the subdivider in a sum
equal to 100% of the amounts established for on-site bonding by the Department
of Community Development. Five percent of the total estimates must be posted as
a cash bond escrow to be held in a non- interest bearing account, and 95% of
the total shall be posted as cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, a
subdivision bond or a performance bond. This financial security must be
automatically renewed and shall not expire until released by the city. This
surety must be filed with the city prior to release of the final plat for
recording.
         (b)   Items covered by this surety must include, but not be limited
to, landscaping as required by resolution, mailboxes, utility repair,
adjustment and lot grading, as well as costs for any entryway sign. These
financial guarantees are for all of the improvements to be furnished and
installed by the subdivider, pursuant to the development contract, and which
have not been completed prior to filing of the final plat.
         (c)   The city is entitled to reimburse itself out of the cash bond
escrow for any cost and expense incurred by the city for completion of the work
in case of default by the subdivider. Upon completion of the work and
termination of any liabilities to the city by the subdivider under the
contract, the balance remaining of the cash bond escrow must be refunded to the
subdivider.
   (B)   Engineering/administrative escrow.
      (1)   A special engineering/administrative escrow must be paid in cash to
the city, held in a non-interest bearing special subdivider's cash escrow
account, and credited to the subdivider. The engineering/administrative escrow
must be equal to at least 6½% of the amount of the subdivider’s project
improvements as estimated by the City Engineer, but not less than $1,000.
      (2)   Costs of city services, expenses and materials provided in
reviewing and processing of the final plat including but not limited to staff
time, legal expenses incurred in plat approval, office and field checking,
setting grade and drainage requirements, general supervision, staking,
inspection, purchase and installation of street identification and traffic
control signs, drafting as-built drawings, and all other city staff services
performed in the processing of the improvements and plats, and administrative
and legal expenses in examining title to the property being developed must be
charged to the engineering/administrative escrow account and must be credited
to the City of Brooklyn Park.
      (3)   The Council must promulgate and adopt a set of rules, regulations
and fees for services rendered by city personnel, and the rules, regulations
and fee schedules must be on file with the City Clerk for inspection. A copy
thereof must be furnished upon request to the subdivider. The city must itemize
all time, services and materials billed to any subdivider's cash escrow
account. The subdivider making the deposit(s) in the subdivider's cash escrow
account must, upon request, be furnished a copy of the itemized charges.
      (4)   If, at any time, the balance in the engineering/administrative
escrow account is depleted to less than 5% of the originally required cash
escrow amount, the subdivider must deposit additional funds in the account in
an amount as determined by the City Manager, sufficient to cover all costs to
be incurred by the city in processing the final plat.
      (5)   If all, or a part, of a development has been completed, inspected
and accepted, all cash escrow monies, for that portion accepted by the city,
may be reduced by the City Council and full or partial payment be returned to
the subdivider. Any balance remaining in the account upon completion of all
platting conditions must be returned to the depositor by the Finance Department
after all claims and charges thereto have been paid and after approval by City
Council.
('72 Code, § 345:73) (Am. Ord. 1985-480(A), passed 3-18-85; Am. Ord. 1991-671
(A), passed 2-11-91; Am. Ord. 1994-756, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord. 2001-961,
passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2008-1092, passed 8-25-08)
§ 151.091 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all
respects to the standards of the City Engineer and the ordinances of the City
of Brooklyn Park must be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a professional
engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota and said plans must
contain the seal of the profession engineer.
   (B)   Such plans together with the quantity of construction items must be
submitted to the City Engineer for the City Engineer’s approval and estimate of
total cost of the required improvements; upon approval they will become a part
of the contract required in §
151.089. Reproducible plans approved by the City Engineer plus two prints must
all be furnished to the city to be filed by the City Engineer as a record in
the Engineering Department. At the inspection, all required improvements on the
site that are to be installed under the provisions of this chapter must be
inspected during the course of construction by the City Engineer at the
subdivider's expense, and acceptance must be subject to the City Engineer's
certificate of compliance with the contract.
('72 Code, § 345:76)
§ 151.092 IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED PRIOR TO THE APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
   Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to
application for approval of the final plat or execution of the contract for
installation of the required improvements, will be accepted as equivalent
improvements in compliance with the requirements of §
151.086 only if the City Engineer certifies that the existing improvements
conform to applicable city standards.
('72 Code, § 345:79)
VARIANCES
§ 151.100 VARIANCES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The City Council may grant a variance from the regulations contained
in this chapter following a finding that all of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the
property, such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the applicant’s land.
      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.
      (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to the other property in the territory in which the
property is situated and will not have an adverse effect upon traffic or
traffic safety.
   (B)   In making this finding, the City Council must consider the nature of
the proposed use of the land and existing use of the land in the vicinity, the
number of persons who reside or work in the area, and the probable effect of
the proposed variance upon traffic conditions in the vicinity.
   (C)   In granting variances as herein provided, the Council must prescribe
conditions that it deems desirable or necessary to protect the public interest.
In making a determination, the Council must find that:
      (1)   The proposed project will constitute a desirable and stable
community development.
      (2)   The proposed project will be in harmony with adjacent areas.
   (D)   The application for any variance must be made in writing and addressed
to the Planning Commission and the City Council and must be submitted to the
Department of Community Development. The application must include the specific
variances requested, the location of those variances and how it varies from the
provisions of the chapter. The written application must be submitted to the
Planning Commission for their advice and recommendation and the Planning
Commission must report on the provisions set forth above. The Planning
Commission must submit their recommendations to the City Council within 60 days
after receiving the written application and required exhibits from the
Department of Community Development.
('72 Code, § 345:85) (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84)
§ 151.101 FEES.
   Applications for variances, subdivisions, or waivers from the subdivision
regulations must be accompanied by a fee as established by the City Council and
§
151.014 of this chapter.
('72 Code, § 345:86) (Ord. 1972-123(A), passed 8-28-72)
§ 151.102 VARIANCE FOR CERTAIN HOMESTEADS.
   (A)   Purpose. The city has been a leader in the development of planning
controls in the metropolitan area. The city was developed and has continued to
develop with agricultural lands and large parcels of land located north of 85th
Avenue North. The city recognizes that certain parcels and lands were divided
and developed prior to the adoption of modern subdivision and zoning ordinances
and that certain residents are burdened with parcels of land too large for a
normal homestead but too small to create a viable or economic agricultural
unit. This section regulates parcels of land less than 20 acres. It is
determined that parcels of land which meet the following criteria are eligible
for a one time variance pursuant to procedures set forth in §
151.100:
      (1)   Are larger than five acres in size.
      (2)   Have a homestead constructed prior to January 1, 1974.
      (3)   Can be divided with a residue parcel at least five acres in size.
The residue parcel as herein referred to and described must not be the parcel
upon which the homestead is located.
      (4)   The parcel with the homestead structure must meet the zoning
requirements of 13,500 square foot lot with 100 feet of street frontage and
setback requirements for the district in which it is located.
      (5)   No more than one non-conforming use may be created.
      (6)   Homestead as used herein refers to a structure used as a dwelling
and not to the tax status of the parcel.
   (B)   Variances and non-conforming use. Variances granted for the
aforedescribed purpose will result in the creation of one non-conforming parcel
containing a structure built prior to January 1, 1974 which meets the
aforementioned requirements. The parcel is not considered as non-conforming in
non-urban areas but rather than be required to meet all the requirements of the
district in which it is located. No more than one variance will be granted for
the purposes set forth in this section.
('72 Code, § 345:87) (Ord. 1977-254(A), passed 12-12-77)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
ADMINISTRATION
Intent and Purpose
   
152.100   Title
   
152.101   Authority
   
152.102   Purpose
   
152.103   Application
   
152.104   Interpretation
   
152.105   Definitions
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.200   Purpose
   
152.201   City Manager
   
152.202   Enforcement and penalties
   
152.203   Easements
   
152.204   Non-conformities
   
152.205   Nuisances
Applications and Procedures
   
152.300   Purpose
   
152.301   Public hearings
   
152.302   General procedures
   
152.303   Site plan review
   
152.304   Concept, development, and regulating plans
   
152.305   Conditional use permit
   
152.306   Interim use permit
   
152.307   Variance
   
152.308   [Reserved]
   
152.309   Zoning text and map amendments
   
152.310   Development contracts, financial guarantees, and cash escrows
   
152.311   Relocating structures
   
152.312   Special event permit
ZONING DISTRICTS
Establishment of Zoning Districts
   
152.400   Purpose
   
152.401   Zoning districts
   
152.402   Zoning map
Residential Districts
   
152.500   UR Urban Reserve District
   
152.501   R-1 Detached Single-Family Estate District
   
152.502   R-2 Detached Single-Family District
   
152.503   R-3 Detached Single-Family and Two-Family District
   
152.504   R-4 Multiple Family District
   
152.505   R-5 Multiple Family District
   
152.506   Residential district lot area and dimensional requirements
   
152.507   Residential district land uses
Nonresidential Districts
   
152.600   B-1 Office Park District
   
152.601   B-2 Neighborhood Retail Business District
   
152.602   B-3 General Business District
   
152.603   B-4 Vehicle Sales and Showroom District
   
152.604   BP Business Park District
   
152.605   I General Industrial District
   
152.606   PI Public Institution District
   
152.607   OP Open Spaces and Parks District
   
152.608   Nonresidential lot area and dimensional requirements
   
152.609   Nonresidential district land uses
Mixed Use Districts
   
152.700   LW Live Work District
   
152.701   NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District
   
152.702   MU Mixed Use District
   
152.703   TOD-C Transit Oriented Development Center District
   
152.704   TOD-E Transit Oriented Development Employment District
   
152.705   TOD-G Transit Oriented Development Greenfield District
   
152.706   Mixed use district lot area and dimensional requirements
   
152.707   Mixed use district land uses
Overlay Districts
   
152.800   CAZ Crystal Airport Zoning
   
152.801   Flood Hazard Overlay
   
152.802   Mississippi River Critical Area Overlay
   
152.803   Planned Development Overlay
   
152.804   Pedestrian Priority Overlay District (PPOD)
STANDARDS
Land Use Performance Standards
   
152.900   Residential performance standards, principal uses
   
152.901   Accessory residential performance standards
   
152.902   Temporary residential performance standards
   
152.903   Nonresidential performance standards, principle uses
   
152.904   Accessory nonresidential performance standards
   
152.905   Temporary and seasonal nonresidential performance standards
Development Standards
   
152.1000   Development standards
   
152.1001   Accessory uses and structures
   
152.1002   Alternative energy systems
   
152.1003   Building and site design standards, residential
   
152.1004   Building and site design standards, mixed use
   
152.1005   Building and site design standards, nonresidential
   
152.1006   Civic spaces
   
152.1007   Clear view triangle
   
152.1008   Commercial vehicle parking standards
   
152.1009   Driveways
   
152.1010   Fences and retaining walls
   
152.1011   Landscaping standards, residential
   
152.1012   Landscaping standards, mixed use
   
152.1013   Landscaping standards, nonresidential
   
152.1014   Lighting standards
   
152.1015   Loading docks and staging areas
   
152.1016   Lowest floor elevation
   
152.1017   Noise pollution control
   
152.1018   Outdoor storage
   
152.1019   Parking
   
152.1020   Parking area design
   
152.1021   Parking ramp
   
152.1022   Pedestrian circulation (sidewalks and walkways)
   
152.1023   Satellite dishes
   
152.1024   Screening
   
152.1025   Streetscape, mixed use
   
152.1026   Telecommunication towers
   
152.1027   Transportation demand management
   
152.1028   Waste enclosures
ADMINISTRATION
Intent and Purpose
§ 152.100 TITLE.
   Chapter 152 may be known, cited, and referred to as the "Brooklyn Park
Zoning Code" except as referred to herein, where it may be known as "this
chapter."
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.101 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Municipal
Planning Act, M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.364, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.102 PURPOSE.
   The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the city and its people through the establishment of minimum
regulations governing the development and use of property within the city. Such
regulations are established to:
   (A)   Implement the Comprehensive Plan. The City Council recognizes the
Comprehensive Plan as the official policy for land use and development in
Brooklyn Park;
   (B)   Promote orderly development and redevelopment;
   (C)   Provide adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property;
   (D)   Prevent congestion in the public right-of-way;
   (E)   Prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures and
population by regulating land, building, setbacks, and density of development;
   (F)   Provide for the compatibility of different land uses and protect from
incompatible uses;
   (G)   Provide for the administration of this chapter and any amendments;
   (H)   Prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations; and
   (I)   Define powers and duties of the City Staff, the Planning Commission,
and the City Council in relation to this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.103 APPLICATION.
   (A)   All buildings, structures, and land uses must be erected, used,
relocated, or altered in conformance with this chapter. No buildings,
structures or land may must be erected, used, relocated, or altered except in
conformance with this chapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are the minimum requirements. Where the
requirements imposed by any other section of city code are more restrictive
than this chapter, the more restrictive regulation shall prevail.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.104 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Construction of language.
      (1)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the
future the present.
      (2)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular.
      (3)   The word "must" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
      (4)   If a word or term defined in this chapter appears in the text, its
meaning may be construed as set forth in the definition of the word or term.
      (5)   All measured distances expressed in feet must be to the nearest
tenth of a foot.
   (B)   Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, the
following may apply to a use not provided for within a zoning district:
      (1)   If in any zoning district a use is neither specifically permitted
nor allowed, the use may be considered prohibited.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.105 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or term
defined in this chapter appears in the text of this chapter, its meaning may be
construed as set forth below.
   ABUTTING. See “adjacent.”
   ACCESSORY ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM. A secondary energy system wherein the
power generated is used primarily for on-site consumption.
   ACCESSORY FEATURE. A landscape design feature, not enclosed, subordinate to,
incidental to, and/or serving the principal structure on the same lot. Examples
include decorative fences, gazebos, fire pits, etc.
   ADJACENT. When referring to adjacent lots or land, adjacent means a lot that
shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot. For the purposes of
this definition, ADJACENT also includes lots or land separated only by a
railroad; utility right-of-way; public street classified as a low-density minor
arterial, collector, or local street; or a trail corridor less than 50 feet
wide.
   ADULT DAY CARE. A facility that is licensed by the State of Minnesota in
which care is provided to adults with disabilities or persons who receive
supportive person to person assistance.
   ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy conversion system or a solar energy
system.
   ANIMAL UNIT. The following animals constitute one animal unit equivalency:
one cow, horse, donkey, llama, or burro, or three sheep or emus. Any animal not
listed except domestic animals may be considered one animal unit equivalency.
Animals are further defined and regulated in other sections of the city code.
   ANIMAL, DOMESTIC. A domestic animal is a common house pet which can be
contained within a principal structure throughout the entire year, provided
that containment can be accomplished without special modification to the
structure requiring a building permit from the city.
   ANIMAL, FARM. Animals not typically sheltered within the principal structure
throughout the entire year. This includes, but is not limited to, cattle, pigs,
sheep, goats, horses, and other animals commonly accepted as farm animals in
the State of Minnesota.
   ANIMAL SERVICES. Any place where domestic animals are kept for the primary
purpose of commercial pet sitting or doggie daycare.
   ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting communication signals. This includes, but is not limited to,
directional antennas, such as panels and microwave and satellite dishes, and
omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
   APPLICANT. The owner, their agent, or representative having interest in land
where an application for city review of any permit, use or development is
required by this chapter.
   APPLICATION. The form and accompanying documentation required by this
chapter or by city policy for city review purposes.
   ASSEMBLY, BANQUET, CONVENTION HALLS, or CONFERENCE CENTER. A facility
available for private rental for private events such as weddings, conferences,
or meetings. This definition does not include rental for uses that are open to
the public such as night clubs or general parties.
   ASSISTED LIVING HOUSING. Housing designed for persons who need assistance
with their daily living needs including special support services such as meal
preparation, housekeeping, limited medical care, and transportation.
   AUCTION LICENSED AUTO DEALER. May sell used motor vehicles belonging to
others.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
   BB or bb. An abbreviation meaning balled and burlapped and used to describe
the root treatment of certain plant materials.
   BEEKEEPING. The breeding of honeybees in colonies, commonly in hives, to
produce honey and other products to pollinate plants or to produce bees for
sale to other beekeepers.
   BERM. A landscaped mound of earth used to separate incompatible uses, screen
offsite views of development, mitigate noise impacts, and create aesthetic
interest.
   BIORETENTION SYSTEMS. Shallow, landscaped depressions commonly located in
parking lot islands or within areas that receive stormwater runoff.
   BLACK DIRT (as used for top soil). Organic soils added on top of existing
soil that are darker in color and richer in organic materials compared to the
existing.
   BLUFF. A natural topographic feature having:
      (1)   A slope that rises at least 25 feet and the grade of the slope
averages 1% or greater, measured over a horizontal distance of 25 feet, from
the toe of the slope to the top of the slope. Where the slope begins below the
ordinary high water level, the ordinary high water level is the top of the
slope. See Figure 152.105.1; or
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9590.png]
 
   Figure 152.105.1 Bluff and Bluff Impact Zone
      (2)   A natural escarpment or cliff with a slope that rises at least ten
feet above the ordinary high water level or toe of the slope, whichever is
applicable, to the top of the slope, with a slope of 75 degrees or greater. See
Figure 152.105.2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9592.png]
 
   Figure 152.105.2 Natural Escarpment and Bluff Impact Zone
   BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and land located within 20 feet of the bluff. See
Figures 152.105.1 and 152.105.2
   BODY ART. Physical body adornment using, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, branding, body modification and cosmetic
tattooing, as regulated by M.S. Chapter 146B and
Chapter 123 of this code. This definition does not include practices that are
considered part of a medical procedure performed by a state board certified
medical or dental personnel, such as, but not limited to, implants under the
skin. Such medical procedures may not be performed in a body art establishment.
This definition does not include piercing of the outer perimeter of lobe of the
ear using pre-sterilized single use stud and clasp ear piercing system.
   BREWERY. A facility that manufactures or produces malt liquor as defined in
M.S. § 340A.101, Subd. 16.
   BROKER LICENSED AUTO DEALER. May arrange for the sale or lease of new or
used motor vehicles.
   BUFFER. The use of land, topography, water bodies and vegetation to separate
and mitigate the impacts of land uses upon another property.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The area upon which structures may be placed on a lot or
parcel of land and excludes areas needed to meet requirements for setbacks,
rights-of-way, bluff impact zones, historic properties, wetlands, designated
floodways, land below the ordinary high water level, and other unbuildable
areas.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns, walls, or other
means of support for the shelter or enclosure of persons or property, and when
said structure is divided by party walls without openings, each portion of such
building so separated may be deemed a separate building. In sections of this
chapter where minimum sized buildings are required, areas which are part of
basements, open porches, canopies, awnings, breeze-ways, covered patios, and
other similar features are not included in calculating the required building
size.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The distance measured from the average proposed ground
elevation adjoining the building at the front building line to the top of the
cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to a point on the
roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the uppermost point on
a round or other arch-type roof, or to the average distance of the highest
gable on a pitched or hip roof.
   CARE CENTER/CONVALESCENT HOME. Housing for dependent persons including
personal nursing care, meal preparation in a common dining hall, hygiene
services, laundry, etc.
   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree trunk measured six inches above the ground
for trees less than four inches in diameter and 12 inches above the ground for
trees more than four inches in diameter.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION BUSINESS. A business with a cannabis cultivator
license, medical cannabis cultivator license, or cultivation endorsement from
the State of Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS DELIVERY BUSINESS. A business with a cannabis delivery service
license or delivery service endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS EVENT ORGANIZER. A business with a cannabis event organizer license
or event organization endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS FLOWER. The harvested flower, bud, leaves, and stems of a cannabis
plant. CANNABIS FLOWER includes adult-use cannabis flower and medical cannabis
flower. CANNABIS FLOWER does not include cannabis seed, hemp plant parts, or
hemp-derived consumer products.
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURING BUSINESS. A business with a cannabis manufacturer
license, or manufacturing endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any cannabis business governed by and defined in
M.S. Chapter 342 as amended from time to time.
   CANNABIS PLANT. All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis that are
growing or have not been harvested and have a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol
concentration of more than 0.3% on a dry weight basis.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT. Any of the following: cannabis concentrate; a product
infused with cannabinoids, including but not limited to tetrahydrocannabinol,
extracted or derived from cannabis plants or cannabis flower; or any other
product that contains cannabis concentrate. CANNABIS PRODUCT includes adult-use
cannabis products, including but not limited to edible cannabis products and
medical cannabinoid products. CANNABIS PRODUCT does not include cannabis
flower, artificially derived cannabinoid, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-
derived consumer products, or hemp-derived topical products.
   CANNABIS RETAILER. 
      (1)   A business with a cannabis retailer license, medical cannabis
retailer license, lower-potency hemp edible retailer license, or retail
endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management.
      (2)   Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or association, foreign
or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and not for the purpose of
resale in any form.
   CANNABIS TESTING BUSINESS. A business with a cannabis testing facility
license or testing endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of Cannabis
Management.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTATION BUSINESS. A business with a cannabis transporter
license or transportation endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS WHOLESALING BUSINESS. A business with a cannabis wholesaler license
or wholesaling endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of Cannabis
Management.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A document written after a compliance inspection,
certifying that the development complies with applicable requirements at the
time of inspection.
   CITY CODE. The 1972 Ordinance Code of the City of Brooklyn Park, as amended
from time to time. Also referred to as the Code of Ordinances. This zoning
ordinance is a part of the city code.
   CLEAR VIEW TRIANGLE. An area around the convergence of two streets or a
street and an access driveway where visibility is not impeded.
      (1)   At the intersection of two streets. The CLEAR VIEW TRIANGLE is an
area that begins at the intersection of the projected curb lines of two
intersecting streets and is measured back along both streets the distance
specified in §
152.1007 and marked with a point. Those points are then connected with a
straight line.
      (2)   At the intersection of an access driveway and a street. The CLEAR
VIEW TRIANGLE is an area that begins at the intersection of the projected curb
line of the access driveway and the private street or public right-of-way and
is measured back along both the street and the access driveway the distance
specified in §
152.1007 and marked with a point. Those points are then connected with a
straight line.
   CLOSED LOOP GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM. A system that circulated a heat
transfer fluid, typically food-grade antifreeze, through pipes or coils buried
beneath the land surface or anchored to the bottom of a body of water.
   CLUB.
      (1)   An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state
for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual
improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered
veterans' organization, which:
         (a)   Has more than 30 members;
         (b)   Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more
than one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its
members; and
         (c)   Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or
other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose.
      (2)   No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit
from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their
guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the
governing body.
   CLUB, SOCIAL. An establishment not included in the definition of “club” that
is open to the public or by private membership where the purpose of the
establishment is to provide a place for social interaction between patrons.
   COCKTAIL ROOM. A facility on or adjacent to the premises of a micro-
distillery where the on-sale consumption of distilled spirits produced by the
distiller is permitted pursuant to M.S. § 340A.22.
   COMMERCIAL INDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Private recreational facilities
operated for profit and open to members and/or the general public including
health centers, tennis and racquetball clubs, indoor swimming pools, video
arcades (amusement centers), indoor batting cages, pool halls, and the like.
   COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Private recreational facilities
operated for profit and open to members and/or the general public including
golf courses and driving ranges, miniature golf, riding stables, skating rinks,
outdoor swimming pools, archery or trapshooting ranges, batting cages,
softball, baseball, volleyball, soccer, or football facilities, and the like.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. A vehicle that meets one or more of the following:
      (1)   A dump truck, step van, construction vehicle or equipment (bobcats,
backhoes and the like), semi-tractor, semitrailer, or trailer, tank truck, tow
truck, tractor, bus, cargo truck, mobile food unit, or any vehicle that has a
registered gross weight of more than 5,000 pounds, except the following:
         (a)   A vehicle that is used for private, personal, or recreational
use; is not defined as a commercial vehicle in division (1) above; and is not
altered with commercial equipment, such as a 1-ton pickup truck; or
         (b)   A properly licensed recreational vehicle or recreational
equipment with sole and consistent use for private recreational purposes.
      (2)   A vehicle that has commercial equipment added to the vehicle such
as a snowplow or other externally attached equipment, except recreational
vehicles or recreational equipment used only for private, recreational, and
residential use;
      (3)   A limousine or taxi; and
      (4)   A trailer loaded with a commercial vehicle(s) or commercial
equipment.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The long range plan to guide the future growth and
development as a formal document, and associated maps, as adopted by the City
Council as amended from time to time.
   COMMUNITY GARDEN. An area of land that is managed and maintained by a group
of individuals to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food ornamental crops
such as flowers for personal or group use, consumption, or donation.
   CONCRETE PRECAST PANELS. A material composed of concrete sheets, also
commonly referred to as tip-up-tilt-up or poured-in-place panels, etc. For
purposes of this chapter, CONCRETE PRECAST PANELS are divided into the
following:
      (1)   ARCHITECTURALLY TEXTURED PANELS. Smooth concrete precast panels,
steel form panels, exposed imprint panels (with exposed aggregate), ribbed,
grooved, random relief, or the like, with additional colors, removed patterns,
and/or graphics like bands, patterns, and geometric designs that are used to
add distinctiveness to building.
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL GRADE PANELS. Panels with the following textures or
those deemed similar: raked, corduroy, broomed, or panels exposed aggregate
(except exposed imprint panels).
   CRITICAL FACILITIES. Facilities necessary to a community's public health and
safety, those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic, or water-reactive
materials, and those that house occupants who may be insufficiently mobile to
avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of critical facilities include
hospitals, correction facilities, schools, daycare facilities, nursing homes,
fire and police stations, wastewater treatment facilities, public electric
utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities, and waste handling and
storage facilities.
   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis plants, cannabis flower, hemp
plants, or hemp plant parts.
   CURRENCY EXCHANGE. Any business, except a bank, trust company, savings bank,
savings association, credit union, or industrial loan and thrift company,
engaged in the business of cashing checks, drafts, money orders, or travelers'
checks for a fee. CURRENCY EXCHANGE does not include a business that provides
these services incidental to the person's primary business if the charge for
cashing a check or draft does not exceed $1 or 1% of the value of the check or
draft, whichever is greater.
   DAY CARE FACILITIES. A facility that is licensed by the State of Minnesota
in which care is provided for children or adults.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre as regulated by this chapter
and the Comprehensive Plan. DENSITY is calculated by dividing the gross acreage
of a property excluding wetlands designated by federal and state agencies and
those classified by the Wetland Conservation Act, by the number of dwelling
units existing or proposed for the property.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations of storage or
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT CONTRACT. A legal instrument that defines the representations
and obligations of an applicant and the city for the development of property.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A document or set of drawings required by the city that
depicts elements that contribute to a cohesive planned area or neighborhood.
   DISTILLERY. A facility that manufactures or produces distilled spirits as
defined in M.S. § 340A.101, Subd. 9.
   DISTRIBUTION CENTER. An establishment engaged in the receipt, storage, and
distribution of goods, products, cargo, and materials, including transshipment
by boat, rail, air, or motor vehicle.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms designed or intended for occupancy within a
building by one family or housekeeping unit with sanitary, culinary, and
sleeping facilities separate from those of other units and intended for the
exclusive use of a single-family or housekeeping unit.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for occupancy by two
families or housekeeping units with a physical separation between the two
dwelling units.
   DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY. A building surrounded by open space
containing one dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling by any
means.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY. A building designed or intended for occupancy by
three or more families or housekeeping units, with separate dwelling units
either designed one over another and connected by interior or exterior hallways
and/or common entries or as townhouse dwellings.
   DWELLING, SENIOR INDEPENDENT LIVING. A residential complex or development
that is age restricted to people 55 and older without any on-site or staffed
nursing or other types of assistance.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A single structure consisting of not more than 16
dwelling units each, with no other dwelling or portion of other dwelling
directly above or below, with each dwelling unit connected to the other
dwelling by a common separation with no opening, except for one unit townhouse
structures.
   EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the owner, to or
for the use by the public, another person, or entity.
   ENTERTAINMENT, LIVE. Disc jockeys, live music, comedy performances,
theatrical performances, and the like. This definition does not include mixed
martial arts or boxing.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The utilization, construction, alteration, or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground,
surface, or overhead gas, electricity, steam, fuel, water supply or
distribution system(s); sanitary sewage disposal system; including accessory
facilities necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities
or municipal departments for the general health, safety, or welfare.
   EVAPOTRANSPIRATION. Water lost to the atmosphere from the ground surface,
evaporation from the capillary fringe of the groundwater table, and the
transpiration of groundwater by plants whose roots tap the capillary fringe of
the groundwater table.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons each related by blood,
marriage, or adoptions, including foster children, living together as a single
housekeeping unit; or no more than four unrelated persons maintaining a common
household and using and maintaining common cooking and kitchen facilities as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or rooming house, or licensed
residential facility.
   FARM. A parcel of land having five acres or more which is under cultivation
or a parcel ten acres or more which is fenced and used as pasture, or a parcel
ten acres or more of any combination. No farm may exceed one animal unit per
acre in aggregate.
   FARMER'S MARKET. Outdoor sales of fruits, vegetables, meats, honey, flowers,
plants, homemade bakery goods, cheeses, soaps, and other similar products.
   FARMING AND CULTIVATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS. Agricultural and
horticultural uses that are not enclosed or covered by a structure.
   FENCE. A barrier, railing, or other upright structure, enclosing an area of
ground to mark a boundary, control access, or prevent intrusion.
   FINISHED SQUARE FOOTAGE (MINIMUM). The above grade areas of a house that are
planned to be completed under the original building permit, excluding garages
or other attached accessory buildings, open porches, breezeways, three season
rooms, covered patios and the like. All unfinished areas of residential
dwellings must be so noted on residential building plans submitted for permit.
Finished interior areas of residential buildings must comply with the UBC
requirements for finished habitable space and have one or more of the listed
materials used on each of the following:
      (1)   Floors: wood; carpet; tile; rock; brick; linoleum; and similar
decorative materials.
      (2)   Ceilings: sheet rock with paint, texturing, or a similar decorative
trim; suspended ceiling systems; tile; heavy timber construction; wood
paneling; and similar decorative materials.
      (3)   Walls: sheet rock with paint, wallpaper, or a similar decorative
trim; wood or rock paneling; mirrors; heavy timber construction, brick; and
similar decorative materials.
   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream, lake, or
wetland that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE or FLOODWAY FRINGE. All the land in a flood plain not lying
within a delineated floodway. Land within a FLOODWAY FRINGE is subject to
inundation by relatively low velocity flows and shallow water depths. The FLOOD
FRINGE includes at a minimum, the areas designated as Zone AE on the flood
insurance rate map outside of the floodway, except as modified on the zoning
overlay map.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The flood plain consisting of the floodway, the flood
fringe, and/or the general flood plain area.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made
available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
   FLOOD PLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse which has been or hereafter
may be covered by a regional flood, as defined in Minn. Rules Chapter 6120, and
as shown on the flood insurance rate map where floodway and flood fringe
boundaries and/or 100-year flood elevations have not been determined. These
areas include areas designated as Zone A on the flood insurance rate map, and
Zone AE where a floodway is not shown.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see “flood”).
   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the flood
plain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the flood water or flood flow of any natural stream or river. The
FLOODWAY, at a minimum, includes the floodway areas shown on the flood
insurance rate map and as depicted on the zoning overlay map.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of all the floor(s) of a building or structure
excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The gross floor area of all buildings or structures
on a lot divided by the area of that lot.
   FLUSH-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A roof-mounted system mounted directly
abutting the roof. The pitch of the solar collector may exceed the pitch of the
roof up to 5% but shall not be higher than ten inches above the roof.
   FOUNDATION FOOTPRINT. The area of the largest level of a dwelling unit at or
near grade as determined by the outside dimensions of a building, excluding
attached garages or other attached accessory buildings, decks, patios, three-
season porches, etc.
   GARAGE. An accessory structure that is primarily used for the parking and
storage of vehicles, and storage of goods and equipment owned by the same
property owner or resident or the principal structure.
   GARAGE SALE. The sale of used personal goods from a private residence or
religious institution.
   GAS/FUEL TANKS (ABOVE GROUND). A tank used to store fuel used for energy
purposes in buildings and structures. This definition does not include portable
propane cylinders used with barbeque grills, or the like.
   GLARE. The effect produced by the intensity and direction of any artificial
illumination sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or temporary loss or
impairment of vision.
   GREYWATER. Wastewater, containing no fecal matter (human feces), that is
generated from domestic activities such as laundry, dishwashing, and bathing
and which can be recycled on-site for uses such as landscape irrigation and
constructed wetlands.
   GREEN ROOFTOPS. Veneers of living vegetation installed atop of buildings
that act to manage stormwater by mimicking a variety of hydrologic processes
normally associated with open space.
   GROUND COVER. Perennial plants that are not classified as noxious weeds as
defined elsewhere in the city code, other than turf grass, normally reaching an
average maximum height of not more than 24 inches at maturity.
   GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM. A system that uses the relatively constant
temperature of the earth or a body of water to provide heating in the winter
and cooling in the summer. System components include open or closed loops of
pipe, coils, or plates; fluid that absorbs and transfers heat; and a heat pump
unit that processes heat for use or disperses heat for cooling; and an air
distribution system.
   HARDSURFACE COVERAGE. The amount of a lot covered by building, pavement,
concrete, or other impervious material.
   HEAT ISLAND REDUCTION. Use of vegetative cover to minimize heat islands on
hard cover areas and to reduce impact on microclimate and human and wildlife
habitat.
   HEMP BUSINESS. Either of the following licensed under this chapter:
      (1)   Lower-potency hemp edible manufacturer; or
      (2)   Lower-potency hemp edible retailer. HEMP BUSINESS does not include
a person or entity licensed under M.S. Chapter 18K to grow industrial hemp for
commercial or research purposes or to process industrial hemp for commercial
purposes.
   HEMP PLANT. All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis that are growing or
have not been harvested and have a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration
of no more than 0.3% on a dry weight basis.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation carried out by the occupant of a residential
dwelling unit that occurs within the principal or accessory building on the
property and does not change the nature of the primary use of the property.
   HORIZONTAL AXIS WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine design in which the rotor shaft
is parallel to the ground and the blades are perpendicular to the ground.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. The area of a lot, above the ordinary high water level,
covered with buildings including all appurtenances, driveways and sidewalks,
and similar impervious materials. For the purpose of this chapter, driveways
that have a gravel base shall be considered impervious. Decks that allow
drainage through the decking and that do not have plastic weed barrier or some
other material that would impede drainage into the ground and swimming pool
water surface area shall not be considered impervious.
   INDOOR SALES OF AUTOMOBILES. All sales and display take place within a
building.
   INTERSECTION (OF TWO STREETS). The point of intersection is the location
where the extended curb lines of two streets meet.
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM. A permanent, underground watering system designed to
transport and distribute water to landscaped areas of property.
   LANDSCAPING. Any combination of living plants, (such as grass, perennials,
shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) and non-living material, (such as rocks,
pebbles, mulch, decorative walls, fences, or decorative paving materials) used
to enhance the appearance and use of the natural and built environment.
   LANDSCAPING, ARID. That combination of living plants, (such as grass,
perennials, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) and non-living material, (such as
rocks, pebbles, mulch, decorative walls, fences, or decorative paving
materials) used to enhance the appearance and use of the natural and built
environment that is designed for needing no additional irrigation above natural
rainfall.
   LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A facility where one or more persons reside
on a 24- hour per day basis under the care and supervision of a program
licensed by the Minnesota Department of Human Services (DHS).
   LIVE/WORK UNITS. A habitable structure that allows for a professional office
or commercial retail or service use to be operated in the same structure, with
the business owner's residence located behind the business use on the ground
floor or on the upper floor.
   LOADING DOCK. A platform adjacent to a building at which trucks load or
unload cargo.
   LOT or PARCEL. A portion of land occupied or used, or intended for occupancy
or use, for a purpose permitted or conditionally permitted in this chapter and
of sufficient size to provide the yards and area required by this chapter.
   LOT AREA. The total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel, excluding
any street rights-of-way given by fee dedication.
   LOT CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of, and adjacent to two or more
intersecting streets.
   LOT DEPTH. The average distance between the front lot line and the rear lot
line of a lot or parcel.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which is adjacent to two substantially parallel
streets and is not a corner lot.
   LOT, FRONT. A lot line abutting the right of way of a public street or
property or easement line of a private street. On a corner lot, the shortest of
the sides abutting the public street shall be the front. If the dimensions of a
corner lot are within 10% of being equal, the front lot line shall be that
street designated by the owner. Once it has been established, with the address
assigned and the principal entrance determined, the front shall not be
reversed.
   LOT LINE. A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another
lot, a public right-of-way, or private street.
   LOT, REAR. The boundary of a lot that is opposite the front lot line. If the
rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at
the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet in length within the lot,
connecting the side lot lines and parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines as measured along the
required front-yard setback.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE MANUFACTURER. A business with a lower-potency hemp
edible manufacturer license from the Office of Cannabis Management.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE RETAILER. A business with a lower-potency hemp
edible retailer license from the Office of Cannabis Management.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of 44 CFR, Part 60.3.
   LUMINAIRE. A complete lighting unit extending from a support structure
consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and
decorative parts. The light source, shield and other components do not extend
below the cutoff angle for the luminaire. A LUMINAIRE does not include a pole
or other support.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. MANUFACTURED HOME
does not include the term “recreational vehicle.”
   MEDICAL CANNABIS BUSINESS. An entity licensed by the OCM to engage in one or
more of the following:
      (1)   The cultivation of cannabis plants for medical cannabis flower;
      (2)   The manufacture of medical cannabinoid products; and
      (3)   The retail sale of medical cannabis flower and medical cannabinoid
products.
   MICRODISTILLERY. A distillery that manufactures or produces distilled
spirits not exceeding 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year.
   MISSISSIPPI RIVER CRITICAL AREA. The Mississippi River and adjacent lands in
the Twin Cities region were designated a critical area by the State of
Minnesota under the Critical Areas Act. Executive Order No. 79-19 established
the Mississippi River Critical Area.
   MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT. The development of a designated area of land with two
or more different land uses.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A self-contained food service operation, located in a
readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store, prepare,
display, or serve food intended for individual portion service that is readily
movable without disassembling, or as defined in M.S. § 157.15, Subd 9.
   MODEL HOME. A home which is like others in a new residential development and
is temporarily open to regular public inspections for the purpose of selling
other homes in the development.
   MODIFIED SPLIT ENTRY. A dwelling unit with a front entrance that is midway
between the lower level and the upper level. This type of home has a lower
level separated by more than three risers or 24 inches of height difference
below the front entry elevation and will not be counted towards the minimum
square footage requirements of the home.
   MODIFIED TWO STORY. A dwelling unit which has some part of the building that
is a minimum of a full two stories in height at, or above the front entry
elevation. Not all parts of the home will be a full two stories (or more) in
height. There may be a lower level separated by no more than three risers or 24
inches of height difference above or below the front entry elevation that may
be counted towards the minimum square footage of the home.
   MONOPOLE TOWER. A tower constructed of tapered tubes that fit together
symmetrically and are stacked one section on top of another and bolted to a
concrete foundation without support cables.
   MOTOR HOME. A vehicle that provides temporary living quarters and is self-
propelled or capable of being towed on public roads. Temporary living quarters
within this definition mean:
      (1)   The vehicle is not used as a residence on private property in this
city;
      (2)   The vehicle is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or
occupant while engaged in recreational or vacation activities away from the
property; and
      (3)   The vehicle is not a junk vehicle defined elsewhere in the city
code.
   NATIVE SPECIES. Plants that are indigenous to a particular region. Plants
are considered native if they were present at the time of the public land
survey (1847-1907) that was conducted before and during the early stages of
European settlement.
   NATURAL AREA. A designated area within a neighborhood development plan where
limited human activity is planned and uses are of an undeveloped nature.
Examples of natural areas include but are not limited to parks, gardens,
recreational uses, trails, nature areas, and open space.
   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL. Limited commercial areas that provide compact
centers for retail sales and services to adjacent neighborhoods.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures, including additions and improvements, and
placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of §
152.801.
   NIGHTCLUB. An assembly use engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises within a building, facility, room, or portion
thereof containing a stage used for live or recorded music and with minimal or
no seating. Providing entertainment is the predominant attraction during
business hours open to the public and an entrance fee is typically charged.
   NON-CONFORMITIES. Any land use, site, structure, building, lot of record, or
sign legally established prior to the effective date of this chapter or
subsequent amendment to it which would not be permitted by or is not in full
compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
   NON-PASSENGER VEHICLE or EQUIPMENT. A recreational vehicle or equipment that
is not self-propelled or cannot receive a vehicle license. This definition does
not include junk vehicles as defined elsewhere in the city code.
   NURSING HOME. A state licensed facility used to provide care for aged or
infirm persons who require nursing and personal care and related services in
accordance with state regulations. A NURSING HOME may be a residential
healthcare facility, an intermediate care facility, or a long-term care
facility.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain that may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
   OFFICE. Services that are predominantly administrative, professional and/or
clerical in nature and conducted within a building or part of a building.
   OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as “OCM” in this chapter.
   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD PLAIN. Lands that are inundated by a regional flood.
   OPEN SPACE. An area of land that does not contain any buildings except those
constructed for recreational or gardening purposes, and is intended for
environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL (OHWL). The boundary of water basins,
watercourses, public waters, and public waters wetlands, and:
      (1)   The OHWL is an elevation delineating the highest water level that
has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly the point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial;
      (2)   For watercourses, the OHWL is the elevation of the top of the bank
of the channel; and
      (3)   For reservoirs and flowages, the OHWL is the operating elevation of
the normal summer pool.
   ORNAMENTAL TREE. A self-supporting woody plant or species normally growing
to a mature height of at least ten feet but no more than 20 feet.
   OUTDOOR SALES AND DISPLAY. An outdoor area designated for sales and display
of product carried by the primary business.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. Storage of any property not fully enclosed in a building.
   OUTLOT. An unbuildable lot that must be replatted into a lot of record
before a building permit can be issued to the property.
   OVERLAY DISTRICT. A zoning district applied over one or more previously
established zoning districts, establishing additional or stricter standards and
criteria for covered properties in addition to those of the underlying zoning
district.
   OVERSTORY TREE. A self-supporting woody plant or species normally growing to
a mature height of at least 20 feet.
   PARK, ACTIVE. A park with structures or designated areas for formal
recreation activities. Examples of active park areas include but are not
limited to golf courses, ballfields, and playgrounds.
   PARK ATTRACTION. A facility or location within a public park that is
regularly used by minors, including but not limited to a playground or athletic
field.
   PARK, PASSIVE. A park or designated area where limited human activity is
planned and uses are of an undeveloped nature. Examples of passive park areas
include but are not limited to largely undeveloped parks, gardens, trails,
nature areas, and open space.
   PARK, PRIVATE. A recreation area, either passive or active, owned and
operated by a private group, most commonly a homeowner's association or
multiple dwelling tenants.
   PARK, PUBLIC. A recreation area, either passive or active, owned or operated
by the city, county, state, or another governmental unit.
   PARK AND RIDE FACILITY. A parking area used for passenger vehicle storage by
persons who travel by mass transit facilities or share rides to other
locations.
   PARKING AREA. A designated portion of a lot used for the temporary storage
of motor vehicles on a surface improved by pavement. This definition does not
include private residential driveways.
   PARKING SPACE. A storage area for a vehicle that has means of access to a
public or private street and has an impermeable surface.
   PARKING IN RESERVE. Proof on an approved site plan that additional land for
parking has been set aside for which construction may be required should
conditions warrant as determined by the City Manager.
   PAWNSHOP. A business that lends money on deposit or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again
at a stipulated price, or that lends money secured by chattel mortgage on
personal property, taking possession of the property or any part so mortgaged.
   PERVIOUS PAVEMENT. A paving system that allows water to infiltrate through
the pavement to accurately reflect the predevelopment hydrologic cycle and
includes, but is not limited to, porous concrete, porous asphalt, porous
pavers, open jointed paving blocks, and open cell paving blocks.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM. A solar energy system that converts solar energy
directly into electricity.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A method of land development that merges zoning
and subdivision controls, allowing developers to plan and develop a large area
as a single entity, characterized by a unified site design, a mix of structure
types and land uses, and an organized phasing of development over an amount of
time agreed upon by the developer and the city.
   PUBLIC & UTILITY FACILITIES. Government and utility facilities and
structures, i.e., maintenance buildings, water towers, pumping and lift
stations, electrical substations, government buildings, mass transit
facilities, and minor cable TV facilities.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas,
electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to the
public. For this chapter, commercial wireless telecommunication service
facilities may not be considered public utility uses and are defined
separately.
   RAIN GARDENS/BIORETENTION SYSTEMS. Shallow landscaped depressions commonly
located in parking lot islands or adjacent to land cover areas that receive
stormwater and filter the runoff or allow it to infiltrate in the soil bed.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a REACH.
   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Recreational equipment which does not meet the
definition for a vehicle in the city code, including, but not limited to,
boats, pull-behind trailers or campers, ice fishing structures, personal
watercraft, and other similar uses that do not necessarily remain on the
property during the entire calendar year. This term does not include semi-
tractor trailers or other trailers over 15 feet, junk vehicles as defined
elsewhere in the city code, detached snow plowing equipment, or swing sets,
trampolines, and other private outdoor recreational equipment.
   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, PRIVATE OUTDOOR. Private swimming pools, hot tubs,
tennis courts, trampolines, swing sets, other large play equipment, and other
similar equipment if it is designed for outdoor use and used solely for the
private enjoyment of the resident.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Non-commercial vehicles used for private recreational
purposes, including motor homes, campers, dirt bikes, motor-cross cycles,
snowmobiles, go-carts, vehicles that are not registered for operation on public
rights-of-way, and similar vehicles. This may not include junk vehicles as
defined elsewhere in the city code.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term "base flood"
used in the flood insurance study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than two feet
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A building or campus in which worship, ceremonies,
rituals, and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   RESIDENTIAL WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine of ten-kilowatt (kW) nameplate
generating capacity or less.
   RESTAURANT, BREWPUB. An establishment that serves food and hold an
intoxicating liquor license and produces in whole or in part beer and/or malt
liquor on the premise.
   RESTAURANT, CLASS I. An establishment that serves food and is eligible for a
3.2 non-intoxicating beer and wine license without a cover charge.
   RESTAURANT, CLASS II. An establishment that serves food and is eligible for
an intoxicating liquor license without a cover charge.
   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. An establishment whose principal business is the sale
of food and/or beverages in a ready to consume state for consumption:
      (1)   Within the restaurant building;
      (2)   Within a motor vehicle parked on the premises; or
      (3)   Off the premises as carryout orders, and whose principal method of
operation includes the following characteristics: food and/or beverages are
usually served in paper, plastic or other disposable containers.
   RESTAURANT, TAPROOM. An establishment that serves beer or malt liquor in
accordance with M.S. § 340A.301, Subd. 6b, as amended from time to time.
   RETAIL BUSINESS. An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to
the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of such goods.
   RETAIL REGISTRATION. An approved registration issued by the city to a
cannabis retail business.
   RETAINING WALL. A vertical or nearly vertical structure constructed of
mortar and rubble masonry, rock or stone regardless of size, vertical timber
pilings horizontal timber planks with piling supports, sheet pilings, poured
concrete, concrete blocks, or other durable materials.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, sidewalk, trail corridor of at least 50 feet, snow storage, highway,
railroad, transmission cable, pipeline, landscaping, and utility structures.
   SCHOOL. 
      (1)   A public or private elementary, middle, secondary, post-secondary,
or vocation school having a course of instruction approved by the Minnesota
Board of Education.
      (2)   A public school as defined under M.S. § 120A.05 or a nonpublic
school that must meet the reporting requirements under M.S. § 120A.24.
   SCREENING. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or
nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely
planted vegetation.
   SEAMLESS METAL PANELS. Smooth, prefinished, architectural metal panels
without seams or joints that protrude from the surface. This term excludes
textured metal, standing seam, pole or "butler building" metals, any kind of
corrugated panel, or metal siding that is residential in appearance or quality.
   SEASONAL (TEMPORARY) GARDEN CENTER. A retail use for the sale of primarily
plants and other related garden materials such as flowerpots, seeds, garden
tools, and landscape rock and mulch.
   SEASONAL (TEMPORARY) GREENHOUSE. A temporary structure, commonly with glass
or durable plastic walls and roof, designed for the cultivation or exhibition
of plants under controlled conditions during the spring and summer seasons.
   SENIOR MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLINGS. Those multiple family dwellings marketed
to and predominately occupied by persons 70 years of age or older.
   SERVICE BUSINESS. An establishment primarily engaged in providing
assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, business, industry,
government, and other enterprises, including hotels and other lodging places;
personal, business, repair, and amusement services; health, legal engineering,
and other professional services; educational services; membership
organizations; and other miscellaneous services and sales of such goods
incidental to the service.
   SETBACK. The required minimum space between property lines and buildings,
structures, accessory uses, or other features as specifically set forth in this
chapter.
      (1)   FRONT. The area extending the full width of the lot between the
public right-of-way from which the dwelling is addressed, and a distance
specified by the applicable district. FRONT SETBACKS are measured in feet from
the property line.
      (2)   REAR. The area between the rear lot line and the rear setback line.
REAR SETBACKS are measured in feet from the property line.
      (3)   SIDE. The area between the side lot line and the side setback line,
bounded by the front yard and rear yard. SIDE SETBACKS are measured in feet
from the property line.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any one of a number of establishments which
offers goods and/or services for sale or rent of a sexual or titillating nature
as its primary business and which excludes minors by virtue of age. This may
include, but is not limited to bookstores, car washes, entertainment centers,
modeling studios, motion picture theaters, cabaret/nightclubs, video rental,
etc.
   SHORELINE. An area 40 feet wide as measured above the ordinary high water
level on both sides of the Mississippi River.
   SIGN. All structures, either stationary or movable, containing writing,
announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, or
illumination used to advertise or promote the interest of any person when the
same is displayed outside. Signs are further defined and regulated in
Chapter 150.
   SITE PLAN. A document or group of documents containing text, drawings to
scale, maps, photographs, and other materials intended to present existing and
proposed conditions of property development, including topography, vegetation,
wetlands, ingress/egress, parking, grading, drainage, utilities, landscaping,
buildings, signs, lighting, and other information as may be reasonably
required.
   SLOPE. The change in elevation on the land. For the purposes of the Critical
Area Overlay District, land with a slope of 12% or greater is regulated. A 12%
slope means that for every eight feet of horizontal distance, the elevation
changes by at least one foot.
   SMALL WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine of 100 kW nameplate generating capacity
or less.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A device or structural design feature, a substantial
purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting or provide for
the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating or
cooling, electricity generation or water heating.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. A term used for flood insurance purposes
synonymous with “one hundred year flood plain.”
   SPLIT LEVEL. A single-family dwelling unit that is almost entirely a full
one-and-a-half stories in height at or above the front entry elevation.
   STAGING AREA. An unobstructed paved surface area provided and maintained for
the temporary parking, unloading, and maneuvering of commercial vehicles
incidental and related to the principal permitted use of the property.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement that occurred before the permit's expiration
date. The actual start is either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STEALTH DESIGN. State-of-the-art design techniques used to blend the object
into the surrounding environment and to minimize the visual impact as much as
reasonably possible. Examples of stealth design techniques include, but are not
limited to architecturally screening roof-mounted antennas and accessory
equipment; integrating telecommunications facilities into architectural
elements; nestling telecommunications facilities into the surrounding landscape
so that the topography or vegetation reduces their view; using the location
that would result in the least amount of visibility to the public, minimizing
the size and appearance of the telecommunications facilities; and designing
telecommunications towers to appear other than as towers, such as light poles,
power poles, flag poles, and trees.
   STORAGE. For the purpose of this chapter storage shall have the meaning of
storing, locating, or parking. STORAGE does not include current property
maintenance activities occurring on the property. STORAGE does not include
temporary parking or vehicles in a staging area.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the next floor above, except that the topmost
story must be that portion of the building included between the upper surface
of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a basement, as defined in this chapter, is more than six feet
above grade for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet
above grade at any point, then the basement counts as a story.
   STREET. A thoroughfare, either owned publicly or privately, and accompanying
boulevard located between right-of-way or property lines used or intended to be
used for passage or travel by vehicles, pedestrians, bicyclists, and related
maintenance activities. Streets may be local, collector, or arterials as
defined by the Comprehensive Plan.
   STREETS, ARTERIAL. A type of road that is characterized by limited access
and a design capacity to move relatively large volumes of traffic in an
expedient manner. Arterials are divided into principal arterials and minor
arterials based on their access, the traffic volume they carry and the areas
they serve. The roadway classification system is further defined and
illustrated in the city's Comprehensive Plan.
   STREETS, COLLECTOR. A type of road that functions to provide connections
between neighborhoods and from neighborhoods to areas with concentrations of
businesses. They typically have lower traffic volumes and speeds than
arterials, but higher volumes and speeds than local roads. Collectors are
divided into those roads that are designed to distribute traffic from major
generators or from minor collectors to arterial roads (major collectors) and
those roads that are designed to distribute traffic from major collectors or
arterials to local streets (minor collectors). Examples of major collectors
include Candlewood Drive, Regent Avenue, and West River Road. Examples of minor
collectors are Pearson Parkway, Lad Parkway, and Northland Drive. The roadway
classification system is further defined and illustrated in the city's
Transportation Plan.
   STREETS, LOCAL. A type of road that functions to provide access to adjacent
properties and from properties to collectors and/or arterials. Speeds and
traffic volumes are typically lower than collectors or arterials. The roadway
classification system is further defined and illustrated in the city's
Transportation Plan.
   STREET TREES. Trees planted or growing on public easements (public right-of-
way and public use), parks and public buildings grounds.
   STRUCTURE. A material or combination of materials that form a construction
for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of land or water.
   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. A structure subordinate to, incidental to, and/or
serving the principal structure on the same lot. Examples include garages
(attached or detached), greenhouses, ice-fishing shacks, storage sheds, etc.
   STRUCTURE, PRINCIPLE. The main structure on a parcel of land designed to
house the principle use.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures, which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. For the purpose of this chapter, historic structure shall
be as defined in CFR, Part 59.1.
   TAPROOM. A facility on or adjacent to the premises of a brewery where the
on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced by the brewer is permitted pursuant
to M.S. § 340A.301, Subd. 6b.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. Includes antennas, accessory equipment, and
telecommunications towers.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER or COMMERCIAL TOWER. A free-standing, self-
supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade
intended to support antennas, except towers used for amateur radio operations.
   TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS. An enclosed portable storage
container placed on a residential property for temporary use.
   THREE SEASON PORCH. A roofed and enclosed porch, deck, or similar space with
windows that is not heated.
   TOWER. Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination
taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and
masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna,
meteorological device, wind turbine, or similar apparatus above grade.
   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling in a row of similar units. Such
dwellings are constructed as slab-on-grade with no basement and may be detached
or attached, each with its own front and rear entrance. Each dwelling extends
from the foundation to the roof with units not stacked.
   TRAILER. A vehicle that is an open-bed style trailer, enclosed trailer, or
trailer as defined in M.S. § 169.01, as amended from time to time, or any
machine or equipment designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels,
treads, runners or slides, and transport persons or property or pull machinery.
A trailer by this definition does not include a semi-tractor trailer,
“commercial vehicle” as defined in this chapter, or a trailer with a registered
gross weight over 12,000 pounds.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling, or attempting to
sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for
more than 14 consecutive days. The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT does not apply to
“mobile food unit,” as defined in §
114.03 and this section.
   TRANSIENT SALES. The informal or temporary sale of items, such as rugs,
Christmas trees, flowers and plants, pumpkins, and fruit and beverages, by
persons other than the owner or occupant of the premises.
   TRANSPORTATION PLAN. A chapter or element of the Comprehensive Plan, as
amended from time to time, that describes the existing and planned
transportation related facilities and policies of the city.
   TRUCK or MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A loading dock facility allowing truck
freight operators to redistribute loads of their truck fleets at an
intermediate transfer point. These facilities are primarily used for staging
loads and possess very little, if any, indoor storage area.
   TWO STORY. A single-family dwelling unit which is almost entirely a full two
stories in height at or above the front entry elevation.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which a property or structure is designed,
arranged, or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use subordinate to and serving the principal use or
structure on the same lot and incidental to such principal use.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use that may be allowed in a particular zoning district
only upon demonstration that the use and its operation will be compatible with
the surrounding area and will comply with all standards of this chapter. The
city may impose additional conditions above those specified in this chapter in
specific instances to protect the public health, safety or welfare and to
ensure compatibility with the surrounding area.
   USE, INTERIM. A use of property that is consistent with the city's
comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance, which may exist temporarily until a
particular date or until an occurrence of a particular event deemed by the City
Council.
   USE, PERMITTED. Any use that is allowed by this chapter and subject to the
restrictions of the zoning district and this chapter.
   USE, PRINCIPLE. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
accessory uses.
   UTILITY WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine of more than 100 kW nameplate
generating capacity.
   VEHICLE. Any vehicle, motor vehicle, semitrailer, or trailer as those terms
are defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may also be amended from time to time,
including pioneer, classic collector, and street rod vehicles. It also
includes, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, and
tractor.
   VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINE. A type of wind turbine where the main rotor
shaft runs vertically.
   WETLAND. Land transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the
water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow
water, as defined in M.S. § 103G.005
   WHOLESALE LICENSE AUTO DEALER. May sell vehicles to licensed dealers only
with no outdoor display or any storage on site.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). An electrical generating facility that
consists of a wind turbine, feeder line(s), associated controls and may include
a tower.
   WIND TURBINE. Any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts the
kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy using airfoils or similar
devices to capture the wind.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICE PROVIDER. Licensed commercial wireless
telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio
(ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
   XERISCAPING. A landscaping method that uses plants that have low water
requirements, making them able to withstand extended periods of drought without
irrigation. Xeriscaping landscapes are a conscious attempt to develop plantings
which are compatible with the environment and make a conscious effort to
minimize use of water.
   YARD. An open space unobstructed from the ground upward except for landscape
materials and minor fixtures of a non-structural nature commonly found in a
yard. The front yard, side yard and rear yard shall have the following
meanings:
      (1)   YARD, FRONT. The area between the front lot line and a line drawn
along the front face or faces of the principal structure on the property and
extended to the side property lines. Where a lawful existing garage is located
closer to the front lot line than the principal structure, the front yard is
the area between the front lot line and a line drawn along the front face or
faces of the principal structure to the perpendicular line following the
accessory structure to the front face of the accessory structure and extended
to the side property line. For properties where the front yard definition is
not applicable, the city will determine the front yard area.
      (2)   YARD, REAR. The area between the rear lot line and the closest
portion of the principal structure and abutting the side and front yard.
      (3)   YARD, SIDE. The area extending from the front yard to the rear yard
along a side lot line measured perpendicularly from the side lot line to the
closest point of a structure.
   ZERO LOT LINE. A setback where one or more of building's sides rests
directly on a lot line and shares a common wall with one or more buildings.
   ZONING DISTRICT, UNDERLYING. The official district supporting and further
regulated by a zoning overlay district.
   ZONING MAP. The official map that is part of this chapter and delineates the
geographic boundaries of zoning districts.
   ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT. A text change to this chapter or a map change to
the official zoning or zoning overlay map that the City Council has authorized.
   ZONING OVERLAY MAP. The official map that is part of this chapter and
delineates the geographic boundaries of zoning overlay districts.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord.
2025-1310, passed 3-24-25)
Administration and Enforcement
§ 152.200 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter establishes the administration and enforcement powers of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.201 CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager may designate such additional persons as necessary to
administer and enforce this chapter. In addition to the duties defined
elsewhere in city code, the duties of the City Manager include:
   (A)   Oversee the creation and maintenance of permanent and current records
of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments,
conditional uses, variances, appeals, applications, permits, and other records
required by law.
   (B)   Oversee the receiving and forwarding of all applications, including
but not limited to, zoning amendments, conditional uses, variances, and
appeals.
   (C)   Interpret the application and provisions of this chapter, which may be
appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to the procedures in §
152.302.
   (D)   Serves as a liaison to the Planning Commission and is responsible for
the preparation of application for zoning related matters, the preparation and
submission of public hearing notices to the official newspaper, the preparation
of reports and other information for Planning Commission and City Council
meetings and enforces all zoning regulations, provisions and conditions
pertaining to the approval of applications by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.202 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Enforcement. The City Manager may in the name of the city take any
appropriate actions or proceedings to enforce this chapter. These actions may
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Conduct periodic inspections of buildings, structures, and use of
land to determine compliance with terms of this chapter;
      (2)   Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a
provision of this chapter, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it and a time frame for compliance;
      (3)   Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions or
alteration; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any other
legal action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions, including cooperation with the City Attorney in
the prosecution of complaints; and
      (4)   The City Manager has the authority to issue stop work orders of any
and all site improvement activities when and where a violation of the
provisions of this chapter has been documented.
   (B)   Penalties. The City Manager may institute in the name of the city any
appropriate legal actions or proceedings against a violator of this chapter.
Any person who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or permits
the violation of any provision of this chapter or who knowingly makes or
submits any false statement or document in connection with any application or
procedure required by this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or permits the violation of
any performance standard of this chapter must reimburse the city or its agent
for the actual cost of the tests, measurements or other procedures necessary to
demonstrate such violation.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.203 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   No private buildings, structures, or uses may be in or on any
easements, except fences or retaining walls and public or quasi-public
facilities regulated by city franchise, or other provisions of the city code.
   (B)   The City Council may grant an encroachment agreement if it is
determined to be appropriate for the structure and if it is not detrimental to
the operation of the easement.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.204 NON-CONFORMITIES.
   (A)   Authority. This section is pursuant to M.S. § 462.357.
      (1)   Non-conforming uses. Except as otherwise provided by law, any non-
conformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing
at the time of the adoption of an additional control under this chapter, may be
continued, including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or
improvement, but not including expansion, unless:
         (a)   The non-conformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of
more than one year; or
         (b)   Any non-conforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to
the extent of greater than 50% of its estimated market value, as indicated in
the records of the County Assessor at the time of damage, and no building
permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged. In
this case, reasonable condition may be imposed upon a zoning or building permit
to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property or water body.
         (c)   Any established use legally existing prior to adoption of this
chapter and which is herein classified by this chapter as requiring a
conditional use permit may be continued in like fashion and activity. Any
change to such a use shall require a new conditional use permit be processed
according to §
152.305.
         (d)   Any established use legally existing prior to adoption of this
chapter and which is herein classified by this chapter as requiring an interim
use permit may be continued in like fashion and activity. Any change to such a
use or building shall require a new IUP be processed according to §
152.306.
   (B)   Non-conforming structures. Expansion of an existing non-conforming
structure, reconstruction of a partially destroyed non-conforming structure, or
other intensification of a site may be subject to M.S. § 394.36.
      (1)   Non-conforming principal structures may not be enlarged or altered
in a way that increases their non-conformity unless in compliance with the
following:
         (a)   Expansion or alteration of buildings found to be non-conforming
only by reason of height, setback or lot area may be permitted, provided the
structural non-conformity is not increased and the expansion complies with the
performance standards of this chapter.
         (b)   Legal non-conforming single-family and two-family dwellings may
be expanded or altered to improve the livability provided the non-conformity of
the structure is not increased.
         (c)   The expansion or alteration must follow the requirements of §§
152.300 -
152.312.
      (2)   A non-conforming structure which has deteriorated or is damaged to
the extent of 50% or more of its market value (excluding land value) as
determined by the City Manager may be replaced or reconstructed only in
compliance with this chapter.
      (3)   Any non-conforming structure which is damaged to an extent of less
than 50% of its value, excluding land, as determined by the City Manager may be
restored to its former foundation footprint, structure height, and gross floor
area if building permit is issued within six months of the date of documented
damage.
   (C)   Non-conforming lot of record.
      (1)   Any lot which was legally created but became non-conforming due to
changes in area or dimensional requirements because of the adoption of this
chapter may be subject to the following:
         (a)   May be combined for tax purposes with a contiguous parcel or
parcels but may not be re-subdivided into a non-conforming lot even if the
division is consistent with the original lot configurations.
         (b)   If an owner has an interest in more than one lot of record
contiguous to other lots of record, all such lots must be combined to meet the
requirements of this section or the provisions of the zoning district in which
the property is located, whichever is more restrictive. If sufficient
contiguous property is held in one ownership to comply with the provision of
the zoning district where the property is located, the zoning district
provisions will apply. In no circumstances will there be approval of any
proposal for multiple lot developments based upon lots of record, and not
conforming with the provisions of the existing zoning district.
         (c)   A vacant lot may be used for a single-family detached dwelling
(if permitted by the district regulations), if the lot area or width
measurements meet at least 75% of the requirements for both the lot area and
width requirements.
         (d)   Additions to principal or accessory buildings or structures
located on non-conforming lots may be permitted provided that any such addition
will meet all minimum setback requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located.
         (e)   If the lot is non-conforming due to public action after the lot
was created or has no buildable area outside the flood plain or critical area
overlay setbacks, then no variance may be required for the reconstruction of a
single-family dwelling on a non-conforming lot that is damaged to the extent of
50% or more of its market value (excluding land value), so long as the
replacement dwelling has a footprint, building height and gross floor area size
equal to that of the destroyed dwelling.
   (D)   Non-conforming site improvements.
      (1)   If non-conforming uses, structures, or buildings suffer damage to
at least 50% of the value of the structure excluding land, as determined by the
City Assessor, or the property owner applies for a building addition or an
accessory structure amounting to 25% of the value of the principal structure,
the site must be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter. At no time will a building or grading permit be issued if the proposed
construction will increase any non- conformity on the site.
      (2)   Upon any change in occupancy, non-conforming paved parking areas
may continue to be used without improvement if the number of parking spaces
supplied remains adequate according to the regulations in this chapter, and the
paved surface has not, in the city's judgment, deteriorated so as to be beyond
repair. If the parking lot cannot be repaired for the new occupancy, then the
parking lot surface must be replaced or otherwise brought into compliance with
this chapter.
      (3)   A building permit may be issued for a portion of a multiple
occupancy building without bringing the existing site improvements for the
entire property into compliance with this chapter so long as no non-conformity
is increased. If a multiple occupancy building becomes completely vacant, its
site improvements must be brought into compliance with this chapter prior to
any future occupancy.
      (4)   When expansion of existing sites occurs, the newly constructed
portion of the site improvements must fully comply with all of the requirements
of this chapter, unless the expansion portion of the property contains physical
limitations that make full compliance unfeasible, then site plan review shall
be required to determine the level of compliance required as approved by the
Planning Commission and City Council.
   (E)   Non-conformities in the Flood Hazard Overlay.
      (1)   Structures in the designated floodway may be considered non-
conforming uses.
      (2)   All reconstruction in the Flood Hazard Overlay must comply with
Minn. Rules parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200. The only acceptable method of
elevating the lowest floor, including the basement (as defined for the Flood
Hazard Overlay), is with the placement of earthen materials (fill). Other
methods require a variance.
      (3)   Reconstruction commences within one year of the date of the
destruction of the original building and reasonable progress must be made in
completing the project for this division to be applicable. A building permit
must be obtained prior to construction of the new dwelling and the new
structure must be constructed in compliance with all other city codes
regulations.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.205 NUISANCES.
   (A)   No use may use or create noise, dust, vibration, odor, glare,
electrical interference, fire hazards, garbage, hazardous chemicals that exceed
standards published in the city code, or by the PCA or Department of Health
standards.
   (B)   No use may create traffic or parking congestion to a degree that
cannot be proportionally accommodated by adjacent street or private driveways
and garages.
   (C)   No use may create any other public health, safety or general welfare
hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than that usually
experienced in an average dwelling unit or private garage, sewer, or water
services under normal circumstances wherein no vocation or avocation exists in
the zoning district where the vocation or avocation exists, except as
superseded by state or county ordinance, statute, or law.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
Applications and Procedures
§ 152.300 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish procedural requirements for
processes enabled or required by this chapter, including amendments to the
regulations of this chapter, zoning map amendments, site plans, conditional use
permits, interim use permits, administrative permits, alternative compliance,
variances, interpretations, appeals, and violations and penalties. This chapter
also addresses development contracts, financial guarantees, and cash escrows
related to development projects and applications.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.301 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   The following applications require a public hearing:
      (1)   Conditional use permits, amendments, and revocations;
      (2)   Interim use permits;
      (3)   Site plans, except those eligible for administrative review per §
152.303;
      (4)   Variances;
      (5)   Zoning map or text amendments (rezonings); and
      (6)   Concept, development, and regulating plans.
   (B)   Notification. All applications requiring a public hearing must be
advertised in the following manner:
      (1)   Notice of the time, place, and purpose hearing must be published in
the newspaper in general circulation in the municipality at least ten days
before the day of the hearing; and
      (2)   A similar notice must be mailed at least ten days before the day of
the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated completely
or partly within 350 feet of the subject property.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.302 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Applications. The City Manager determines if the required information
is complete. If the information is determined to be incomplete, such that a
thorough review of the application is not possible, the item may not be placed
on the Planning Commission or City Council agenda for consideration until the
required information is submitted. The applicant will be notified within ten
days following the receipt of the application describing the information that
is missing.
   (B)   Application requirements. All applications for development proposals
requiring a public hearing must be advertised to allow informed participation
by all interested parties and conform with the applicable state statute. The
City Manager may maintain copies of the city policy concerning notification.
   (C)   Planning Commission and City Council action.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend such actions or conditions
relating to the application as it deems necessary to carry out the intent and
purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   The City Council may adopt, modify or reject any recommendation of
the Planning Commission.
      (3)   At any time before final action is taken on an application, the
applicant may request a continuance of action by the Planning Commission and
City Council, or withdraw the application by submitting a letter to the City
Manager stating the applicant's desire to do so. Any portion of fees spent in
the processing of the application may be retained by the city. The City Manager
may establish a time limit on any continuation.
   (D)   Appeals. This division is established to allow those aggrieved by the
decision of the City Manager to attempt to remedy the grievance by appealing
the decision to the City Council. Any unresolved dispute as to an
administrative interpretation of city code, ordinance, or policy requirements
may be appealed to the Planning Commission in its role as the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals subject to §§
31.15 through
31.19 of the city code. The appeal must be submitted in writing to the City
Manager on or before the next application filing deadline for a Planning
Commission meeting.
   (E)   Re-submitting denied applications. No application which has been
denied wholly or in part may be resubmitted for at least one year from the date
of its denial, unless substantial changes have been made which warrant
reconsideration, as determined by the City Manager.
   (F)   Expiration of action. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, or
as approved by the City Council, the approved applications for projects become
null and void by December 31 of the year following the date of its approval,
unless the property owner or applicant has begun construction of any building,
structure, addition or alteration, or use as evidenced by the issuance of a
building permit or grading permit in compliance with the approved plan. The
property owner or applicant has the right to submit an application for a time
extension in accordance with this chapter.
   (G)   Request for time extensions.
      (1)   A request for a time extension may be considered by the City
Manager. Time extensions must be submitted to the City Manager prior to the
expiration of a final action by the City Council. If an action has officially
expired, no time extension may be granted. If the time extension request is
delayed in the review process and, through no fault of the applicant, cannot be
reviewed by the City Manager as anticipated, the request may proceed through
the process to final resolution without jeopardy. The applicant may request a
maximum of one time extension. Time extensions are valid for a maximum of one
year from the original expiration date.
      (2)   The request may be reviewed with consideration of the following:
         (a)   The Comprehensive Plan or any other city plan;
         (b)   City policy changes;
         (c)   Transportation conditions;
         (d)   Applicable changes to any city, county, state or federal
statutes, rules, requirements, or ordinances;
         (e)   Park dedication fees and other financial guarantees may be
redetermined as required by city code to the date of approval of the extension;
and
         (f)   Any negative escrow accounts from previous reviews must be paid
and the escrow account must be updated to current minimum requirements prior to
the City Manager's consideration of the extension.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.303 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes site plan review procedures and
provides regulations pertaining to the enforcement of site design standards
consistent with the requirements of this chapter. These procedures are
established to promote high quality development and enhance the built and
natural environment within the city as new development and redevelopment
activities occur.
   (B)   Applicability. Site plan approval is required for the following
development:
      (1)   Construct a structure;
      (2)   Relocate a structure from one property to another in the city;
      (3)   Expand or change the use of a building or parcel of land or modify
a building, accessory structure or site or land feature in any manner that
results in a different intensity of use, including the requirement for
additional parking;
      (4)   Grade or take any action to prepare a site for development, except
in conformance with the requirements for a grading permit, an approved
neighborhood development plan or an approved conditional use permit; and
      (5)   Remove earth, soils, gravel, or other natural material from or
place the same on a site, except in conformance with the requirements for a
building or grading permit or an approved neighborhood development plan or an
approved conditional use permit.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the site plan review
process:
      (1)   Agricultural structures in the UR Urban Reserve District provided
they comply with all other code provisions; and
      (2)   Accessory structures in residential zones under 200 square feet and
18 feet in height or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less,
provided they comply with all other code provisions;
   (D)   Review authority. Except in cases of administrative site plan review
per division (G) below, the Planning Commission and City Council shall have the
review and approval authority to approve a site plan.
   (E)   Conditions. The City Council may impose conditions that affect the
intent of this chapter to the approval of a site plan review.
   (F)   Modification to approved site plan. A modification to plans previously
approved through the site plan review process that do not qualify for an
administrative site plan review under division (G) below must follow the City
Council approved site plan review procedure.
   (G)   Administrative site plan review. Sites plans shall be reviewed by the
City Manager in lieu of City Council approval if they meet the following
criteria, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter:
      (1)   Residential properties with one dwelling unit per parcel that
comply with the approved plan; and
      (2)   Modifications or expansions of parking lots or driveways;
      (3)   Expansions of no more than 10% of the floor area of an existing
building, and/or affect no more than 10% of the site.
      (4)   Sites, buildings and uses that are permitted in the zoning district
and do not require variances from this chapter or any other city code, except
for the following:
         (a)   Nonresidential uses in or adjacent to a residential district;
         (b)   Uses with drive-through service;
         (c)   Uses in the Public Institution District (PI); and
         (d)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools, including
charter schools.
      (5)   Procedure.
         (a)   Administrative site plan review may be combined with the
established building permit process when applicable. The City Manager may
impose conditions on the approval to implement the intent of this chapter.
         (b)   Administrative approval, including all applicable conditions and
requirements, may be made either in writing separately or attached to the
submitted plans. The applicant must fulfill all applicable conditions of the
approval prior to the issuance of any permits.
   (H)   Term of approval.
      (1)   If application has not been made for final site plan review for all
or part of the property within the development plan 365 days following the date
of its approval, the development plan approval will lapse unless the applicant
requests an extension of that approval. An extension may be valid for one year
and may be approved by the City Council.
      (2)   If no construction has occurred on the property included within the
development plan within 365 days following the date of final site plan
approval, approval for the development plan will lapse unless an extension has
been approved by the City Council. An extension may be valid for one year and
may be approved by the City Council.
   (I)   Conformance to the approved site plan. All developments must remain in
continual conformance with the approved site plan review until or unless
amended in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1310, passed 3-24-25)
§ 152.304 CONCEPT, DEVELOPMENT, AND REGULATING PLANS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is to establish procedures, and regulations for
the adoption and enforcement of concept, regulating and development plans
consistent with the requirements of this chapter. These procedures are
established to promote high quality development to ensure the long-term
stability of mixed uses and enhance the built and natural environment within
the city as new development and redevelopment activities occur. The specific
goals of these plans are:
      (1)   To ensure the application of quality design principles within new
and redevelopment projects;
      (2)   To ensure the active participation and review of site plans by the
affected public;
      (3)   To mitigate to the extent possible, the impact of one development
upon another; and
      (4)   To ensure new developments contain elements of internal and
external cohesiveness to promote good neighborhood atmosphere.
   (B)   Procedures. All requests for concept, regulating, or development plan
approval must include the following items:
      (1)   Grading plan, including drainage and storm water management plans;
      (2)   Utility plan;
      (3)   Landscaping plan;
      (4)   Placement of buildings, parking lots, driveways, pedestrian
connections, drainage areas, and amenities;
      (5)   Public rights-of-way;
      (6)   Illustrative architectural designs. This plan will show the general
architectural style or parameters in which all buildings within the plan will
follow;
      (7)   Sign plan. This plan will articulate the location of all monument
and directional signage, as well as a calculation of the maximum signage on the
proposed structures;
      (8)   Additional information as required by the zoning district in which
the development will occur; and
      (9)   A narrative containing the following information:
         (a)   Anticipated mix of uses and approximate area/number of each use.
         (b)   Anticipated completion schedule.
   (C)   Environmental review may be necessary as required by Minn. Rules
Chapter 44110. The environmental review and development plan review process may
run concurrently with each other, provided that final approval of the plan does
not precede the City Council's approval of the environmental review.
   (D)   In addition to the other application materials, the applicant provides
a general plan of development, consisting, at a minimum, of the components
specified in the district provisions and those required for a conditional use
permit in compliance with §
152.305. The city has the right to approve, or refuse items in the application.
   (E)   Amendments and revocation must follow the procedures for site plan
review and revocations as outlined in §
152.303.
   (F)   Duration. A concept, regulating or development plan is in effect for
five years from the date of approval.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.305 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.3595, the purpose of this section is
to provide regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the
review and approval, or denial, of proposed conditional uses.
   (B)   Applicability. Only the specific uses classified as "conditional" in
the zoning district where the property is located may qualify for a conditional
use permit.
   (C)   Review authority. The Planning Commission shall review and make
recommendation to City Council. The City Council shall have the review and
approval authority to grant conditional use permits.
   (D)   Review standards. The Planning Commission and City Council shall
consider the following factors when making its determination on a conditional
use permit application:
      (1)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   Traffic generation, volume, and safety associated with the use and
driveway location on adjacent roads, sidewalks, and trail connections;
      (3)   The characteristics of the parking area of the use, including the
number and design of parking spaces, landscaping, traffic circulation,
drainage, and lighting;
      (4)   The provision of adequate public infrastructure to the site where
the use is proposed;
      (5)   The ability to screen and buffer incompatible off-site impacts of
the proposed use on adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood;
      (6)   The degree that the site or building associated with the proposed
use meets or exceed the architectural design standards for the district in
which it is located; and
      (7)   Compliance with any other applicable section of this chapter or the
city code.
   (E)   Conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City
Council may impose, reasonable conditions relating to this chapter. Such
conditions must be related to the purpose of the chapter and be based on
factual evidence. The city may, however, impose conditions that are additional
to or above those standards contained in this chapter.
   (F)   Permit issuance. Conditional use permits shall be issued by resolution
of the City Council and shall include the legal description of the property
included.
   (G)   Recordation. A certified copy of all conditional use permits shall be
recorded with the Hennepin County Recorder prior to issuance of a building
permit.
   (H)   Construction. No building or grading permit can be issued except in
compliance with the conditions of the conditional use permit.
   (I)   Duration. The conditional use permit remains with the property as long
as the property and use comply with the conditions attached to the permit by
the City Council.
   (J)   Certification. Upon request by the City Manager, the holder of a
conditional use permit certifies that the use, building, and site are in
conformance with the conditional use permit and city codes, in conjunction with
§
152.204. The City Manager may maintain copies of the city policy concerning
certification.
   (K)   Revocation.
      (1)   The city may revoke a conditional use permit if there is not
substantial compliance with conditions. The revocation must be based upon
factual evidence, after appropriate notice and public hearing per §
152.302.
      (2)   If the city finds that exigent circumstances exist requiring
immediate permit revocation, the city may revoke the permit and provides a post
revocation hearing before the City Council not more than 15 days after holder's
receipt of written notice of the hearing. Following such hearing, the City
Council may sustain or rescind the revocation, or may impose such other and
further discipline as it deems appropriate.
      (3)   Any decision to impose a penalty or other discipline must be in
writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
   (L)   Amendment. Holders of a conditional use permit may propose amendments
to the approved permit at any time, subject to the procedures of §
152.302, except where administrative site plan review may be granted as
outlined in §
152.303(G).
   (M)   Changes in zoning classification. In the event a property is rezoned
to a district where the use becomes permitted, or a text amendment makes the
use permitted in the zoning district, the conditional use permit is voided.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.306 INTERIM USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of interim use permits is:
      (1)   To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent
location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.
      (2)   To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City
Council, but that with anticipated development or redevelopment will not be
acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or
conditional use allowed within the respective district.
      (3)   To allow a use that complies with the Comprehensive Plan, provided
that said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is
in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing
uses and development.
   (B)   Applicability. An interim use permit applies to those uses that fit
the criteria of division (A), above.
   (C)   Review standards. The Planning Commission and City Council shall
consider the following factors when making its determination on an interim use
permit application:
      (1)   The use conforms to the zoning regulations;
      (2)   The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified
with certainty;
      (3)   Permission of the use will not impose additional costs on the
public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the future;
and
      (4)   The user agrees to any conditions that the governing body deems
appropriate for permission of the use.
   (D)   Conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City
Council may impose, reasonable conditions relating to this chapter. Such
conditions must be related to the purpose of the chapter and be based on
factual evidence. The city may, however, impose conditions that are additional
to or above those standards contained in this chapter.
   (E)   Duration. An interim use permit shall terminate on the happening of
any of the following events, whichever occurs first:
      (1)   The date stated in the interim use permit;
      (2)   Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued;
      (3)   Upon change in the city's zoning regulations, which render the use
non-conforming; or
      (4)   The redevelopment of the use and property.
   (F)   Changes in zoning classification. In the event a property is rezoned
to a district where the use becomes permitted, or a text amendment makes the
use permitted in the zoning district, the interim use permit is voided.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.307 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Purpose. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 6, as it may be amended
from time to time, the City Council, acting as a Board of Appeals and
Adjustments, may issue variances from the provisions of this zoning code. A
variance is a modification or variation of the provisions of this zoning code
as applied to a specific piece of property.
   (B)   Review standards.
      (1)   Variances shall only be permitted:
         (a)   When they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of
the chapter; and
         (b)   When the variances are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   Variances may be granted when the applicant for the variance
establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with the zoning
code. Practical difficulties, as used in connection with the granting of a
variance, means that:
         (a)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by this chapter;
         (b)   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property not created by the landowner;
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality;
         (d)   Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties; and
         (e)   Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
   (C)   Conditions. The City Council may impose conditions in the granting of
variances. A condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance. No building permit may
be issued except in compliance with the conditions of the variance.
   (D)   Variances for communication towers.
      (1)   Initial criteria. The City Council may grant a variance to the
setback, separation or buffer requirements, and/or maximum height provision of
this subdivision based on the criteria set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
      (2)   Additional criteria. In addition to taking the criteria set forth
in §
152.1026 into consideration, the City Council may also grant a variance if the
applicant demonstrates with written or other satisfactory evidence that:
         (a)   The location, shape, appearance or nature of the use of the
proposed tower will not substantially detract from the aesthetics of the area
nor change the character of the neighborhood in which the tower is proposed to
be located;
         (b)   The variance will not create a threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare;
         (c)   If the request is for a modification to the setbacks, the size
of the parcel upon which the tower is proposed to be located makes compliance
impossible, and the only alternative for the applicant is to locate the tower
at another site that poses a greater threat to the public health, safety or
welfare or is closer in proximity to residentially zoned land;
         (d)   If the request is for a modification of separation requirements,
the applicant must provide technical evidence from an engineer that the
proposed tower and antennas must be located at the proposed site in order to
meet the coverage needs of the applicant's wireless communications system. The
applicant must also submit a landscape plan showing buffers to screen the tower
base from being visible from a residential area; and
         (e)   If the request is for modification of the maximum height limit,
the applicant must provide evidence documented by a qualified professional
engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota, showing the modification is
necessary to facilitate collocation of telecommunication antennas and ground
equipment to avoid the construction of a new tower, or to meet the coverage
requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.308 [RESERVED].
§ 152.309 ZONING TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section specifies the procedures for text amendments to
this chapter or the amendments to the official zoning map.
   (B)   Initiation. Amendments may be initiated by a simple majority of the
City Council or Planning Commission. Any person owning property within the
city, or their designated agent, may initiate an application to amend the
district boundaries or designation on the official zoning map for property in
which they have a real estate interest.
   (C)   Procedures. The procedures for application and public hearing of
zoning amendment applications are described in §
152.302.
   (D)   Effective date. Any amendment to this chapter adopted by the City
Council may be effective 30 calendar days after its publication or at such
later date as may be specified in the amendment.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.310 DEVELOPMENT CONTRACTS, FINANCIAL GUARANTEES, AND CASH ESCROWS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a development contract is to guarantee
satisfactory completion of public and private improvements and otherwise
document the terms of subject development projects. The contract provides the
city and the developer with assurances, thereby providing more certainty in the
land development process.
   (B)   Development contract.
      (1)   A development contract, incorporating any conditions or
requirements imposed on the applicant must be executed by and between the City
Council and the applicant before a building or grading permit can be issued for
any development project that includes public off-site and private on-site
improvements, including, but not limited to earthwork, erosion control, site
utilities, curb, gutter, walks, paving, striping, landscaping, irrigation, sign
monuments and site lighting.
      (2)   The development contract shall be prepared by the city and may be
reviewed by the City Attorney. The agreement shall define the required work,
reflect the terms, and guarantee the performance of the work by the applicant.
   (C)   Escrow.
      (1)   An engineering/administrative escrow must be paid and held in a
non-interest-bearing city escrow account to be used to cover costs of city
services, expenses, and materials provided in reviewing and processing an
application. This includes, but is not limited to staff time, legal expenses
incurred in the application approval, office and field checking, and similar
expenses.
      (2)   For projects that include public off-site improvements, the
engineering/ administrative escrow must be 6.5% of the estimated costs of the
project, but not less than $1,000. For projects with only on-site private
improvements, the cash escrow account shall be 3% of the estimated project cost
but not less than $1,000.
      (3)   If at any time the balance of the engineering/administrative escrow
account is depleted to less than 5% of the originally required cash escrow
amount, the applicant must deposit additional funds in the account sufficient
to cover all costs to be incurred by the city.
   (D)   Financial guarantee.
      (1)   Any financial guarantee required by the development contract
guarantees conformance and compliance with the conditions of the application
approval and the ordinances of the city. If the conditions are not met, the
financial guarantees may be forfeited to the city to cure the default or
reimburse the city the cost of enforcement measures.
      (2)   The amount of the financial guarantee must be established by the
city, based upon an itemized estimate of the cost of all required work as
documented by the applicant.
         (a)   An irrevocable letter of credit or similar financial security as
approved by the City Attorney must be posted with the city in the amount of 95%
of the approved estimated cost. This financial security must be automatically
renewed and shall not expire until released by the city.
         (b)   The remaining 5% of the approved estimated costs must be posted
with the city in cash to be held in a non-interest-bearing city account.
      (3)   Upon completion and city acceptance of the project, any remaining
financial securities must be returned to the depositor by the Finance
Department after all claims and charges have been paid and following approval
by City Council.
         (a)   If part of a project has been completed, inspected, and accepted
by the city, the financial securities posted may be reduced by the city and
partial payment be returned to the applicant.
         (b)   Landscaping improvements may not be deemed complete until the
city has verified survivability of all required plantings through two winter
seasons, which is defined for the purpose of this chapter as October 31 through
May 31.
      (4)   The city may hold the financial guarantee until the project is
completed and approved by the city.
         (a)   The financial guarantee can only be released by the City
Council.
         (b)   Periodically, the amount of the financial guarantee may be
reduced by the City Council based on the projects progress, as determined by
the city.
         (c)   Reduction and release actions will only be initiated after
proper request from the applicant.
      (5)   Failure to comply with the conditions of the application approval,
the development contract, or a city ordinance may result in forfeiture of the
financial guarantee to the extent necessary to achieve the project's total
compliance with the approved site plan.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.311 RELOCATING STRUCTURES.
   All relocated structures must meet the requirements of the district in which
they will be located. In addition, the applicant provides the following:
   (A)   A report from the Building Official which specifies, at a minimum:
      (1)   The improvements to the house that may be required for the
structure to meet all applicable, current codes, based on an inspection;
      (2)   If the applicant's submitted plans will successfully meet the
required improvements; and
      (3)   If the sewer and water connections have been plugged or
discontinued at the curb line or at the main and that all other hazards have
been eliminated.
   (B)   Evidence that all taxes and sewer and water charges have been paid
against the property the structure is being relocated.
   (C)   A signed development contract stating that the applicant has agreed to
complete the necessary changes specified by the City Manager within a period of
one year, and a performance bond or cash deposit in compliance with §
152.310.
   (D)   Evidence that the applicant has secured the necessary permits or
permission for the displacement of any overhead electrical or other wires from
the person, association, or corporation that owns, operates, or controls the
wires.
   (E)   Evidence that the applicant or their designated person, firm or
corporation engaged in moving structures has a license, in compliance with
Section 445, before moving any structure over streets controlled by the city.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.312 SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose. Provide regulations which govern the procedure and
requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed events or
activities.
   (B)   Review authority. The City Manager shall have the review and approval
authority to grant special event permits.
   (C)   Review standards. The City Manager may consider possible adverse
effects of the proposed events or activities based on the following factors:
      (1)   Compliance with and effect upon the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   Compliance with §
152.905(G);
      (3)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the event or
activity will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, or comfort;
      (4)   The event or activity will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood;
      (5)   The establishment of the event or activity will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district;
      (6)   Adequate public facilities and services are available or can be
reasonably provided to accommodate the event or activity which is proposed;
      (7)   The event or activity may, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located as outlined in
the applicable sections of this chapter; and
      (8)   The event or activity and site conform to the performance standards
as outlined in the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Permit issuance.
      (1)   The City Manager shall approve or deny the special event permit
within 30 days from the date of submission of a complete application.
      (2)   A written permit may be issued when a determination of compliance
has been made. Specific conditions to assure compliance with applicable
evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and the standards of this chapter must
be attached to the permit.
      (3)   Determination of the applications non-compliance with applicable
codes, ordinances, and the standards in this division shall be communicated to
the applicant in writing and the application for the permit may be considered
denied, unless, within ten days of the date of such notice, the applicant
submits revised plans and/or information with which the City Manager is able to
determine compliance.
   (D)   Revocation. A special event permit may be revoked by the City Manager
or by an officer of the Brooklyn Park Police Department if it is determined
that the applicant has violated any conditions of the administrative permit,
any applicable provisions of the city code, or any applicable provisions of
state or federal law.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
ZONING DISTRICTS
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 152.400 PURPOSE.
   The area located within the jurisdiction of this chapter is hereby divided
into zoning districts of such number as is necessary to achieve compatibility
of land uses within each district, to implement the Comprehensive Plan, and to
achieve the other purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.401 ZONING DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, all areas within the jurisdiction of this
chapter are hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
   (A)   Residential districts. The residential districts are intended to
balance housing type, choice, affordability, connectivity, style, and promote
neighborhood stability and livability. The following residential zoning
districts are hereby established within the city:
      (1)   UR Urban Reserve District;
      (2)   R-1 Detached Single-Family District;
      (3)   R-2 Detached Single-Family District;
      (4)   R-3 Detached Single-Family and Two-Family District;
      (5)   R-4 Multiple Family Residential District; and
      (6)   R-5 Multiple Family Residential District.
   (B)   Nonresidential Districts. The business districts as a whole are
designed to balance the community need for employment opportunities, goods,
services, and tax base diversification with their impact on neighboring uses.
The following business zoning classifications are hereby established within the
city.
      (1)   B-1 Office Park District;
      (2)   B-2 Neighborhood Business District;
      (3)   B-3 General Business District;
      (4)   B-4 Vehicle Sales and Showroom District;
      (5)   BP Business Park District;
      (6)   I General Industrial District;
      (7)   PI Public Institution District; and
      (8)   OP Open Space and Parks District.
   (C)   Mixed Use Districts.
      (1)   LW Live Work District;
      (2)   NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District;
      (3)   MU Mixed Use District;
      (4)   TOD-C Transit Oriented Development - Center District;
      (5)   TOD-E Transit Oriented Development - Employment District; and
      (6)   TOD-G Transit Oriented Development - Greenfield District.
   (D)   Overlay Districts.
      (1)   CAZ Crystal Airport;
      (2)   FHO Flood Hazard Overlay;
      (3)   MRCCA Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area Overlay;
      (4)   PD Planned Development Overlay; and
      (5)   PPOD Pedestrian Priority Overlay District.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.402 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   This chapter divides the city into use districts and establishes
regulations in regard to location, erection, construction, re-construction,
alteration, and use of structures and land. The location and boundaries of the
districts established by this text are set forth on the zoning map or the
zoning overlay map entitled "City of Brooklyn Park Zoning Map" and the "City of
Brooklyn Park Zoning Overlay Map," and referred to as the "zoning map" and the
"zoning overlay map." Both maps are on file with the City Manager. The zoning
map and the zoning overlay map and all the notations, references and other
information shown on them have the same force and effect as if fully set forth
in this chapter and made a part of this chapter by reference.
   (B)   The district boundary lines on the zoning map are intended to follow
street right-of-way lines, the center line of streets, or lot lines unless a
boundary line is otherwise indicated on the map. In the case of unsubdivided
property or in any case where street or lot lines are not used as boundaries,
the district boundary lines may be determined by use of dimensions or the scale
appearing on the map.
   (C)   All Flood Hazard Overlay boundary decisions will be based on
elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile and other available
technical data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries may
be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of Appeals
and Adjustments and to submit technical evidence as defined in §
152.302.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
Residential Districts
§ 152.500 UR URBAN RESERVE DISTRICT.
   (A)   The UR Urban Reserve District is intended to provide the following:
      (1)   The orderly phasing and development of land until city services,
including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water, are extended into the area in
compliance with the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   A district for uses that typically require significant amounts of
open land area such as athletic and cultural facilities, country clubs,
government buildings, educational uses, and land reclamation; and
      (3)   Short-term agriculture uses, very low-density residential uses, and
those accessory uses customarily incidental to them.
   (B)   The district may be applied only to those areas guided as an urban
reserve area in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.501 R-1 DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY ESTATE DISTRICT.
   (A)   The R-1 Detached Single-Family Estate District is intended to provide
a district which allows for larger lot detached single-family dwellings and for
uses customarily incidental to them.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for low
density residential development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.502 R-2 DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT.
   (A)   The R-2 Detached Single-Family District is intended to provide a
district which allows for smaller lot detached single-family dwellings and for
uses customarily incidental to them.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for low
density residential development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.503 R-3 DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT.
   (A)   The R-3 Detached Single and Attached Two-Family District is intended
to provide a district which allows for detached single and attached two-family
dwellings and for uses customarily incidental to them.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for medium
density residential development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.504 R-4 MULTIPLE FAMILY DISTRICT.
   (A)   The R-4 Multiple Family District is intended to provide a district
which allows for three story multiple family structures or attached townhomes
and for uses customarily incidental to them.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for medium or
medium-high density residential development on the Comprehensive Plan Future
Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.505 R-5 MULTIPLE FAMILY DISTRICT.
   (A)   The R-5 Multiple Family District is intended to provide a district
which allows for multiple family dwellings three stories or taller and for uses
customarily incidental to them.
   (B)   This district may only be applied to those areas guided for high
density residential development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.506 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum area and
dimensional requirements for residential properties to allow conformance with
the residential densities and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, promote open
space around structures, provide green area and space for enjoyment by
residents, and protect public easements.
   (B)   General requirements. The following standards are established for all
lots in the residential zoning districts.
      (1)   Lot area, width, and coverage.
         (a)   No required lot area, yard, or open space allocated to a
structure or lot in compliance with this chapter may be used to satisfy the
minimum lot area, yard, or open space requirement for any other structure or
lot, unless modified by this chapter.
         (b)   The minimum lot areas and lot widths contained in this section
do not apply to lot splits along the common wall where an existing two-family
dwelling is being converted into two separate attached single-family dwellings.
TABLE 152.506.1 REQUIRED MINIMUM LOT AREA, WIDTH, AND COVERAGE IN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
                          Lot width in
District Minimum lot area lineal feet as  Maximum impervious  Maximum building
                          measured at the area in front yards footprint
                          front setback
TABLE 152.506.1 REQUIRED MINIMUM LOT AREA, WIDTH, AND COVERAGE IN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
                           Lot width in      Maximum
District Minimum lot area  lineal feet as    impervious area Maximum building
                           measured at the   in front yards  footprint
                           front setback
UR       20 acres          330 ft.           40%             40%
R-1      9,750 sq. ft.     75 ft.            40%             40%
R-2      7,250 sq. ft.     50 ft.            40%             40%
         5,000 sq. ft.     60 ft. (detached)
R-3      (detached)                          40%             40%
         3,600 sq. ft.     40 ft. (per unit
         (attached)        attached)
         22,000 sq. ft.
         for multiple      100 ft.
         dwellings
R-4      3,600 sq. ft. lot                   40%             40%
         equivalent or     N/A
         average per unit
         for townhomes
R-5      22,000 sq. ft.    120 ft.           40%             40%
 
      (2)   Setbacks. Setbacks for each residential zone are defined in Table
152.506.2.
         (a)   All residential units must be constructed at the required
setback or no more than ten feet greater than the setback line as established
in the respective zoning district. For infill development in residential
neighborhoods that do not conform to these setbacks, the minimum setback line
is the average depth of the adjacent properties.
         (b)   If an attached garage has living space constructed above it, the
side setback must not be less than five feet on the garage side of the lot.
TABLE 152.506.2 REQUIRED SETBACKS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 District
 UR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
TABLE 152.506.2 REQUIRED SETBACKS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
                                                          District
                                                          UR  R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Front setback
Principal and “A” or “B” minor arterials          50  50  50  50  50  50
                                                          ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. ft.
All other public streets                                  25  25  25  25  20  10
                                                          ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. ft.
Side setback
Interior lots                                             10  7.5 10  10  10  15
                                                          ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. ft.
Corner lots- along principal and “A” or “B” minor 50  Front setback   25
arterials                                                 ft. of the adjacent ft.
                                                              property
Corner lots- All other public streets when the adjacent   20  20  20  20  20  10
lot does not front the side street                        ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. ft.
Rear setback
Principal “A” and “B” minor arterial and Class I  50  50  50  50  50  10
collectors                                                ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. ft.
All other public streets and interior property lines      30  25  25  25  25  10
                                                          ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. ft.
                                                          Same as the front
                                                          setback of any      10
Double frontage lots                                      adjacent            ft.
                                                          residential zoned
                                                          properties
Note: Refer to §
152.1001 for accessory structure setbacks.
 
      (3)   Setback encroachments.
         (a)   The following features may extend three feet into the minimum
front, back, or rear setback, provided there is no encroachment into existing
easements:
            1.   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, sills, pilasters, lintels.
            2.   Ornamental features like cornices, eaves, bays, gutters, and
other similar projections.
         (b)   Accessible building entrance components may encroach into the
setback to meet the running slopes required by the Minnesota Accessibility
Code.
         (c)   The following are considered a permitted encroachments into the
front setback provided they extend no more than six feet beyond the setback
line: balconies and porches, steps, stoops, and the like provided they do not
have a floor higher than the entrance floor to the building and are not
enclosed with windows, screens, or the like, although they may have a roof.
         (d)   Sidewalks, driveways, and parking areas are not considered
encroachments when in compliance with §
152.1019.
         (e)   Handicap access ramps may encroach into the front setback to
meet the running slopes required by the Minnesota Accessibility Code.
         (f)   The following may not be closer than five feet from interior lot
lines and 20 feet from public rights-of-way unless further restricted elsewhere
in this chapter:
            1.   Accessory features, excluding retaining walls;
            2.   Accessory structures;
            3.   Driveways and vehicle parking areas;
            4.   Solar collectors;
            5.   Balconies, breezeways, gazebos, decks, patios;
            6.   Screened porches, and three season porches; and
            7.   Private outdoor recreational equipment.
   (C)   Height.
 
TABLE 152.506.3 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Use                              Maximum Height
Single, two-family, and townhome 3 stories or 40 ft.
dwellings
Multiple family dwellings        6 stories or 75 ft.
Non-residential in a residential 3 stores or 40 ft.
district*
                                 Personal radio and television antennas,
Exemptions**                     spires, bell towers, carillons, steeples,
                                 and flag poles.
Notes:
   *May exceed height restriction by 150% as approved by City Council at
time of approval of site plan review or conditional use permit upon
satisfactory demonstration that the proposal includes mitigation of any
off-site impacts.
   **May exceed the three stories or 40 foot height limitations by 125%
with a conditional use permit.
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.507 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT LAND USES.
   (A)   Purpose. Establish a listing of the permitted, conditional, accessory,
and temporary uses for the residential zoning districts. The uses have been
allocated to the individual districts to allow reasonable use of properties in
a manner that is compatible with the purpose of each residential zoning
district and the overall purpose of this zoning code and the code of
ordinances.
   (B)   Principal permitted and conditional land uses for each residential
zone listed in Table 152.507.1. See §
152.900 for additional performance standards for residential uses.
   (C)   Temporary uses must meet all requirements established in §
152.303.
TABLE 152.507.1 PRINCIPAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
              Zoning District
Principal Use UR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
TABLE 152.507.1 PRINCIPAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
                                                       Zoning District
Principal Use                                          UR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Single family (detached)                               P  P   P   P   NP  NP
Two-family (attached)*                                 NP NP  P   P   P   NP
Townhouse (attached or detached)*                      NP NP  NP  P   P   P
Multifamily                                            NP NP  NP  NP  P   P
Manufactured home park                                 NP NP  NP  NP  C   NP
Care centers, convalescent homes, assisted living      NP NP  NP  NP  C   C
Bed and breakfast establishment                        C  C   C   C   NP  NP
Essential services                                     P  P   P   P   P   P
Daycare facility (13-16 persons)                       NP NP  NP  NP  P   P
Farming and cultivation of agricultural products       P  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP
Office related to leasing, renting, and maintenance of P  P   P   P   P   P
multiple family dwellings and townhouses
Public and utility facilities                          P  P   P   P   P   P
Religious assembly*                                    P  P   P   P   P   P
Residential, facility, licensed (6 or fewer persons)   P  P   P   P   NP  NP
Residential facility, licensed (7-15 persons)          NP NP  NP  NP  C   C
Soil processing and mining                             C  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP
P- Permitted A- Accessory C- Conditional T- Temporary NP- Not Permitted
*Additional standards required by §
152.900 or as indicated in this table.
 
TABLE 152.507.2 ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
              Zoning District
Accessory Use UR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
TABLE 152.507.2 ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
                                                                     Zoning District
Accessory Use                                                        UR R- R- R- R- R-
                                                                        1  2  3  4  5
Antennas and satellite dishes*                                       A  A  A  A  C  C
Beekeeping (in compliance with Chapter 92)                           A  A  A  A  A  A
Commercial recreational facility (privately owned)                   C  NP NP NP NP NP
Community garden*                                                    A  A  A  A  A  A
Construction debris dumpster (oversize)*                             T  T  T  T  T  T
Day care facility (12 or fewer persons)*                             P  P  P  P  P  NP
Day care facility in schools and religious institutions*             P  P  P  P  P  P
Domesticated and farm animals                                        A  NP NP NP NP NP
Garage sales*                                                        T  T  T  T  T  T
Gas/fuel tanks (above ground)                                        A  A  A  A  A  A
Ground source heat pump systems in compliance with §                P  P  P  P  P  P
152.1002
Home vocations and avocations in compliance with §                  P  P  P  P  P  NP
152.901
Live/work uses within a dwelling unit                                P  P  P  P  P  P
Outside storage of agricultural equipment                            T  T  T  T  T  NP
Outside storage of recreational vehicles*                            T  T  T  T  T  NP
Parking ramp in compliance with §                                   N  NP NP NP C  C
152.1019
Parks and playgrounds, open spaces, natural areas                    A  A  A  A  A  A
Private residential recreational equipment                           A  A  A  A  A  A
Schools located within religious institutions*                       C  C  C  C  C  C
Sale of agricultural products grown on the property                  A  A  A  A  A  A
Sale of residential motor vehicles and recreational vehicles*        T  T  T  T  T  T
Satellite dish                                                       A  A  A  A  A  A
Seasonal greenhouse and garden center                                C  NP NP NP NP NP
Detached accessory structure*                                        A  A  A  A  A  A
Solar energy system in compliance with §                            A  A  A  A  A  A
152.1002
Telecommunication tower*                                             C  C  C  C  C  C
Portable storage containers                                          T  T  T  T  T  T
Residential wind turbine (vertical axis only) in compliance with §  A  A  A  A  A  A
152.1002
P- Permitted A- Accessory C- Conditional T- Temporary NP- Not Permitted
*Additional standards required by
152.902 or as indicated in this table.
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
Nonresidential Districts
§ 152.600 B-1 OFFICE PARK DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The B-1 Office Park District is intended to provide a
district primarily for office uses, with other accessory retail and service
uses offered on site to serve the primary use or their employees.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties designated for
employment, or commercial, development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land
Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.601 B-2 NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The B-2 Neighborhood Retail Business District is intended to
provide a district which encourages compact centers for retail sales and
services that serve the adjacent neighborhoods and to preserve and protect the
general character of the adjacent areas. The city has determined that certain
uses may present a greater impact on adjacent land uses than others due to
characteristics unique to the function and design of the particular use.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties designated for
commercial development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.302 B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The B-3 General Business District is intended to provide
centralized areas for businesses that have a community or regional customer
base in that they generally draw customers from farther away than the adjacent
neighborhoods.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties designated for
commercial development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.603 B-4 VEHICLE SALES AND SHOWROOM DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The B-4 Vehicle Sales and Showroom District is intended to
provide areas for vehicle sales businesses that draw from a regional customer
base and has outdoor storage, display and/or sales of vehicles and/or
recreational equipment.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties designated for
commercial development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.604 BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The BP Business Park District is designed to provide areas in
which to locate businesses that enhance the city's tax base, have few customers
coming to the site, but may have a large employee base, involve manufacturing,
warehousing, office uses, and other accessory retail and service uses offered
on site to service the primary use or their employees. The properties and
buildings in this district must be designed to promote a campus-like setting
that exhibits a landscape theme and high-quality exterior building materials.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties designated for
business park development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.605 I GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The I General Industrial District is designed to provide a
district for warehousing and industrial uses that may present negative off-site
impacts to adjacent properties and are potentially environmentally sensitive
due to the characteristics of the use of the property, and may have outdoor
storage requirements.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas designated for
industrial development on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.606 PI PUBLIC INSTITUTION DISTRICT.
   (A)   The PI Public Institution District is intended to provide for a
district for public buildings, uses and needs that otherwise may not fit into
other zoning districts because of their specialized land use needs and public
purpose.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties designated for
institutional uses on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.607 OP OPEN SPACES AND PARKS DISTRICT.
   (A)   The OP Open Space and Parks District is intended to provide for a
district for areas that contain valuable environmental qualities which are to
be preserved as park or open space amenities and to prevent the over-crowding
of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, a specific public purpose,
and/or alleviate the burden of development from environmentally sensitive
lands.
   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties designated for
parks or open space uses on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.608 NONRESIDENTIAL LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum area and
dimensional requirements for nonresidential zoning districts to allow
conformance with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan, promote open space
around structures, provide green area and space for the enjoyment of all, and
protect public easements.
   (B)   General requirements. The following standards are established for the
following districts: B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, BP, I, PI, and OP:
      (1)   Unless otherwise approved through a site plan approval all non-
residential uses on parcels adjacent to single or two-story residential uses in
residential districts must be constructed at a height no greater than 40 feet.
Consideration to approve greater height may include, but not limited to,
existing conditions, increased setbacks, and buffering.
      (2)   Height limitations do not apply to radio and T.V. antennas,
belfries, steeples, cooling towers, and water towers.
      (3)   The minimum height for a principal building on any property must be
no less than 15 feet in height as measured from the highest adjacent grade to
the top of the roof.
      (4)   In the PI district, for each one foot greater than 60 feet of
building height, as measured from the highest adjacent grade to the top of the
roof, the required front, side, and rear setbacks must be increased one foot.
TABLE 152.608.1 MINIMUM ALLOWABLE BUILDING FOOTPRINT AND MAXIMUM
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
 Zoning District
 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 BP I PI OP
TABLE 152.608.1 MINIMUM ALLOWABLE BUILDING FOOTPRINT AND MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS
SURFACE
            Zoning District
            B-1     B-2     B-3     B-4        BP         I          PI     OP
Minimum lot 15,000  25,000  25,000  87,120 sq. 25,000 sq. 40,000 sq. N/A    N/A
area        sq. ft. sq. ft. sq. ft. ft.        ft.        ft.
Lot width   100 ft. 125 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft.    100 ft.    150 ft.    N/A    N/A
Minimum
building
footprint   N/A     N/A     N/A     10%        N/A        N/A        N/A    N/A
(as a
percent of
lot area)
Maximum
impervious
surface (as 70%     75%     80%     80%        85%        85%        N/A    N/A
a percent
of lot
area)
Maximum
height when
adjacent to 40 ft.  40 ft.  40 ft.  40 ft.     40 ft.     40 ft.     60 ft. N/A
residential
use
 
      (5)   Principal buildings and accessory structures must comply with the
setback restrictions from property lines within the nonresidential districts.
See Table 152.608.2.
      (6)   The setback to an interior side or rear property line(s) may be
reduced to zero feet where a property has a railroad trackage abutting the
interior side of the lot.
      (7)   The following features may extend into the required setback from a
public right-of-way:
         (a)   Three-feet pilasters, lintels, stoops, ornamental features,
cornices, eaves, bays, gutters, and similar projections; and
         (b)   Canopies, awnings, and other similar features as regulated by
the International Building Code. These elements may extend into the right-of-
way upon approval of an encroachment agreement by the City Council.
      (8)   Accessible building entrance components may encroach into the
setback to meet the running slopes required by the Minnesota Accessibility
Code.
 
TABLE 152.608.2 MINIMUM REQUIRED SETBACKS (IN FEET)
                                                Zoning District
                                                B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 BP  I   PI OP
Front (abutting public right-of-way)            0   0   0   50  10  50  10 10
Side (interior)                                 0   0   0   15  15  15  10 10
Rear (interior)                                 30  30  30  30  30  30  10 10
Side or rear if abutting a residential district 50  75  75  75  110 110 50 50
property line
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.609 NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT LAND USES.
   (A)   Purpose. The following section establishes a listing of the permitted,
conditional, and temporary uses for the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, BP, I, PI, and OP
zoning districts. The uses have been assigned to the appropriate business
districts to allow reasonable use of properties in a manner that is compatible
with the purpose of each business zoning district and the overall purpose of
this zoning code and the code of ordinances.
   (B)   Permitted and conditional uses for each business district are defined
in the following listed in Table 152.609.1. See §
152.903 for additional performance standards for nonresidential uses.
TABLE 152.609.1 PRINCIPAL USES IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Use Zoning District
    B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 BP I PI OP
TABLE 152.609.1 PRINCIPAL USES IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Use                                                                 Zoning District
                                                                    B- B- B- B- BP I  PI OP
                                                                    1  2  3  4
Sales and service
Animal services                                                     NP P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
   Outdoor pet runs*+                                            NP NP A  A  A  A  A  NP
Bank                                                                P  P  P  P  P  P  P  NP
Body art                                                            NP P  P  NP NP NP NP NP
Care center, convalescent home or assisted living                   C  C  C  C  NP NP NP NP
Living
Currency exchange and pawn shop*                                    NP NP C  NP NP NP NP NP
Daycare facility, licensed*                                         PA PA PA PA PA PA PA NP
General sales*                                                      P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
General services                                                    P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Hospital                                                            NP NP C  C  C  C  NP NP
Hotel or motel                                                      NP C  C  C  C  NP NP NP
Indoor recreational facility 2,450 sq. ft. or under                 NP P  P  P  P  P  A  NP
Indoor recreational facility over 2,450 sq. ft.                     NP C  C  C  C  C  A  NP
Medical or dental clinic                                            P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Multiple family dwelling and cluster housing in compliance with §  NP C  C  NP NP NP NP NP
152.1003
Office                                                              P  P  P  P  P  P  P  NP
Outdoor recreational facility                                       NP C  C  C  NP NP P  C
Self service storage                                                NP NP C  C  NP C  NP NP
Sexually oriented business*                                         NP NP P  NP NP NP NP NP
Transient sales*+                                                   A  A  A  A  A  A  A  NP
Theater, excluding drive-ins                                        NP C  C  C  NP NP NP NP
Veterinary clinic                                                   P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Farmer s market*+                                                   A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
Automotive
Auto repair services                                                NP NP C  C  C  C  NP NP
Automobile sales and showrooms                                      NP NP NP C  NP NP NP NP
Bus or truck storage, service shops                                 NP NP NP NP NP C  NP NP
Car wash                                                            NP NP C  C  C  NP NP NP
Fabrication/ assembly of heavy equipment or vehicles                NP NP NP NP NP C  NP NP
Fuel stations and gas sales*                                        NP C  C  C  C  C  NP NP
   Propane exchanges*+                                           NP C  C  NP C  C  NP NP
Motor vehicle rental                                                NP C  C  C  NP NP NP NP
Parking ramp                                                        NP NP C  NP C  C  C  NP
Vehicle impound yard                                                NP NP NP NP NP C  NP NP
Truck or motor freight terminal                                     NP NP NP NP NP C  NP NP
Wholesale broker, auction dealer of motor vehicles                  P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Overnight recreational vehicle parking or camping*+                 NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Repair of vehicles (accessory to a vehicle sale business)*+         NP NP NP C  NP NP NP NP
Assembly
Banquet, convention hall or conference center                       NP C  C  C  NP NP NP NP
Night club                                                          NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Funeral home and mortuary                                           C  C  C  C  C  C  C  NP
   Crematory/ crematorium*+                                      A  A  A  A  NP NP C  NP
Religious institution                                               C  C  C  C  C  C  C  NP
   Rectory*+                                                     C  C  C  C  C  C  C  NP
   Columbarium*+                                                 C  C  C  C  C  C  C  NP
School                                                              C  C  C  C  C  C  C  NP
Social club                                                         C  C  C  C  C  C  C  NP
Food service
Brewery                                                             NP P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Brewery with a taproom                                              NP P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Cocktail room                                                       NP P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Distillery                                                          NP P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Distillery with a cocktail room                                     NP P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Restaurant                                                          P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Live entertainment in conjunction with a restaurant, brewery or     NP A  A  A  A  A  NP NP
distillery+
Live entertainment in conjunction with a taproom or cocktail room+  NP NP NP NP A  A  NP NP
Live entertainment in conjunction with a restaurant, brewery or     NP NP C  C  C  C  NP NP
distillery where a cover charge is required+
Live entertainment in conjunction with a taproom or cocktail room   NP NP A  A  C  C  NP NP
where a cover charge is required+
Mobile food unit+                                                   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Exterior food and beverage vending machines, ice machines+          A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
Manufacturing, processing, fabricating, brewing, distilling
Construction based business                                         NP NP NP NP NP P  NP NP
   Construction buildings*+                                      P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Distribution center                                                 NP NP NP NP P  P  NP NP
Fabrication                                                         NP NP NP NP P  P  NP NP
Manufacturing                                                       NP NP NP NP P  P  NP NP
Processing                                                          NP NP NP NP P  P  NP NP
Warehouse                                                           A  A  A  A  P  P  NP NP
Outdoor storage                                                     A  A  A  A  A  A  A  NP
Public facilities
Airports and aeronautical uses                                      NP NP NP NP NP NP P  NP
Cemetery*                                                           C  C  C  C  C  C  C  NP
Communication towers and antennas                                   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Parks                                                               P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Public and quasi-public facilities                                  C  C  C  C  C  C  P  P
Essential services (electric, utilities, etc)                       P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Conservation                                                        P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Accessory uses applicable to all non-residential uses
Drive through windows                                               C  C  C  C  C  C  NP NP
Staging area*+                                                      A  A  A  A  A  A  A  NP
Storage shed*+                                                      A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
Waste and recycling storage as regulated in §§
98.01 through                                                       A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
98.16+
Electric fences                                                     NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Salvage                                                             NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Multiple principle structures on a single lot                       C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Cannabis oriented business
Cannabis retailer                                                   P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Medical cannabis retailer                                           P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Cannabis delivery service                                           P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Lower-potency hemp retailer                                         P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Cannabis cultivator                                                 NP NP NP P  P  P  NP NP
Medical cannabis cultivator                                         NP NP NP P  P  P  NP NP
Cannabis event organizer                                            P  P  P  P  P  P  NP NP
Cannabis manufacturer                                               NP NP NP P  P  P  NP NP
Medical cannabis manufacturer                                       NP NP NP P  P  P  NP NP
Lower-potency hemp manufacturer                                     NP NP NP P  P  P  NP NP
Cannabis testing                                                    NP NP NP P  P  P  NP NP
Cannabis wholesaler                                                 NP NP NP P  P  P  NP NP
Cannabis transporter                                                NP NP NP P  P  P  NP NP
Medical cannabis combination business                               NP NP NP P  P  P  NP NP
P- Permitted A- Accessory C- Conditional NP- Not permitted PA- Permitted or Accessory
Note: Uses marked with + are exclusively accessory uses.
*Additional standards required by §
152.903 or as indicated in this table.
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24)
Mixed Use Districts
§ 152.700 LW LIVE WORK DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The LW Live Work District is intended to provide for compact,
pedestrian-oriented mixed-use areas of limited size.
   (B)   Applicability. This district may be applied to those areas guided for
live work uses on the Comprehensive 2040 Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Use mix. The mix of uses should include residential at densities
between three and 12 units per acre as well as small-scale, low intensity
employment uses.
   (D)   Design. Development in these areas shall follow a traditional
neighborhood design where buildings are within a close proximity to the street
and pedestrian connections are abundant. Both horizontal and vertical mixed use
are encouraged in this district.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.701 NMU NEIGHBORHOOD MIXED USE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District is intended to
provide for compact, pedestrian-oriented mixed-use areas of limited size.
   (B)   Applicability. This district may be applied to those areas guided for
neighborhood mixed use on the Comprehensive 2040 Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Use mix. The mix of uses should include residential at densities
between nine and 50 units per acre as well as retail, office and personal
service establishments that are oriented to residents of the immediate
neighborhood areas that anticipate high pedestrian traffic.
   (D)   Design. Development in these areas shall follow a traditional
neighborhood design where buildings are within a close proximity to the street
and pedestrian connections are abundant. Both horizontal and vertical mixed use
are encouraged in this district.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.702 MU MIXED USE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The MU Mixed Use District is intended to provide for compact,
pedestrian-oriented mixed-use areas.
   (B)   Applicability. This district may be applied to those areas guided for
mixed use on the Comprehensive 2040 Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Use mix. The mix of uses should include residential at densities
between 12 and 100 units per acre as well as office, commercial, and retail.
Housing must be an integral component of the overall development and will
encompass at least 30% of the land mass of the district.
   (D)   Design. Development in these areas shall follow a traditional
neighborhood design where buildings are within a close proximity to the street
and pedestrian connections are abundant. Both horizontal and vertical mixed use
are encouraged in this district.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.703 TOD-C TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT CENTER DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The TOD-C Transit Oriented Development Center District is
intended to provide both horizontal and vertical mixed uses in areas near light
rail transit stations or areas with regular frequent transit service.
   (B)   Applicability. This district may be applied to those areas and land
uses within the LRT Overlay on the 2040 Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map
and other areas with frequent transit service.
   (C)   Use mix. The mix of uses may be in a common site, development area, or
building. Individual developments may consist of a mix of two or more
complementary uses that are compatible and connected to the surrounding area.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.704 TOD-E TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The TOD-E Transit Oriented Development Employment District is
intended to provide walkable urbanism with complementary uses in industrial,
warehousing, and office park areas.
   (B)   This district may be applied to those areas and land uses within the
LRT Overlay centered on the 93rd Avenue Transit Station on the Comprehensive
2040 Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.705 TOD-G TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT GREENFIELD DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The TOD-G Transit Oriented Development Greenfield District is
intended to provide standards for new walkable, mixed-use communities.
   (B)   This district may be applied to those areas and land uses within the
LRT Overlay centered on the Oak Grove Transit Station on the 2040 Comprehensive
Plan Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.706 MIXED USE DISTRICT LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum area and
dimensional requirements for mixed use zoning districts to allow conformance
with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Minimum frontage buildout indicates that lots must contain buildings
along the prescribed length of property line.
      (1)   At front streets the minimum frontage buildout is a percentage of
the length of the abutting property line.
      (2)   At side streets the minimum frontage buildout is a specified
distance along the property line from the corner.
      (3)   Facades must be within the minimum and maximum setback.
      (4)   At corner lots the width of the property, for frontage buildout
calculation, may be reduced by the setback of the perpendicular lot line as
indicated by (a) in Figure 152.706.1 below.
   (C)   For buildings subject to a maximum front setback, the area between the
building and the right-of-way will be maintained as city easement for right-of-
way maintenance.
   (D)    Building width is measured at the front setback. The maximum building
width does not apply to buildings with a forecourt frontage type where the
forecourt is wider than 40 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9594.png]
 
   Figure 152.706.1 Minimum Frontage Buildout
   (E)    The follo wing stand ards are establi shed for the follo wing distri
cts: LW, NMU, MU, TOD-C, TOD-E, AND TOD-G.
TABLE 152.706.1
 LW NMU MU TOD-C TOD-E TOD-G
TABLE 152.706.1
            LW         NMU        MU        TOD-C        TOD-E     TOD-G
Maximum building setbacks
From public                                                        Low: 20 ft.
right-of-   None       12 ft.     12 ft.    12 ft.       16 ft.    Med: 16 ft.
way                                                                High: 12 ft.
Side                                                               Low: 6 ft.
(interior)  None       None       None      6 ft.        6 ft.     Med: 16 ft.
                                                                   High: 6 ft.
Side                                                               Low: 20 ft.
(street)    None       None       12 ft.    12 ft.       16 ft.    Med: 15 ft.
                                                                   High: 12 ft.
Minimum building setbacks
Front
(abutting                                                          Low: 8 ft.
public      1 ft.      1 ft.      1 ft.     1 ft.        2 ft.     Med: 1 ft.
right-of-                                                          High: 1 ft.
way)
Side        None       None       None      None         None      None
(interior)
Side                                                               Low: 5 ft.
(street)    2 ft.      2 ft.      2 ft.     2 ft.        2 ft.     Med: 2 ft.
                                                                   High: 2 ft.
Rear        3 ft.      3 ft.      3 ft.     3 ft.        3 ft.     3 ft.
(interior)
Minimum parking setbacks
Front
(abutting
public      30 ft.     30 ft.     30 ft.    30 ft.       30 ft.    30 ft.
right-of-
way)
Side        0 ft. if   0 ft. if             0 ft. if
(interior)  shared, or shared, or 0 ft.     shared, or 5 0 ft.     0 ft.
            5 ft.      5 ft.                ft.
Side        12 ft.     12 ft.     12 ft.    30 ft.       12 ft.    12 ft.
(street)
Rear        0 ft. if   0 ft. if             0 ft. if
(interior)  shared, or shared, or 3 ft.     shared, or 5 3 ft.     3 ft.
            5 ft.      3 ft.                ft.
Side or
rear if
abutting a
residential 10 ft.     10 ft.     N/A       N/A          N/A       N/A
district
property
line
Maximum allowable building footprint and impervious surface
Maximum                                                            Low: 70%
impervious  70%        80%        80%       100%         80%       Med: 80%
surface                                                            High: 100%
Building coverage and building width
Minimum                                                            Low: 60%
frontage    None       80%        80%       80%          70%       Med: 70%
buildout                                                           High: 80%
Side
frontage                                                           Low: 40 ft.
buildout    None       40 ft.     50 ft.    50 ft.       40 ft.    Med: 40 ft.
from front                                                         High: 50 ft.
street
Maximum                                                            Low: 80 ft.
building    400 ft.    400 ft.    400 ft.   400 ft.      400 ft.   Med: 100 ft.
width                                                              High: 400
                                                                   ft.
Minimum                                                            Low: 0.3
floor area  0.3        0.5        0.75      0.75         0.5       Med: 0.5
ratio                                                              High: 0.75
Building height
                                                                   Low: 3
Principal                                                          stories
structure   3 stories  4 stories  8 stories 6 stories    4 stories Med: 4
maximum                                                            stories
stories                                                            High: 8
                                                                   stories
Residential density
Minimum
dwelling    3          9          12        12           N/A       9
units per
acre
Maximum
dwelling    12         50         100       100          N/A       100
units per
ace
Glazing/window coverage
Front
street      30%        30%        30%       30%          30%       30%
(minimum)
Side street 30%        30%        30%       30%          30%       30%
(minimum)
Upper
floors      10%        10%        10%       10%          10%       10%
(minimum)
Lot width
Minimum                           20 ft.                           20 ft.
                                                                   Low: 100 ft.
Maximum                           400 ft.                          Med: 180 ft.
                                                                   High: 300
                                                                   ft.
 
   (F)   Minimum floor area ratio. Minimum floor area ratio requirements of
principal buildings are set forth within
Table 152.706.1. Floor area devoted to parking or loading shall not be counted
toward compliance with the minimum floor area ratio. Floor area devoted to any
other habitable space, including spaces below grade, may be used for the
purpose of determining compliance with the minimum floor area ratio
requirement. Minimum floor area ratio regulations shall not apply to the
expansion of buildings existing on the effective date of this chapter. Minimum
floor area ratio requirements shall not apply on lots existing on the effective
date of this chapter with less than one acre of area.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1310, passed 3-24-25)
§ 152.707 MIXED USE DISTRICT LAND USES.
   (A)   Purpose. Establish a listing of the permitted, conditional, and
temporary uses for the LW, NMU, MU, TOD-C, TOD-E and TOD-G zoning districts.
The uses have been allocated to the individual districts to allow reasonable
use of properties in a manner that is compatible with the purpose of each
zoning district and the overall purpose of this zoning code and the code of
ordinances.
   (B)   Land uses.
      (1)   Principal permitted and conditional land uses for each mixed-use
zone listed in Table 152.707.1. See §§
152.900 and
152.904 for additional performance standards for residential and nonresidential
uses.
      (2)   A vertical mix of land uses is encouraged, such as residential and
commercial, with a strong pedestrian orientation.
TABLE 152.707.1 PRINCIPAL LAND USE
    Zoning District
Use LW NMU MU TOD-C TOD-E TOD-G
                          Low Med High
TABLE 152.707.1 PRINCIPAL LAND USE
                                                  Zoning District
Use                                               LW NMU MU TOD- TOD- TOD-G
                                                            C    E
                                                                      Low Med High
Sales and service
Animal services                                   NP P   P  P    P    P   P   P
   Outdoor pet runs*+                          NP NP  C  C    NP   C   C   NP
Bank                                              P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Body art                                          NP P   P  P    NP   NP  P   P
Care center, convalescent home, or assisted       C  C   C  P    NP   P   P   P
living
Currency exchange or pawn shop                    NP NP  C  NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Daycare facility, licensed*                       PA PA  PA PA   PA   P   P   P
General sales                                     P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
General services                                  P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Hospital                                          NP NP  C  C    C    NP  NP  C
Hotel or motel                                    NP C   C  P    P    P   P   P
Indoor recreational facility 2,450 sq. ft.        NP P   P
Indoor recreational facility over 2,450 sq. ft.   NP C   C  C    C    C   C   C
Medical or dental clinic                          P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Office                                            P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Outdoor recreational facility                     NP C   C  C    NP   C   C   C
Sexually oriented business*                       NP NP  C  NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Theater, excluding drive-ins                      NP C   C  C    NP   NP  NP  C
Veterinary clinic                                 P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Farmers market*+                                  A  A   A  A    A    A   A   A
Transient sales*+                                 A  A   A  A    A    A   A   A
Automotive
Auto repair services                              NP NP  C  NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Automobile sales and showrooms                    NP NP  NP C    NP   NP  NP  NP
Bus or truck storage, service shops                  NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Car wash                                          NP NP  C  NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Fabrication/ assembly of heavy equipment or       NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
vehicles
Fuel stations and gas sales*                      NP CNP C  NP   C    NPC NP  NP
   Propane exchanges*+                         NP C   C  NP   A    NP  NP  NP
Motor vehicle rental                              NP C   C  NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Parking ramp                                      NP NP  C  C    P    P   NP  NP
Vehicle impound yard                              NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Truck or motor freight terminal                   NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Wholesale broker, auction dealer of motor         P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
vehicles
Overnight recreational vehicle parking or         NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
camping*+
Repair of vehicles (accessory to a vehicle sale   NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
business)*+
Assembly
Banquet, convention hall or conference center     NP C   C  C    NP   P   P   P
Business, trade or non-academic colleges          C  C   C  NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Night club                                        NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Funeral home and mortuary                         C  C   C       NP   NP  NP  NP
   Crematory/ crematorium*+                    A  A   A  A    NP   NP  NP  NP
Religious institution                             C  C   C  P    NP   P   P   P
   Rectory*+                                   A  A   A  A    NP   A   A   A
   Columbarium*+                               C  C   C  C    NP   C   C   C
Social club                                       C  C   C  NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Food service
Brewery                                           NP P   P  P    P    C   C   P
Brewery with a taproom                            NP P   P  P    P    C   C   P
Cocktail room                                     NP P   P  P    P    C   C   P
Distillery                                        NP P   P  P    P    C   C   P
Distillery with a cocktail room                   NP P   P  P    P    C   C   P
Restaurant                                        P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Live entertainment in conjunction with a          NP A   A  A    A    C   C   C
restaurant, brewery or distillery+
Live entertainment in conjunction with a taproom  NP NP  NP A    A    C   C   C
or cocktail room+
Live entertainment in conjunction with a
restaurant, brewery or distillery where a cover   NP NP  C  A    A    C   C   C
charge is required+
Live entertainment in conjunction with a taproom
or cocktail room where a cover charge is          NP NP  A  A    A    C   C   C
required+
Mobile food unit+                                 P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Exterior food and beverage vending machines, ice  A  A   A  A    A    A   A   A
machines+
Manufacturing, processing, fabricating, brewing, distilling
Construction based business                       NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
   Construction buildings*+                    P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Distribution center                               NP NP  NP NP   A    NP  NP  NP
Fabrication                                       NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Manufacturing                                     NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Processing                                        NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Warehouse                                         A  A   A  A    A    NP  NP  NP
Outdoor storage*+                                 P  P   P  P    P    P   P   NP
Public facilities
Airports and aeronautical uses                    NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Cemetery*                                         NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Schools                                           P  P   P  NP   NP   P   P   P
Parks                                             P  P   P  P    NP   P   P   P
Public and quasi-public facilities                C  C   C  P    C    C   C   P
Essential services                                P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Conservation                                      P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Residential
Single family (detached)                          P  P   NP NP   NP   P   NP  NP
Two-family (attached)                             P  P   NP NP   NP   P   NP  NP
Townhouse (attached or detached)                  P  P   P  NP   NP   P   P   NP
Multifamily                                       P  P   P  P    NP   P   P   P
Manufactured home park                            NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Bed and breakfast establishment                   P  P   NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Essential services, government                    P  P   P  P    P    P   P   P
Accessory uses applicable to all non-residential uses
Drive-through windows                             C  C   C  C    C    NP  NP  NP
Gas tanks (above ground) for propane, liquid      NP P   P  NP   P    NP  NP  NP
nitrogen, etc. (excludes motor vehicle fuel)+
Loading docks*+                                   A  A   A  A    A    A   A   A
Outdoor sales and display+                        NP NP  NP A    NP   A   A   A
Outdoor storage+                                  A  A   A  A    A    A   A   A
Staging area*+                                    A  A   A  A    A    A   A   A
Storage shed*+                                    A  A   A  A    A    A   A   A
Waste and recycling storage as regulated in §§
98.01 through
98.16
Electric fences                                   NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Salvage                                           NP NP  NP NP   NP   NP  NP  NP
Cannabis oriented business
Cannabis retailer                                 P  P   P  P    P    NP  NP  P
Medical cannabis retailer                         P  P   P  P    P    NP  NP  P
Cannabis delivery service                         P  P   P  P    P    NP  NP  P
Lower-potency hemp retailer                       P  P   P  P    P    NP  NP  P
Cannabis cultivator                               NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Medical cannabis cultivator                       NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Cannabis event organizer                          P  P   P  P    P    NP  NP  P
Cannabis manufacturer                             NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Medical cannabis manufacturer                     NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Lower-potency hemp manufacturer                   NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Cannabis testing                                  NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Cannabis wholesaler                               NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Cannabis transporter                              NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
Medical cannabis combination business             NP NP  NP NP   P    NP  NP  NP
P- Permitted A- Accessory C- Conditional NP- Not Permitted PA- Permitted or
Accessory
Note: Uses marked with + are limited to accessory uses.
*Additional standards required by §§
152.903 and
152.904 or as indicated in this table.
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24)
Overlay Districts
§ 152.800 CAZ CRYSTAL AIRPORT ZONING.
   (A)   Purpose and authority. The Crystal Airport Joint Airport Zoning Board,
created and established by joint action of the Metropolitan Airports Commission
and the Cities of Crystal, Brooklyn Park, Brooklyn Center, Minneapolis, New
Hope, and Robbinsdale, pursuant to the provisions and authority of M.S. §
360.063, hereby finds and declares that:
      (1)   An airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of the
airport and property or occupants of land in its vicinity, and also may reduce
the size of the area available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of
aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the airport and the
public investment therein.
         (a)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and an injury to the region served by the airport.
         (b)   For the protection of the public health, safety, order,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, and for the promotion of the most
appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or
establishment of airport hazards.
         (c)   The prevention of these airport hazards should be accomplished,
to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of police power without
compensation.
         (d)   The elimination or removal of existing land uses or their
designation as non- conforming uses is not in the public interest and should be
avoided whenever possible, consistent with reasonable standards of safety.
         (e)   In addition, the social and economic costs of disrupting land
uses around the airport often outweigh the benefits of a reduction in airport
hazards, requiring a balance between the social and economic costs to
surrounding communities and the benefits of regulation.
         (f)   Preventing the creation or establishment of airport hazards and
eliminating, removing, altering, mitigating, or marking and lighting of
existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political subdivisions
may raise and expend public funds, levy assessments against land, and acquire
land and property interests therein.
   (B)   Title and short title. This section shall be known as the "Crystal
Airport Zoning Ordinance."
   (C)   Definitions and rules of construction.
      (1)   Definitions. As used in this section, unless otherwise expressly
stated, or unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the words
and phrases in the following list of definitions shall have the meanings
indicated. All words and phrases not defined shall have their common meaning.
         AIRPORT. The Crystal Airport located in Hennepin County, Minnesota.
         AIRPORT BOUNDARY. The boundary shown on
Figure 152.800.1 Airport Boundary, attached hereto and made a part hereof.
         AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree, or use of land that obstructs the
airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at the airport; and, any use of land that is hazardous to
persons or property because of its proximity to the airport.
         AIRPORT ZONING PERMIT. Zoning permits as required under division (H)
below.
         AIRSPACE SURFACES. The surfaces established in division (D)(1).
         AIRSPACE ZONES. The land use zones established in division (D)(1).
         BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The body established in division (M).
         COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Transportation or, if either the position of Commissioner or the Minnesota
Department of Transportation shall no longer exist or serve its present
functions, such successor state official or officials or entity or entities as
shall either singularly or collectively perform or serve such functions.
         CRYSTAL AIRPORT ZONING MAP. The Crystal Airport Zoning Map as defined
in division (F)(3).
         EFFECTIVE DATE. The effective date set forth in division (R).
         EXISTING. The current layout of the airport environment, including
alignment, location, and length of each runway at Crystal Airport at the time
of this section’s on the effective date.
         FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration or, if the Federal Aviation
Administration shall no longer exist or serve its present functions, such
successor federal entity or entities as shall either singularly or collectively
perform or serve such functions.
         FAA 7460 OBSTRUCTION EVALUATION. Established FAA process for
conducting aeronautical studies conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR,
Part 77 (for proposed construction or alteration) or Federal Aviation Act of
1958 (for existing structures), or any successor to this process.
         LOT. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat
or subdivision, or otherwise permitted by law.
         NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any structure in existence in any airspace
zone or land use zone but not conforming to the provisions of this section on
the effective date.
         NON-CONFORMING USE. Any use of land in existence in any airspace zone
or land use zone but not conforming to the provisions of this section on the
effective date.
         PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative.
         RUNWAY. Any existing surface of the airport which is specifically
designated and used to be used for the landing and/or taking off of aircraft.
The individual runways at the airport are defined in this section based on the
compass heading of landing and departing aircraft.
         RUNWAY 14-32. The existing 3,750-foot non-precision primary runway.
The Runway 14 end is within the City of Brooklyn Park, and the Runway 32 end is
within the City of Crystal.
         RUNWAY 6L-24R. The existing 2,500-foot visual crosswind runway. Both
the Runway 6L and 24R ends are within the City of Crystal.
         RUNWAY 6R-24L. The existing 1,669-foot visual crosswind runway. Both
the Runway 6R and 24L ends are within the City of Crystal.
         RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE. A zone mandated by FAA regulations that is
longitudinally centered on the extended centerline at each end of Runways 14-
32, 6L-24R and 6R-24L, whose inner edge is at the same width and elevation as,
and coincides with, the end of the primary surfaces for Runway 14-32 (500
feet), Runway 6L-24R (250 feet), and Runway 6R-24L (250 feet). The Runway 14-32
protection zone extends outward a horizontal distance of 1,000 feet, expanding
uniformly to a width of 700 feet. Runways 6L-24R and 6R-24L have protection
zones extending outward a horizontal distance of 1,000 feet, expanding
uniformly to a width of 450 feet.
         LAND USE ZONES. The land use zones established in division (E)(1).
         SCHOOL. Any private or public educational institution for people in
kindergarten through grade 12 and any private or public day care or pre-school
facility that enrolls more than 50 children.
         SLOPE. An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio
of horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9608.png]
 
         STRUCTURE. Anything anchored, attached, built, constructed, erected,
gathered, located, placed, or piled on the ground or in or over a water body,
whether temporary or permanent, moveable or immovable, including antennae,
buildings, canopies, cranes, decks, derricks, docks, edifices, equipment,
fences, overhead transmission lines, patios, piers, piles, ponds, posts,
roadways, signs, smokestacks, towers, utility poles, wires, and anything
attached to any of the foregoing either temporarily or permanently.
         TREE. Any object of natural growth.
         ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The public official in each affected
municipality as set forth in division (K)(2).
      (2)   Rules of construction. In the construction of this section, the
following rules shall be observed and applied, except where the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
         (a)   Computing time. In computing the period of time within which an
act may or must be done, the first calendar day from which the designated
period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period
shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, in
which case the period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
         (b)   Conflicts between ordinance provisions. If a provision of this
section conflicts with any other provision of this section, the more
restrictive provision shall prevail.
         (c)   Height. Height shall be expressed as elevation in feet above
mean sea level, North American Vertical Datum, 1988 Adjustment, except in
reference to maximum construction height without an airport zoning permit when
it shall be expressed as distance in feet above ground shown on the maximum
construction heights without permit plates in the Crystal Airport Zoning Map.
         (d)   Including, not limited to. The word "including" means including
but not limited to.
         (e)   Land to include water surfaces and bodies. The word "land" shall
include water bodies and surfaces for the purpose of establishing airspace
zones and land use zones.
         (f)   May, permissive. The word "may" is permissive.
         (g)   Shall, mandatory. The word "shall" is mandatory and not
discretionary.
         (h)   Singular and plural. The singular shall include the plural, and
the plural the singular.
         (i)   Tense. The present tense shall include the future.
   (D)   Airspace obstruction zoning.
      (1)   Airspace surfaces and zones. In order to carry out the purpose of
this section as set forth in division (A), the following airspace surfaces and
airspace zones are hereby established, subject to the airspace zoning limits in
division (F)(1).
         (a)   Primary surface. An imaginary surface longitudinally centered on
each Runway extending 200 feet beyond each end of Runways 14-32, 6L-24R, and
6R-24L. Runway 14-32 has uniform width of 500 feet, while Runways 6L-24R and
6R-24L have a uniform width of 250 feet. The elevation of any point on the
primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline.
         (b)   Primary zone. All that land which lies directly under a primary
surface.
         (c)   Horizontal surface. An imaginary surface that is 1,019.3 feet
above mean sea level, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of
specified radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each
runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. The
radius of each arc is 5,000 feet for runways 14-32, 6L-24R, and 6R-24L.
         (d)   Horizontal zone. All that land which lies directly under the
horizontal surface.
         (e)   Conical surface. An imaginary surface extending upward and
outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a
horizontal distance of 4,000 feet as measured radially outward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface.
         (f)   Conical zone. All that land which lies directly under the
conical surface.
         (g)   Approach surface. An imaginary surface longitudinally centered
on the extended centerline at each end of Runways 14-32, 6L-24R, and 6R-24L.
The inner edge of this surface is at the same width and elevation as, and
coincides with, the end of the primary surface. For Runways 14-32, 6L-24R, and
6R-24L, this surface inclines upward and outward at a slope of 20:1 for a
horizontal distance of 5,000. For Runway 14-32, the outer width of this surface
is 2,000 feet. For both Runways 6L-24R and 6R-24L, the outer width of this
surface is 1,250 feet.
         (h)   Approach zone. All that land which lies directly under an
approach surface.
         (i)   Transitional surface. An imaginary surface extending upward and
outward at right angles to the centerline and extended centerline of Runways
14-32. 6L-24R, and 6R-24L at a slope of 7:1 from both sides of each primary
surface and from both sides of each approach surface of Runway 14-32, 6L-24R,
and 6R-24L until it intersects the horizontal surface or the conical surface.
         (j)   Transitional zone. All that land which lies directly under a
transitional surface.
      (2)   Height restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
and except as necessary and incidental to airport operations, the following
height restrictions shall apply. Where a lot is beneath more than one airspace
surface, the height of the more restrictive (lower) airspace surface shall
control.
         (a)   Structures. No new structure shall be constructed or
established; and no existing structure shall be altered, changed, rebuilt,
repaired, or replaced in any airspace zone so as to project above any airspace
surface. Nor shall any equipment used to accomplish any of the foregoing
activities be allowed to project above any airspace surface.
         (b)   Trees. No tree shall be allowed to grow or be altered, repaired,
replaced, or replanted in any airspace zone so as to project above any airspace
surface. Nor shall any equipment used to accomplish any of the foregoing
activities be allowed to project above any airspace surface.
            1.   Public nuisance; order. If the whole or any part of any tree
shall be determined to be an airport hazard by the FAA, or any successor
entity, after proper investigation, the Zoning Administrator may issue an order
in writing for the owner or owners, agent or occupant of the property upon
which such hazardous tree is located, to forthwith cause such hazardous tree,
or portion thereof if the removal of a portion will remove the hazard, to be
taken down and removed.
            2.   Notice. Said order is to be mailed to the last known address
of the owner, agent or occupant and shall be accompanied by a notice setting
forth the authority to remove such hazardous tree at such owner's, agent's or
occupant's expense in the event such owner, agent or occupant fails to comply
with or file a notice of appeal from said order within ten days of mailing. The
notice shall include instructions for filing a notice of appeal from said
order.
            3.   Removal. If within ten days after said order has been mailed,
as above provided for, the owner or owners, agent or occupant of the property
upon which such hazardous tree is located neglects or refuses to comply with
said order, or has failed to file a notice of appeal from said order with the
Zoning Administrator, then the Administrator or its designee(s) may enter upon
said premises and take down or remove said tree or portion thereof declared to
be hazardous, and to do any and all things which in his opinion may be
necessary for the protection of life, limb or property.
            4.   Assessment of expense. If, after the notice hereinbefore
provided for has been given, the owner, agent or occupant has failed to remove
such hazardous tree or portion thereof, and it becomes necessary for the Zoning
Administrator to remove same, the Zoning Administrator or its designee shall
mail a statement of the expense of such removal to the owner, agent or occupant
of the property from which such tree or portion thereof has been removed, and
if within 30 days therefrom the owner, agent or occupant has not remitted to
the Zoning Administrator for the expense incurred by the Zoning Administrator
in said removal, the Zoning Administrator or its designee may forthwith recover
the amount of such expense from the owner or owners of said property in any
civil court of competent jurisdiction, in the manner provided by law.
      (3)   FAA 7460 obstruction evaluation. All construction of new structures
or alteration of existing structures in an airspace zone shall comply with the
requirements for filing notice to the FAA under the FAA 7460 obstruction
evaluation process.
   (E)   Land use zoning.
      (1)   Land use zones. In order to carry out the purpose of this section,
as set forth in division (A), the following land use zones are hereby
established, subject to the land use zoning limits in division (F)(2).
         (a)   Land Use Zone 1. Designated land, the extents of which are shown
in
Figure 152.800.2. Land Use Zone 1 overlies the runway protection zones.
         (b)   Land Use Zone 2. All land enclosed within the perimeter of the
Horizontal Zone, as shown in
Figure 152.800.3, except that land within Land Use Zone 1.
      (2)   Land use restrictions.
         (a)   General restrictions. Subject at all times to the height
restrictions set forth in division (D)(2) and the FAA 7460 obstruction
evaluation process, no use shall be made of any land in any of the land use
zones that creates or causes interference with the operations of radio or
electronic facilities at the airport or with radio or electronic communications
between airport and aircraft, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish
between airport lights and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots
using the airport, impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport, is deemed
a "hazard" to air navigation by FAA or MNDOT as part of an FAA 7460 obstruction
evaluation, or otherwise endangers the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of
aircraft.
         (b)   Land Use Zone 1 restrictions. Subject at all times to the height
restrictions set forth in division (D)(2) and to the general restrictions
contained in division E(2)(a), areas designated as Land Use Zone 1 for each end
of Runways 14-32, 6L-24R, and 6R-24L shall contain no buildings, exposed high-
voltage transmission lines, or other similar land use structural hazards, and
shall be restricted to those uses which will not create, attract, or bring
together a dense, confined assembly of persons thereon. Permitted uses may
include, but are not limited to, such uses as agriculture (seasonal crops),
horticulture, animal husbandry, wildlife habitat, light outdoor recreation,
cemeteries, roadways and vehicle parking, railroads, and other approved
aeronautical uses. Where Land Use Zone 1 overlies the Runway Protection Zone,
land uses and structures within the Runway Protection Zone will be governed by
federal laws and regulations or by FAA advisory circulars, orders, or guidance.
         (c)   Land Use Zone 2 restrictions. No land use in Land Use Zone 2
shall violate the height restrictions set forth in division (D)(2) or the
general restrictions contained in division (E)(2)(a).
   (F)   Airport zoning limits and Crystal Airport Zoning Map.
      (1)   Airspace zoning limits.
Figure 152.800.4 Airport Boundary and Airspace Zoning Limits and
Figure 152.800.5 Airport Boundary and Airspace Contours, attached hereto and
made a part hereof, show these limits.
      (2)   Land use zoning limits.
Figure 152.800.6 Airport Boundary and Land Use Zoning Limits, attached hereto
and made a part hereof, shows these limits.
      (3)   Crystal Airport Zoning Map. The locations and boundaries of the
airspace surfaces, airspace zones, land use zones, and the maximum construction
heights without an airport zoning permit established by this section are set
forth on the Crystal Airport Zoning Map consisting of 102 Plates- Airspace
Zones, Plates A-A2 to A-F6; Maximum Construction Heights Without Permit, Plates
MCH-A2 to MCH-F6; and Land Use Zones, Plates SZ-A2 to SZ-F6 prepared by the
Metropolitan Airports Commission, attached hereto and made a part hereof. These
plates, together with such amendments thereto as may from time to time be made,
and all notations, references, elevations, heights, data, surface and zone
boundaries, and other information thereon, shall be and the same are hereby
adopted as part of this section.
   (G)   Non-conforming uses. The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering, other change, or alteration of any
non-conforming structure or tree, or otherwise interfere with the continuance
of any non-conforming use. Non-conforming structures and non-conforming uses
are permitted under this section, subject to the provisions in divisions (H)
and (I). Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction,
alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of
which was begun prior to the effective date, and was diligently prosecuted and
completed within two years of the effective date.
   (H)   Airport zoning permits.
      (1)   Permit required. The following activities shall not take place on a
lot in any airspace zone or land use zone unless an airport zoning permit shall
have been granted therefore by the Zoning Administrator for the jurisdiction in
which the lot is located.
         (a)   Existing structures. Except as specifically provided in division
(H)(2), no existing structure shall be altered, changed, rebuilt, repaired, or
replaced.
         (b)   New structures. Except as specifically provided in division (H)
(2), no structure shall be newly constructed or otherwise established.
         (c)   Non-conforming structures. No non-conforming structure shall be
replaced, substantially altered or repaired, or rebuilt.
      (2)   Exception to permit requirement.
         (a)   Maximum construction height without a permit. No airport zoning
permit shall be required for an existing structure to be altered, changed,
rebuilt, repaired, or replaced on a lot, or for a new structure to be
constructed or otherwise established on a lot, if the highest point on the
structure or on any equipment used to accomplish any of the foregoing
activities, whichever is higher (measured in feet from curb level or from
natural grade at a point ten feet away from the front center of the structure,
whichever is lower) does not exceed the maximum construction height above
ground without an airport zoning permit shown for the lot on the applicable
Maximum Construction Heights Without Permit Plate in the Crystal Airport Zoning
Map.
         (b)   No violation of height or land use restriction permitted.
Nothing in this shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit a
violation or a greater violation of any provision of this section.
      (3)   Permit application. An airport zoning permit application for
activities on a lot shall be made in the manner and on the form established by
the Zoning Administrator of the jurisdiction in which the lot is located as
designated in division (K)(2).
      (4)   Permit standard. An airport zoning permit shall be granted unless
the Zoning Administrator determines that granting the permit (1) would allow a
conforming structure or use to violate any provision of this section or (2)
would permit a non-conforming structure or a non-conforming use to become a
greater violation of any provision of this section. Any airport zoning permit
may be granted subject to any reasonable conditions that the Zoning
Administrator may deem necessary to effectuate the purpose of this section. In
making any determination, the Zoning Administrator need not give public notice
of, or hold a public hearing on, the airport zoning permit application or the
determination.
      (5)   Abandoned or deteriorated non-conforming uses. Whenever a Zoning
Administrator determines that a non-conforming structure, non-conforming use,
or tree has been abandoned or more than 80% torn down, deteriorated, or
decayed, no airport zoning permit shall be granted that would allow such non-
conforming structure, non-conforming use, or tree to exceed the height
restrictions of division (D)(2) or otherwise violate any provision of this
section. Whether application is made for an airport zoning permit or not, a
Zoning Administrator may order the owner of the abandoned, torn down,
deteriorated, or decayed non-conforming structure, non-conforming use, or tree
at the owner's expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct, or equip the same in the
manner necessary to conform to the provisions of this section. In the event the
owner shall neglect or refuse to comply with such order for ten days after
receipt of written notice of such order, the Zoning Administrator may, by
appropriate legal action, proceed to have the non- conforming structure, non-
conforming use, or tree lowered, removed, reconstructed, or equipped and assess
the cost and expense thereof against the land on which the non-conforming
structure, non-conforming use, or tree is, or was, located. Unless such an
assessment is paid within 90 days from the service of notice thereof on the
owner of the land, the sum shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from
the date the cost and expense is incurred until paid, and shall be collected in
the same manner as are general taxes, all as authorized by M.S. § 360.067.
   (I)   Variances.
      (1)   Variance application. Any person desiring to use his or her
property in violation of any provision of this section, whether to construct or
establish a new structure; to alter, change, rebuild, repair, or replace an
existing structure; to allow a tree to grow higher; to alter, repair, replace,
or replant a tree; or to otherwise use his or her property in violation of any
provision of this section, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance
from such provision. A variance application shall be made by sending the
application on the form provided by the Board of Adjustment by certified United
States Mail to (1) the members of the Board of Adjustment and (2) the Board of
Adjustment at the mailing address specified in division (L)(3). The applicant
shall also mail a copy of the application by regular United States Mail to the
Zoning Administrator of the jurisdiction in which the structure or property is
located, as designated in division (K)(2). The Board of Adjustment may charge a
fee for processing the application.
      (2)   Failure of Board to act. If the Board of Adjustment fails to grant
or deny the variance within four months after the last Board member receives
the variance application, the variance shall be deemed to be granted by the
Board of Adjustment, but not yet effective. When the variance is granted by
reason of the failure of the Board of Adjustment to act on the variance, the
person receiving the variance shall send notice that the variance has been
granted by certified United States Mail to (1) the Board of Adjustment at the
mailing address specified in division (L)(3) and (2) the Commissioner. The
applicant shall include a copy of the original application for the variance
with the notice to the Commissioner. The variance shall be effective 60 days
after this notice is received by the Commissioner, subject to any action taken
by the Commissioner pursuant to M.S. § 360.063, Subd. 6.a.
      (3)   Variance standard. A variance shall be granted where it is found
that a literal application or enforcement of the provisions of this section
would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and relief granted
would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be
in accordance with the spirit of this section and M.S. Chapter 360. Any
variance granted may be granted subject to any reasonable conditions that the
Board of Adjustment, or the Commissioner acting under division (I)(2), may deem
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this section or M.S. Chapter 360.
   (J)   Hazard marking and lighting.
      (1)   Non-conforming structure. The Metropolitan Airports Commission may
require the owner of any non-conforming structure to permit the installation,
operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be
deemed necessary by the Metropolitan Airports Commission to indicate the
presence of the structure to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained
at the expense of the Metropolitan Airports Commission.
      (2)   Permits and variances. Any airport zoning permit or variance
granted by a Zoning Administrator or the Board of Adjustment may, if such
action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this section and be
reasonable in the circumstances, be granted subject to a condition that the
owner of the structure in question permit the Metropolitan Airports Commission,
at its expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and
lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport
hazard.
   (K)   Zoning Administrator.
      (1)   Duties. It shall be the duty of each Zoning Administrator to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section. Applications for airport
zoning permits shall be made to a Zoning Administrator as provided herein. A
Zoning Administrator may charge a fee for processing the application. Airport
zoning permit applications shall be considered and acted upon by the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the provisions of this section and within the
timelines established by M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended. The Zoning
Administrator shall remind each applicant that it is the responsibility of the
applicant to record any conditions of an airport zoning permit, if required by
law.
      (2)   Designated Zoning Administrators. For the purpose of this section,
the Zoning Administrator shall be the official entitled as follows: the Crystal
Zoning Administrator for lands located in the City of Crystal; the Brooklyn
Park Zoning Administrator for lands located in the City of Brooklyn Park; the
Brooklyn Center Zoning Administrator for lands located in Brooklyn Center; the
Minneapolis Zoning Administrator for lands located in Minneapolis; the New Hope
Zoning Administrator for lands located in New Hope; and the Robbinsdale Zoning
Administrator for lands located in Robbinsdale. In the event that one or more
of the above-described Zoning Administrators fails to administer or enforce
this section as provided by law, the Crystal Airport Joint Airport Zoning Board
hereby appoints the Metropolitan Airports Commission to administer or enforce
this section in the municipality or municipalities. If any official position
designated above as a Zoning Administrator ceases to exist or to perform or
serve its present function, the successor position as designated by the
applicable entity shall become the Zoning Administrator for that entity and
shall perform or serve such functions.
   (L)   Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   Establishment of Board and selection of Chair. There is hereby
established a Board of Adjustment that shall consist of five members appointed
by the Metropolitan Airports Commission, and each shall serve for a term of
three years and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the
members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of one year, two for
a term of two years, and two for a term of three years. Upon their appointment,
the members shall select a chair to act at the pleasure of the Board of
Adjustment. Members shall be removable by the Metropolitan Airports Commission
for cause, upon written charges, after a public hearing.
      (2)   Board powers. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear
and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by any Zoning Administrator or the Metropolitan Airports Commission in the
enforcement of this section and to hear and grant or deny variances.
      (3)   Board procedures.
         (a)   Rules, meetings, and records. The Board of Adjustment shall
adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of
this section. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of
the chair and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may determine. The
chair, or in his or her absence the acting chair, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Adjustment
shall be public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the offices
of the Metropolitan Airports Commission and the Zoning Administrator of the
jurisdiction in which the affected structure or lot is located, and shall be a
public record.
         (b)   Written findings and conclusions. The Board of Adjustment shall
make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon
which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in affirming,
modifying, or reversing an order, requirement, decision, or determination of a
Zoning Administrator or the Metropolitan Airports Commission and in granting or
denying a variance.
         (c)   Majority vote required. The concurring vote of a majority of the
members of the Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to affirm, modify, or
reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of a Zoning
Administrator or the Metropolitan Airports Commission, to decide to grant or
deny a variance, or to act on any other matter upon which the Board of
Adjustment is required to pass under this section.
         (d)   Mailing address. The mailing address for the Board of Adjustment
is:
Crystal Airport Zoning Ordinance Board of Adjustment
c/o Executive Director
Metropolitan Airports Commission
6040 28th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55450
   (M)   Appeals.
      (1)   Who may appeal. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by
any order, requirement, decision, or determination of a Zoning Administrator
made in administration of this section may appeal to the Board of Adjustment.
Such appeals may also be made by any governing body of a municipality or
county, or any joint airport zoning board, which is of the opinion that an
order, requirement, decision, or determination of a Zoning Administrator is an
improper application of this section as it concerns such governing body or
board.
      (2)   Commencement of appeals. All appeals hereunder must be commenced
within 30 days of a Zoning Administrator's decision by filing with the Zoning
Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment the notice of
appeal and all papers constituting the record upon which the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from was taken.
      (3)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed
from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Adjustment,
after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in the Zoning Administrator's opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not
be stayed except by order of the Board of Adjustment on notice to the Zoning
Administrator and on due cause shown.
      (4)   Appeal procedures. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable
time for hearing an appeal, give public notice and due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any
party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney.
      (5)   Decision. The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the
provisions of M.S. Chapter 360 and this section, affirm or reverse, in whole or
in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed
from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination, as may
be appropriate under the circumstances and, to that end, shall have all the
powers of a Zoning Administrator.
   (N)   Judicial review. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by
any decision of the Board of Adjustment or any action of the Commissioner taken
under M.S. § 360.063, Subd. 6 or 6.a., or any governing body of a municipality
or county, or any joint airport zoning board, which is of the opinion that an
order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Board of Adjustment or
action of the Commissioner is illegal, may seek judicial review as provided in
M.S. § 360.072. The petitioner must exhaust the remedies provided in this
section before availing himself or herself of the right to seek judicial review
as provided by this section.
   (O)   Penalties and other remedies. Every person who violates any provision
of this section, any zoning approval granted hereunder, any condition of any
zoning approval granted hereunder, or any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of a Zoning Administrator or the Board of Adjustment shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine, imprisonment, or both
of not more than the fine and imprisonment established for misdemeanors by
state law. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense for the purpose of the penalties and remedies specified in this
section. This section may also be enforced through such proceedings for
injunctive relief and other relief as may be proper under M.S. § 360.073, as it
may be amended, and other applicable law.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9596.png]
 
Figure 152.800.1 Airport Bound ary
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9598.png]
 
Figure 152.800.2 JAZB Land Use Zone 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9600.png]
 
Figure 152.800.3 JAZB Land Use Zone 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9602.png]
 
Figure 152.800.4 Airport Boundary and Airspace Zoning Limits
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9604.png]
 
Figure 152.800.5 Airport Boundary and Airspace Contours
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9606.png]
 
Figure 152.800.6 Airport Boundary and Land Use Zoning Limits
§ 152.801 FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY.
   The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Ch. 103F and 462
delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses. The intent of the designation on a property
is to protect and preserve areas and investments on properties that are subject
to periodic inundation by flood waters. This designation includes Floodway
(FW), Flood Fringe (FF) and General Flood Plain (FP). The Official Zoning Map
together with all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this chapter. The attached material includes the Flood
Insurance Study for Hennepin County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas, dated
November 4, 2016, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels enumerated as
follows: 27053C0069F, 27053C0088F, 27053C0089F, 27053C0093F, 27053C0182F,
27053C0184F, 27053C0201F, 27053C0202F, 27053C0203F, 27053C0204F, 27053C0206F,
27053C0207F, 27053C0208F, 27053C0209F, dated November 4, 2016, all prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. These materials are on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these overlays includes:
      (1)   To protect areas with environmental sensitivity;
      (2)   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
city;
      (3)   To minimize losses of life, property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base due to periodic
inundation;
      (4)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR Parts 59 - 78, as amended, to maintain the
community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; and
      (5)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and flood plains in order to moderate flood and stormwater
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and
riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   This subchapter adopts the flood plain maps applicable to the city
and includes three flood plain districts: Floodway, Flood Fringe, and General
Flood Plain.
         (a)   Where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are delineated on the
flood plain maps, the standards in divisions (D)(3) or (D)(4) will apply,
depending on the location of a property.
         (b)   Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are not
delineated on the flood plain maps are considered to fall within the General
Flood Plain District. Within the General Flood Plain District, the Floodway
District standards in division (D)(3) apply unless the floodway boundary is
determined, according to the process outlined in division (D)(5). Once the
floodway boundary is determined, the Flood Fringe District standards in
division (D)(4) may apply outside the floodway.
      (2)   Lands to which subchapter applies. This subchapter applies to all
lands within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the official zoning map or
the attachments to the map as being located within the boundaries of the
Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood Plain Districts.
         (a)   The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Flood Plain Districts are
overlay districts that are superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The
standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any other
requirements in this subchapter. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive
standards will apply.
      (3)   Interpretation. The boundaries of the zoning districts are
determined by scaling distances on the flood insurance rate map.
         (a)   Where a conflict exists between the flood plain limits
illustrated on the official zoning map and actual field conditions, the flood
elevations shall be the governing factor. The Zoning Administrator must
interpret the boundary location based on the ground elevations that existed on
the site on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing
the area within the regulatory flood plain, and other available technical data.
         (b)   Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will
be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Planning
Commission and to submit technical evidence.
      (4)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this
subchapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
other private agreements. However, where this subchapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this subchapter prevail. All other ordinances
inconsistent with this subchapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
      (5)   This subchapter does not imply that areas outside a flood hazard
area will be free from flooding or flood damages. This subchapter does not
create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this section, or any administrative
decision lawfully made based on regulations in this section.
      (6)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
subchapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the
remainder of this subchapter shall not be affected and shall remain in full
force.
      (7)   Annexations. The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by
reference into this section above may include flood plain areas that lie
outside of the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this
subchapter. If any of these flood plain land areas are annexed into the city
after the date of adoption of this subchapter, the newly annexed flood plain
lands will be subject to the provisions of this subchapter immediately upon the
date of annexation.
      (8)   Detachments. The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by
reference into this section will include flood plain areas that lie inside the
city at the time of adoption of this subchapter. If any of these flood plain
land areas are detached from the city and come under the jurisdiction of
another city after the date of adoption of this subchapter, the newly detached
flood plain lands will no longer be subject to the provisions of this
subchapter as of the date of detachment.
   (C)   Amendments and administration. All amendments to this subchapter must
follow the procedures as defined in §
152.302.
      (1)   Designations shown on the zoning overlay map may not be removed
unless an applicant provides evidence that the designation is in error or that
the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood
protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the flood hazard area.
Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources determined that, through other measures, lands are adequately
protected for the intended use.
      (2)   All amendments, either to the text of this section or the zoning
overlay map must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the boundaries for flood hazard area
must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Technical Conditions
and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The
Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten days written notice of all
hearings to consider an amendment to this section and said notice must include
a draft of the amendment or technical study under consideration.
      (3)   Zoning Administrator. A Zoning Administrator or other official
designated by the city shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the Zoning
Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this chapter the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such violation in
accordance with the procedures stated in division (H).
      (4)   Permit requirements.
         (a)   Permit required. For that portion of the property or structures
in the flood plain, a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity
with the provisions of this subchapter shall be secured prior to the erection,
addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair
over $500), or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof; prior
to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to the
construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system; prior to the change or
extension of a non-conforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has
been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source, and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or
equipment within the flood plain; relocation or alteration of a watercourse
(including new or replacement culverts and bridges), unless a public waters
work permit has been applied for; any other type of development as defined in
this subchapter. Exceptions to this requirement include dog houses, non-
habitable structures such as storage units less than 36 square fee in size,
normal household storage, such as lawn furniture or equipment storage, such as
a canoe, all of which may easily be moved if necessary and normal landscaping
and maintenance, provided no fill is placed within the Flood Hazard Overlay.
         (b)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and
the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the community
authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has
applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to M.S.
Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the
Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
         (c)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease
the 100-year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes
by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data.
      (5)   The Flood Plain District regulations adopted by this subchapter
will be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency to the flood plain maps adopted by this section.
   (D)   Floodway, Flood Fringe, and General Flood Plain performance standards
and uses.
      (1)   Districts.
         (a)   Floodway District. The Floodway District includes those areas
within Zones AE that have a floodway delineated as shown on the flood insurance
rate map adopted in this section. For lakes, wetlands and other basins within
Zones AE that do not have a floodway delineated, the Floodway District also
includes those areas that are at or below the ordinary high water level as
defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14.
         (b)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District includes areas
within Zones AE that have a floodway delineated on the flood insurance rate map
adopted in this section but are located outside of the floodway. For lakes,
wetlands and other basins within Zones AE that do not have a floodway
delineated, the Flood Fringe District also includes those areas below the 1%
annual chance (100-year) flood elevation but above the ordinary high water
level as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14.
         (c)   General Flood Plain District. The General Flood Plain District
includes those areas within Zones A, AE, or AH that do not have a delineated
floodway as shown on the flood insurance rate map adopted in this section.
      (2)   Applicability. Within the Flood Plain Districts established in this
subchapter, the use, size, type and location of development must comply with
the terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations. In no cases
shall flood plain development adversely affect the efficiency or unduly
restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributaries to the
main stream, drainage ditches, or any other drainage facilities or systems. All
uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in divisions (D)(3)
through (5) below are prohibited. In addition, critical facilities, as defined
in §
152.105, are prohibited in all Flood Plain Districts.
      (3)   Floodway District (FW).
         (a)   Permitted uses. The following uses, subject to the standards set
forth in division (C)(2) and (E), are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in
the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay district:
            1.   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
            2.   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and
airport landing strips.
            3.   Open space uses, including but not limited to private and
public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic
grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and fishing
areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
            4.   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
            5.   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines, provided that the Department of Natural Resources Area Hydrologist
is notified at least ten days prior to issuance of any permit.
         (b)   Standards for Floodway permitted uses.
            1.   The use must have a low flood damage potential.
            2.   The use must not obstruct flood flows or cause any increase in
flood elevations and must not involve structures, obstructions, or storage of
materials or equipment.
            3.   Any facility that will be used by employees or the general
public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time
for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the
depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a
product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
            4.   No on-site sewage treatment, holding tanks or water supply
systems are permitted in the floodway.
         (c)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed as
conditional uses following the standards and procedures set forth in division
(K) and further subject to the standards set forth in division (C)(4), if
otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay
district.
            1.   Structures accessory to the uses listed in divisions (C)(1)(a)
through (c) and the uses listed in divisions (C)(3)(b) and (c).
            2.   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
            3.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water
control structures.
            4.   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
            5.   Placement of fill or construction of fences that obstruct
flood flows. Farm fencing, as defined in M.S. §
344.02, Subd. 1(a) - (d), is permitted as it relates to this section.
            6.   Travel-ready recreational vehicles meeting the exception
standards in §
152.801(E).
            7.   Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a
frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency flood event.
         (d)   Standards for Floodway conditional uses.
            1.   All uses. A conditional use must not cause any increase in the
stage of the 1% chance or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages
in the reach or reaches affected.
            2.   Fill; storage of materials and equipment:
               a.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
               b.   Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited
or stored in the flood plain must be protected from erosion by vegetative
cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and gravel
operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site development
plan.
               c.   Temporary placement of fill, other materials, or equipment
which would cause an increase to the stage of the 1% chance or regional flood
may only be allowed if the City Council has approved a plan that ensures
removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time
available.
            3.   Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as identified in
division (C)(3)(a) above, may be permitted, provided that:
               a.   Structures are not intended for human habitation;
               b.   Structures will have a low flood damage potential;
               c.   Structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a
minimal obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
               d.   Service utilities, such as electrical and heating
equipment, within these structures must be elevated to or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation or properly floodproofed;
               e.   Structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with the FP1 or FP2 floodproofing classifications in
the State Building Code. All floodproofed structures must be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
               f.   As an alternative, an accessory structure may be internally
wet floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing classifications in the State
Building Code, provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment and does not exceed 576 square feet in size. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer
or meet or exceed the following criteria: to allow for the equalization of
hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in
the outside walls of the structure, with a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
there must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of
all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to
the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding
will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
            4.   Accessory structures in the Flood Hazard Area Overlay.
               a.   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human
habitation.
               b.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood
waters:
            5.   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow: and
            6.   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
               a.   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or
structurally dry floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in
accordance with the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be wet floodproofed to the floodproofing classification in the
State Building Code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment and does not exceed 500 square feet in size. All floodproofed
accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:
                  i.   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
                  ii.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure
must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or
properly floodproofed; and
                  iii.   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure,
there must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at
least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no
higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using
human intervention to open a door prior to flooding will not satisfy this
requirement for automatic openings.
            7.   Structural works for flood control that will change the
course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters are
subject to the provisions of M.S. § 103G.245.
            8.   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway must
not cause an increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The technical
analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a
stream.
            9.   Floodway developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system.
      (4)   Flood Fringe District (FF).
         (a)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are those uses of land or
structures allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the
standards in division (4)(b) below. If no pre-existing, underlying zoning
districts exist, then any residential or nonresidential structure or use of a
structure or land is a permitted use provided it does not constitute a public
nuisance.
         (b)   Standards for Flood Fringe permitted uses.
            1.   Except for the structures mentioned in division (E)(4) only
non-habitable accessory structures constructed with less than 120 square feet,
fences, or docks for the personal use of the resident(s) of the principal
structure that are constructed with flood resistant material to the regulatory
flood protection elevation in accordance with the floodproofing classification
of the State Building Code may be permitted in the flood fringe, if permitted
in the underlying district. No accessory structure may be constructed on the
property that will increase flood elevations. All structures, including
accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor, as
defined, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished
fill elevation for structures must be no lower than one foot below the
regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill must extend at the same
elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure.
            2.   Accessory structures. As an alternative to the fill
requirements of division (4)(b)(i) above, structures accessory to the uses
identified in division (4)(a) above may be permitted to be internally/wet
floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing classifications in the State
Building Code, provided that:
               a.   The accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment,
does not exceed 576 square feet in size, and is only used for parking and
storage.
               b.   All portions of floodproofed accessory structures below the
regulatory flood protection elevation must be:
                  i.   Adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement and designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls;
                  ii.   Be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage; and
                  iii.   Must have all service utilities be water-tight or
elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
               c.   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
criteria: to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be
a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the structure,
with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding; and there must be openings on at least two
sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than
one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human
intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this
requirement for automatic openings.
               d.   The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a
parcel must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is specifically
intended to elevate a structure in accordance with division (D)(2)(a) above, or
if allowed as a conditional use under division (D)(3)(c) below.
               e.   The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated
on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
               f.   All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated
or water-tight to prevent infiltration of floodwaters.
               g.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
               h.   All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method.
               i.   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at
or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation, or must have a flood warning or emergency evacuation plan
acceptable to the City Council.
               j.   i.   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and
parking lots may be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. However, any facilities used by employees or the general public must
be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth
(in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a
product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
                  ii.   Interference with normal manufacturing/industrial plant
operations must be minimized, especially along streams having protracted flood
durations. In considering permit applications, due consideration must be given
to the needs of industries with operations that require a flood plain location.
               k.   Manufactured homes must meet the standards of division (E)
(5) and recreational vehicles must meet the standards of divsion (E)(6).
         (c)   Conditional uses. The following uses and activities may be
allowed as conditional uses, if allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) or
any applicable overlay district, following the procedures in division (K).
            1.   Any structure that is not elevated on fill or floodproofed in
accordance with division (D)(2)(a) and (b) above.
            2.   Storage of any material or equipment below the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
            3.   The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of
fill when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with
division (D)(2)(a) above.
         (d)   Standards for Flood Fringe conditional uses.
            1.   The standards listed in divisions (D)(2)(c) - (j) apply to all
conditional uses.
            2.   Basements, as defined by §
152.105, are subject to the following:
               a.   Residential basement construction is not allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
               b.   Non-residential basements may be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with division (D)(4)(c) below.
            3.   All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements,
to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation must be
floodproofed in accordance with the structurally dry floodproofing
classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing must
meet the FP1 or FP2 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code,
which requires making the structure watertight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
            4.   The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other
similar material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of elevating a
structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must comply with an
approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.
               a.   The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to
stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional (1%
chance) flood event.
               b.   The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City
Council.
               c.   The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal
of the material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time exists.
            5.   Storage of materials and equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation must comply with an approved emergency plan providing for
removal of such materials within the time available after a flood warning.
      (5)   General Flood Plain District (GF).
         (a)   Permitted uses.
            1.   The uses listed in division (C)(1) above, Floodway District
permitted uses, are permitted uses.
            2.   All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe
evaluation criteria specified in division (E)(2) below. Division (C) above
applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Floodway District.
Division (D) above applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Flood
Fringe District.
         (b)   Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe determinations.
            1.   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval
within the General Flood Plain District, the Zoning Administrator must obtain,
review and reasonably utilize any regional flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state, or other source.
            2.   If regional flood elevation and floodway data are not readily
available, the applicant must furnish additional information, as needed, to
determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed
use would fall within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District. Information must
be consistent with accepted hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards
and the standards in division (E)(2)(c).
            3.   The determination of floodway and flood fringe must include
the following components, as applicable:
               a.   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional (1% chance)
flood.
               b.   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood
based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
               c.   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the
regional flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A
lesser stage increase than a half foot is required if, as a result of the stage
increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment
on both sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing
floodway boundaries.
            4.   The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information
and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood
Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of
previous floodway encroachments. The Zoning Administrator may seek technical
assistance from a designated engineer or other expert person or agency,
including the Department of Natural Resources. Based on this assessment, the
Zoning Administrator may approve or deny the application.
            5.   After the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have
been determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the permit application
consistent with the applicable provisions of divisions (C) and (D) above.
   (E)   Standards for all Flood Plain Districts.
      (1)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas,
electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the flood plain
must be floodproofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to
the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (2)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and
bridges to be located within the flood plain must comply with §
152.801(D). These transportation facilities must be elevated to the regulatory
flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of these facilities
would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities
are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads
or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or
safety. None of these uses shall increase flood elevations.
      (3)   Non-habitable park shelters and other community assembly structures
when accessory to park uses shall be permitted, but shall be constructed using
floodproofing measures to the regulatory flood protection elevation, in
accordance with the State Building Code, and shall not increase flood
elevations. Buildings over 500 square feet must be dry floodproofed to the
floodproofing standards in the State Building Code.
      (4)   On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems. Where public
utilities are not provided:
         (a)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are subject to the
provisions in Minn. Rules Chapter 4725.4350, as amended; and
         (b)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be subject to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are subject to the
provisions in Minn. Rules Chapter 7080.2270, as amended.
      (5)   Manufactured homes. New manufactured home parks and expansions to
existing manufactured home parks are prohibited in any Flood Plain District.
For existing manufactured home parks or lots of record, the following
requirements apply:
         (a)   Placement or replacement of manufactured home units is
prohibited in the Floodway District.
         (b)   If allowed in the Flood Fringe District, placement or
replacement of manufactured home units is subject to the requirements of §
152.801(D) and the following standards:
            1.   New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in
compliance with §
152.801(D) and must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
            2.   New or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured
home parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for subdivisions in §
152.801(I).
      (6)   Recreational vehicles. New recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are prohibited in any Flood Plain District. Storage of recreational
vehicles and equipment shall be in conformance with the regulations of the
city, less than 400 square feet in size and equipment may be temporarily stored
(for a maximum period of 180 days) if permitted in the underlying district and
in compliance with all other sections of the city code. Placement of
recreational vehicles in existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds or
as storage in the flood plain must meet the exemption criteria below or be
treated as new structures meeting the requirements of this subchapter.
         (a)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this
subchapter if they are placed in any of the following areas and meet the
criteria listed in division (F)(2) below:
            1.   Individual lots or parcels of record;
            2.   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds;
or
            3.   Existing condominium-type associations.
         (b)   Criteria for exempt recreational vehicles:
            1.   The vehicle must have a current license required for highway
use;
            2.   The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks;
            3.   No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the
vehicle;
            4.   The vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any pre-
existing, underlying zoning district;
            5.   Accessory structures are not permitted within the Floodway
District. Any accessory structure in the Flood Fringe District must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials and be securely anchored, meeting the
requirements applicable to manufactured homes in division (E)(2) above; and
            6.   An accessory structure must constitute only a minimal
investment.
         (c)   Recreational vehicles that are exempt in division (F)(2) lose
this exemption when development occurs on the site that exceeds a minimal
investment for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The
recreational vehicle and all accessory structures will then be treated as new
structures subject to the elevation and floodproofing requirements of §
152.801(D). No development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the
recreational vehicle is allowed that would hinder the removal of the vehicle
should flooding occur.
      (7)   Building sites. If a proposed building site is in a flood prone
area, all new construction and substantial improvements (including the
placement of manufactured homes) must be:
         (a)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage;
         (c)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
and
         (d)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
   (F)   Procedures for submission of technical data for boundary.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a development for a use within a
Flood Hazard Overlay, the applicant is required to furnish as is applicable to
the application as determined by the City Manager for the determination of the
regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within
the floodway or flood fringe. If the proposed use is located within the
floodway, §
152.801(D) of this chapter applies. If the proposed use is located in the flood
fringe, §
152.801(E) of this chapter applies.
         (a)   A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the
stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-
sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water
information.
         (b)   Plan (surface view) showing the following:
            1.   Elevations or contours of the ground;
            2.   Pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations;
            3.   The size, location, and spatial arrangement of all proposed
and existing structures on the site;
            4.   Location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing
structures on the site;
            5.   The location and elevations of streets;
            6.   Photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream
and downstream; and
            7.   The soil type(s).
         (c)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development.
      (2)   The applicant must be responsible to submit a copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the floodway
or flood fringe and to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Procedures consistent with Minn. Rules parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 must be
followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is
strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology
with the respective Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist prior to
commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert must:
         (a)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood;
         (b)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas; and
         (c)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages and providing compensation storage
volumes on a 1:1 basis below the 100-year flood elevation. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of a stream within the reach must be assumed in
computing floodway boundaries.
   (G)   The City Manager must present the technical evaluation and findings of
the designated engineer or expert to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The
Board may formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended floodway
and flood fringe delineations for the Flood Hazard Overlay Area or deny the
permit. The Board, prior to official action, must submit the application and
all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
Department of Natural Resources for review and comment. Once the flood way and
flood fringe boundaries have been determined, the Board will refer the matter
back to the City Manager who will process the permit application consistent
with the applicable provisions of §§
152.300 through
152.312 of this chapter.
   (H)   Procedures for submission of technical data for all development within
a Flood Hazard Overlay. In addition to the requirements of §§
152.300 through
152.312, the following additional requirements apply to an application for
development within all Flood Hazard Overlays.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a development for a use within a
Flood Hazard Overlay, the applicant is required to furnish the following as is
applicable to the application as determined by the City Manager for the
determination of the flood hazard area boundary and the adequacy of the
proposed use for the particular site:
         (a)   Plans drawn to scale showing the following information:
            1.   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot;
            2.   The existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials;
            3.   Floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above to
the location of the stream channel; and
            4.   The relationship of the above to the location of the stream
channel.
         (b)   Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
         (c)   The applicant is required to submit certification by a
registered engineer or surveyor licensed by the State of Minnesota that the
floodproofing, finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   One copy of the plans and specifications defined above must be
given to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical
assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to
flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the
adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters. Based upon
the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or expert, the City Manager
shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate the
suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.
      (3)   Review standards. In addition to the review standards listed in §§
152.300 through
152.312. The City Council must also consider the following in its review of any
application in the Flood Hazard Overlay. These standards include:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachment;
         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other
hydraulic structures;
         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions;
         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (e)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use;
         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and flood plain management programs for the area;
         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinance and emergency vehicles;
         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
         (l)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
      (4)   Reasonable conditions. The City Council shall attach any reasonable
conditions as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities;
         (b)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy or operation;
         (c)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions;
         (d)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures; or
         (e)   Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building
Code and this chapter. The applicant must submit a plan or documentation
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
      (5)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting approval for any
application for development, the City Manager shall determine that the
applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
   (I)   Subdivision review criteria.
      (1)   In general. Recognizing that flood prone areas may exist outside of
the designated Flood Plain Districts, the requirements of this section apply to
all land within the city.
      (2)   No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of
flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are
considered subdivisions for purposes of this subchapter. All lots within Flood
Plain Districts shall be able to contain a building site outside of the Flood
Plain Districts. All subdivisions must have water and sewage treatment
facilities that comply with the provisions of this chapter and have road access
both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two
feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in
the Flood Plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the
regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access
roads must be clearly labeled on all required elevations of all access roads
and must be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting
documents.
      (3)   In the General Flood Plain Overlay, applicants must provide the
information required in §
152.801(H) of this chapter to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the
Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the subdivision site.
      (4)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated
on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate
specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-
structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated
prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard
area designation will be requested.
      (5)   If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in a
flood prone area, any such proposal must be reviewed to assure that:
         (a)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage within the flood prone area;
         (b)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
         (c)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood
hazard.
   (J)   Conditions for a variance to the Flood Hazard Overlay performance
standards.
      (1)   Applications for variance will be reviewed in accordance with the
procedures in §
152.302.
      (2)   Any projects granted a variance to high water mark must submit an
erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared by a registered engineer
licensed by the State of Minnesota in accordance with the guidelines of the
West Mississippi Watershed District. This plan must be approved by the city
prior to issuance of a permit.
      (3)   Proposals for variance must be the minimum necessary to allow for
the reasonable use of the property.
      (4)   Proposals must meet the requirements defined in division (E) for
development in the Flood Hazard Overlay.
      (5)   All habitable structures applying for a variance and proposed in
the Flood Hazard Overlay must be constructed in accordance with the flood plain
management standards for the State of Minnesota as found in Minn. Rules parts
6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 CFR 60.3(a) - (d).
      (6)   No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses
prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the
regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area or permit
standards lower than those required by state law.
      (7)   The City Manager must submit hearing notices for proposed variances
to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days notice of the
hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the
respective DNR area hydrologist.
      (8)   Required notification. The City Manager must notify the applicant
for a variance of the impacts of the action and must maintain a record of such
notification. The city must maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in
its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National
Flood Insurance Program. The impacts necessitating notification include:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
         (b)   Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property.
      (9)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action.
The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR
area hydrologist.
      (10)   The following additional variance criteria of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:
         (a)   Variances shall not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
         (b)   Variances shall only be issued by a community upon:
            1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
            2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (11)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or
above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of
Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood
warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
      (12)   Record-keeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and must
report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of
the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
   (K)   Approval of site plan review, conditional use permits, and/or grading
permits.
      (1)   The City Council may attach conditions to the approval of site plan
review or any permits on flood hazard overlay properties including, but not
limited to, the modification of the waste disposal and water supply facilities;
limiting the period of use, occupancy, and/or operation; imposing operational
controls, sureties, and deed restriction requirements; aesthetic considerations
to protect wetlands, open space or those amenities, and requirements for
construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and
other protective measures; floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State
Building Code and this subchapter. The applicant must submit a plan or document
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
      (2)   In passing upon conditional use applications governed by this
subchapter, the City Council must consider all relevant factors specified in
other sections of this subchapter, and those factors identified in division (E)
(3).
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed
conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten
days notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S.
Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
      (4)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such
action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the
respective DNR area hydrologist.
   (L)   Non-conformities. A structure or the use of a structure or premises
which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject
to §
152.204 and the following:
      (1)   A non-conforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded,
changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood damage
potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as otherwise provided
in division (B). Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures or occupancies
within the Floodway District is prohibited.
      (2)   Any structural alteration or addition to a non-conforming structure
or non-conforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage
potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood
protection elevation in accordance with flood plain management standards for
the State of Minnesota as found in Minn. Rules parts 6120.5000 - 5120.6200 and
44 CFR 60.3(a) - (d).
      (3)   The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any non-
conforming structure over the life of the structure must not exceed 50% of the
market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alternations and additions constructed
since the adoption of the city's initial flood plain controls shall be
calculated into today's current cost which will include all costs such as
construction material and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If
the current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds
50% of the current market value of the structure, then the structure must be
located outside the floodway and meet the flood plain management standards for
the State of Minnesota as found in Minn. Rules parts 6120.5000 - 5120.6200 and
44 CFR 60.3(a) - (d).
      (4)   If any non-conforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this
subchapter. The Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of
instances of non-conforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of 12
months.
      (5)   If any non-conforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in §
152.105, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the flood
plain management standards for the State of Minnesota as found in Minn. Rules
parts 6120.5000 - 5120.6200 and the 44 CFR 60.3(a) - (d).
      (6)   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in §
152.105, from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions
of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or
other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing non-conforming
building, then the building addition (as required by division (B) above) and
the existing non-conforming building must meet the flood plain management
standards for the State of Minnesota as found in Minn. Rules parts 6120.5000 -
5120.6200 and 44 CFR 60.3(a) - (d).
      (7)   If any non-conforming use or structure experiences a repetitive
loss, it must not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (M)   Record of first floor elevation. The City Manager must maintain a
record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the Flood
Hazard Overlay. The City Manager must also maintain a record of the elevation
to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
floodproofed.
   (N)   Enforcement of penalties. In addition to the enforcement and penalties
defined in §§
152.200 through
152.202 and §
152.310, other action may be taken by the city to ensure compliance with this
section, including a request to the National Flood Insurance Program to deny
flood insurance availability to the subject property. If the structure and/or
use suspected to be in violation of this section is in the process of
construction, the City Manager must immediately order the construction or
development halted until the proper permit or approval is granted. The City
Manager will also notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition
which existed prior to the violation. Each day a violation exists shall be
treated as a separate offense.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.802 MISSISSIPPI RIVER CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY.
   (A)   Authority, intent and purpose.
      (1)   Statutory authorization. This Mississippi River Corridor Critical
Area (MRCCA) section is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies
contained in M.S. Chapter 116G, Minn. Rules, Parts 6106.0010 - 6106.0180, and
the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapters 462 and 473.
      (2)   Policy. The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility
to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and
development of designated critical areas and thus preserve and enhance the
quality of important historic, cultural, aesthetic values, and natural systems
and provide for the wise use of these areas.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of this section apply to land within
the river corridor boundary as described in the State Register, volume 43,
pages 508 to 519 and shown on the zoning map.
      (2)   Enforcement. The City Manager is responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this section. Any violation of its provisions or failure to
comply with any of its requirements including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional
uses constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. Violations
of this section can occur regardless of whether a permit is required for a
regulated activity listed in division (C)(2).
      (3)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
section is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this section) shall not be affected thereby.
      (4)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this
section to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this section imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this section shall prevail. All other sections inconsistent
with this section are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
      (5)   Underlying zoning. Uses and standards of underlying zoning
districts apply except where standards of this overlay district are more
restrictive.
   (C)   Administration.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to identify administrative
provisions to ensure this section is administered consistent with its purpose.
      (2)   Permits. A permit is required for the construction of structures
and additions (including construction of decks and signs), the installation
and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, vegetation removal consistent
with division (I) and land alterations consistent with division (J).
      (3)   Variances. Variances to the requirements under this section may
only be granted in accordance with M.S. § 462.357 and must consider the
potential impacts of variances on primary conservation areas, public river
corridor views, and other resources identified in the MRCCA plan. In reviewing
the variance application, the City Council shall:
         (a)   Evaluate the impacts to these resources. If negative impacts are
found, require conditions to mitigate the impacts that are related to and
proportional to the impacts, consistent with division (C)(5); and
         (b)   Make written findings that the variance is consistent with the
purpose of this section, as follows:
            1.   The extent, location and intensity of the variance will be in
substantial compliance with the MRCCA Plan;
            2.   The variance is consistent with the character and management
purpose of the MRCCA district in which it is located;
            3.   The variance will not be detrimental to PCAs and PRCVs nor
will it contribute to negative incremental impacts to PCAs and PRCVs when
considered in the context of past, present and reasonable future actions; and
      (4)   Conditional and interim use permits. All conditional and interim
uses, required under this section, must comply with M.S. § 462.3595 and must
consider the potential impacts on primary conservation areas, public river
corridor views, and other resources identified in the MRCCA plan. In reviewing
the application, the City Council shall:
         (a)   Evaluate the impacts to these resources and if negative impacts
are found, require conditions to mitigate the impacts that are related to and
proportional to the impacts, consistent with Section 3.5; and
         (b)   Make written findings that the conditional use is consistent
with the purpose of this section as follows:
            1.   The extent, location and intensity of the conditional use will
be in substantial compliance with the MRCCA Plan;
            2.   The conditional use is consistent with the character and
management purpose of the MRCCA district in which it is located;
            3.   The conditional use will not be detrimental to PCAs and PRCVs
nor will it contribute to negative incremental impacts to PCAs and PRCVs when
considered in the context of past, present and reasonable future actions; and
      (5)   Conditions of approval. The City Council shall evaluate the impacts
to PCAs, PRCVs, and other resources identified in the MRCCA Plan, and if
negative impacts are found, require conditions to mitigate the impacts that are
related to and proportional to the impacts. Mitigation may include:
         (a)   Restoration of vegetation identified as "vegetation restoration
priorities" identified in the MRCCA plan;
         (b)   Preservation of existing vegetation;
         (c)   Stormwater runoff management;
         (d)   Reducing impervious surface;
         (e)   Increasing structure setbacks;
         (f)   Wetland and drainageway restoration and/or preservation; and
         (g)   Other conservation measures.
      (6)   Application materials. Applications for permits and discretionary
actions required under this section must submit the following information
unless the City Manager determines that the information is not needed.
         (a)   A detailed project description; and
         (b)   Scaled maps and plans, dimensional renderings, maintenance
agreements, and other materials that identify and describe:
            1.   Primary conservation areas;
            2.   Public river corridor views;
            3.   Buildable area;
            4.   Existing and proposed topography and drainage patterns;
            5.   Proposed storm water and erosion and sediment control
practices;
            6.   Existing and proposed vegetation to be removed and
established;
            7.   Ordinary high water level, blufflines, and all required
setbacks;
            8.   Existing and proposed structures;
            9.   Existing and proposed impervious surfaces; and
            10.   Existing and proposed subsurface sewage treatment systems.
      (7)   Non-conformities.
         (a)   All legally established non-conformities as of the date of this
chapter may continue consistent with M.S. § 462.357 Subd. 1e.
         (b)   New structures erected in conformance with the setback averaging
provisions of division (F)(4) are conforming structures.
         (c)   Site alterations and expansion of site alterations that were
legally made prior to the effective date of this chapter are conforming. Site
alterations include vegetation, erosion control, storm water control measures,
and other nonstructural site improvements.
         (d)   Legally non-conforming principal structures that do not meet the
setback requirements of division (F)(3) may be expanded laterally provided
that:
            1.   The expansion does not extend into the shore or bluff impact
zone or further into the required setback than the building line of the
existing principal structure; and
            2.   The expanded structure's scale and bulk is consistent with
that of the original structure and existing surrounding development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9622.png]
 
   Figure 152.802.1 Expansion of Non-conforming Structure
      (8)   Notifi cations.
         (a)    Amendments to this section and to the MRCCA plan must be
submitted to the Commissioner as provided in Minn. Rules, Part 6106.0070, Subp.
3, Items B - I.
         (b)    Notice of public hearings for discretionary actions, including
conditional and interim use permits, variances, appeals, rezonings, preliminary
plats, final subdivision plats, master plans, and PUDs, must be sent to the
following entities at least ten days prior to the hearing:
            1.   The Commissioner in a format prescribed by the DNR;
            2.   National Park Service; and
            3.   Where building heights exceed the height limits specified in
division (F)(2) as part of the conditional use or variance process, adjoining
local governments within the MRCCA, including those with overlapping
jurisdiction and those across the river.
         (c)   Notice of final decisions for actions in division (C)(7)(A),
including findings of fact, must be sent to the Commissioner, the National Park
Service, and adjoining local governments within the MRCCA within ten days of
the final decision.
         (d)   Requests to amend district boundaries must follow the provisions
in Minn. Rules, Part 6106.0100, Subp. 9, Item C.
         (e)   The DNR will be notified at time of application submittal of
master plans, PUDs, preliminary, and final plats.
      (9)   Accommodating disabilities. Reasonable accommodations for ramps or
other facilities to provide persons with disabilities access to the persons'
property, as required by the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act and the
Federal Fair Housing Act and as provided by Minn. Rules, Chapter 1341, must:
         (a)   Comply with divisions (F) through (L); or
         (b)   If divisions (F) through (L) cannot be complied with, ramps or
other facilities are allowed with an administrative permit provided:
            1.   The permit terminates on either a specific date or upon
occurrence of a particular event related to the person requiring accommodation;
and
            2.   Upon expiration of the permit, the ramp or other facilities
must be removed.
   (D)   MRCCA Districts.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish districts
under which building height and structure placement are regulated to protect
and enhance the Mississippi River's resources and features consistent with the
natural and built character of each district.
      (2)   District description and management purpose. The MRCCA within the
Brooklyn Park is divided into the following MRCCA Districts:
         (a)   Rural and Open Space (ROS).
            1.   Description. The ROS District is characterized by rural and
low-density development patterns and land uses, and includes land that is
riparian or visible from the river, as well as large, undeveloped tracts of
high ecological and scenic value, flood plain, and undeveloped islands. Many
primary conservation areas exist in the district.
            2.   Management purpose. The ROS District must be managed to
sustain and restore the rural and natural character of the corridor and to
protect and enhance habitat, parks and open space, public river corridor views,
and scenic, natural, and historic areas.
         (b)   River Neighborhood (RN).
            1.   Description. The RN District is characterized by primarily
residential neighborhoods that are riparian or readily visible from the river
or that abut riparian parkland. The district includes parks and open space,
limited commercial development, marinas, and related land uses.
            2.   Management purpose. The RN District must be managed to
maintain the character of the river corridor within the context of existing
residential and related neighborhood development, and to protect and enhance
habitat, parks and open space, public river corridor views, and scenic,
natural, and historic areas. Minimizing erosion and the flow of untreated storm
water into the river and enhancing habitat and shoreline vegetation are
priorities in the district.
         (c)   Separated from River (SR).
            1.   Description. The SR District is characterized by its physical
and visual distance from the Mississippi River. The district includes land
separated from the river by distance, topography, development, or a
transportation corridor. The land in this district is not readily visible from
the Mississippi River.
            2.   Management purpose. The SR District provides flexibility in
managing development without negatively affecting the key resources and
features of the river corridor. Minimizing negative impacts to primary
conservation areas and minimizing erosion and flow of untreated storm water
into the Mississippi River are priorities in the district. The RTC District
must be managed in a manner that allows continued growth and redevelopment in
historic downtowns and more intensive redevelopment in limited areas at river
crossings to accommodate compact walkable development patterns and connections
to the river. Minimizing erosion and the flow of untreated storm water into the
river, providing public access to and public views of the river, and restoring
natural vegetation in riparian areas and tree canopy are priorities in the
district.
      (3)   MRCCA district map. The locations and boundaries of the MRCCA
Districts established by this section are shown on MRCCA Overlay District map
which is incorporated herein by reference. The district boundary lines are
intended to follow the centerlines of rivers and streams, highways, streets,
lot lines, and municipal boundaries, unless a boundary line is otherwise
indicated on the map. Where district boundaries cross unsubdivided property,
the district boundary line is determined by use of dimensions or the scale
appearing on the map.
   (E)   Special land use provisions.
      (1)   Purpose. To identify development standards and considerations for
land uses that have potential to negatively impact primary conservation areas
and public river corridor views.
      (2)   Underlying zoning. Uses within the MRCCA are determined by
underlying zoning, with additional provisions for the following land uses:
         (a)   Agricultural use. Perennial ground cover is required within 50
feet of the ordinary high water level and within the bluff impact zone.
         (b)   Feedlots. New animal feedlots and manure storage areas are
prohibited. Existing animal feedlots and manure storage areas must conform with
Minn. Rules, Chapter 7020.
         (c)   Forestry. Tree harvesting and biomass harvesting within
woodlands, and associated reforestation, must be consistent with recommended
practices in Conserving Wooded Areas in Developing Communities: Best Management
Practices in Minnesota.
         (d)   Non-metallic mining. Non-metallic mining requires a conditional
use permit or interim use permit issued by the local government, subject to the
following:
            1.   New non-metallic mining is prohibited within the shore impact
zone and bluff impact zone and within the required structure setback from the
bluffline and OHWL;
            2.   Processing machinery must be located consistent with setback
standards for structures as provided in division (F)(3);
            3.   Only one barge loading area, which must be limited to the
minimum size practicable, is permitted for each mining operation;
            4.   New and, where practicable, existing non-metallic mining
operations must not be readily visible and must be screened by establishing and
maintaining natural vegetation. The unscreened boundaries of non-metallic
mining areas are limited to only the barge loading area;
            5.   A site management plan must be developed by the operator and
approved by the local government before new non-metallic mining commences.
Operations must be consistent with the site plan throughout the duration of
operations at the site. The site management plan must:
               a.   Describe how the site will be developed over time with an
emphasis on minimizing environmental risk to public waters;
               b.   Explain where staged reclamation may occur at certain
points during the life of the site;
               c.   Address dust, noise, storm water management, possible
pollutant discharges, days and hours of operation, and duration of operations;
and
               d.   Describe any anticipated vegetation and topographic
alterations outside the pit, and reclamation plans consistent with the stated
end use for the land; and;
            6.   Existing and new non-metallic mining operations must submit
land reclamation plans to the local government compatible with the purposes of
this section.
         (e)   River-dependent uses. River-dependent uses must comply with the
following design standards:
            1.   Structures and parking areas, except shoreline facilities and
private roads and conveyances serving river-dependent uses as provided in
division (L), must meet the dimensional and performance standards in this
section, must be designed so that they are not readily visible, and must be
screened by establishing and maintaining natural vegetation;
            2.   Shoreline facilities must comply with Minn. Rules, Chapter
6115 and must:
               a.   Be designed in a compact fashion to minimize the shoreline
area affected; and
               b.   Minimize the surface area of land occupied in relation to
the number of watercraft or barges to be served.
            3.   Dredging and placement of dredged material are subject to
existing federal and state permit requirements and agreements.
         (f)   Wireless communication towers. Wireless communication towers
require a conditional or interim use permit and are subject to the following
design standards:
            1.   The applicant must demonstrate that functional coverage cannot
be provided through co-location, a tower at a lower height, or a tower at a
location outside of the MRCCA;
            2.   The tower must not be located in a bluff or shore impact zone;
            3.   Placement of the tower must minimize impacts on public river
corridor views; and
            4.   Comply with the general design standards in division (H)(2).
   (F)   Structure height and placement and lot size.
      (1)   Purpose. To establish standards that protect primary conservation
areas and public river corridor views from development impacts and ensure that
new development is sited consistent with the purpose of the MRCCA.
      (2)   Structure height. Structures and facilities must comply with the
following standards unless identified as exempt in division (L).
         (a)   Structures and facilities must comply with the following
standards unless identified as exempt in division (L):
            1.   ROS District: 35 feet or lower.
            2.   RN District: 35 feet.
            3.   SR District: Height is determined by underlying zoning,
provided the allowed height is consistent with that of the mature treeline,
where present, and existing surrounding development, as viewed from the OWHL of
the opposite shore.
         (b)   Height is measured on the side of the structure facing the
Mississippi River.
         (c)   In addition to the conditional use permit requirements of
division (C)(4), criteria for considering whether to grant a conditional use
permit for structures exceeding the height limits must include:
            1.   Assessment of the visual impact of the proposed structure on
public river corridor views, including views from other communities;
            2.   Determination that the proposed structure meets the required
bluff and OHWL setbacks;
            3.   Identification and application of techniques to minimize the
perceived bulk of the proposed structure, such as:
               a.   Placing the long axis of the building perpendicular to the
river;
               b.   Stepping back of portions of the facade;
               c.   Lowering the roof pitch or use of a flat roof;
               d.   Using building materials or mitigation techniques that will
blend in with the natural surroundings such as green roofs, green walls, or
other green and brown building materials;
               e.   Narrowing the profile of upper floors of the building; or
               f.   Increasing the setbacks of the building from the
Mississippi River or blufflines.
            4.   Identification of techniques for preservation of those view
corridors identified in the MRCCA Plan; and
            5.   Opportunities for creation or enhancement of public river
corridor views.
      (3)   Structure and impervious surface placement.
         (a)   Structures and impervious surface must not be placed in the
shore or bluff impact zones unless identified as an exemption in division (L).
         (b)   Structures and facilities must comply with the following OHWL
setback provisions unless identified as exempt in division (L).
            1.   ROS District: 200 feet from the Mississippi River and 150 feet
from the Minnesota and Vermillion Rivers.
            2.   RN District: 100 feet from the Mississippi River and 75 feet
from the Rum and Vermillion Rivers.
            3.   SR District: 75 feet from the Vermillion River.
         (c)   Structures and facilities must comply with the following
bluffline setback provisions unless identified as exempt in division(L):
            1.   ROS District: 100 feet.
            2.   RN District: 40 feet.
            3.   SR District: 40 feet.
         (d)   Where principal structures exist on the adjoining lots on both
sides of a proposed building site, the minimum setback may be altered to
conform to the average of the adjoining setbacks, if the new structure's scale
and bulk riverward or bluffward of the setbacks required under divisions (F)(3)
(B) and(F)(3)(C) are consistent with adjoining development. See Figure
152.802.2.
152.802.2 Structure Setback Averaging
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9624.png]
 
         (e)    Subsurface sewage treatment systems, including the septic tank
and absorption area, must be located at least 75 feet from the ordinary high
water level of the Mississippi River and all other public waters.
      (4)    Lot size and buildable area.
         (a)   The width of lots abutting the Mississippi River in the ROS
District must be at least 200 feet, unless alternative design methods are used
that provide greater protection of the riparian area.
         (b)   All new lots must have adequate buildable area to comply with
the setback requirements of divisions (F)(3)(B) and(F)(3)(C)c so as to not
require variances to use the lots for their intended purpose.
   (G)   Performance standards for private facilities.
      (1)   Purpose. To establish design standards for private facilities that
are consistent with best management practices and that minimize impacts to
primary conservation areas, public river corridor views and other resources
identified in the MRCCA plan.
      (2)   General design standards. All private facilities must be developed
in accordance with the vegetation management and land alteration requirements
in divisions (I) and (J).
      (3)   Private roads, driveways, and parking areas. Except as provided in
division (L), private roads, driveways and parking areas must:
         (a)   Be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and
topography so that they are not readily visible;
         (b)   Comply with structure setback requirements according to division
(F)(3); and
         (c)   Not be placed within the bluff impact zone or shore impact zone,
unless exempt under division (L) and designed consistent with division (H)(2).
      (4)   Private water access and viewing facilities.
         (a)   Private access paths must be no more than:
            1.   Eight feet wide, if placed within the shore impact zone; or
            2.   Four feet wide, if placed within the bluff impact zone.
         (b)   Private water access ramps must:
            1.   Comply with Minn. Rules, Chapters 6115.0210 and 6280.0250; and
            2.   Be designed and constructed consistent with the applicable
standards in Design Handbook for Recreational Boating and Fishing Facilities.
         (c)   Design and construction of private stairways, lifts, and
landings are subject to the following standards:
            1.   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties and
residential facilities held in common, if approved by the City Manager;
            2.   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not
exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet area allowed
for commercial properties and residential facilities held in common, if
approved by the City Manager;
            3.   Canopies or roofs are prohibited on stairways, lifts, or
landings;
            4.   Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the least
visible portion of the lot whenever practical; and
            5.   Ramps, lifts, mobility paths, or other facilities for persons
with physical disabilities are allowed for achieving access to shore areas
according to divisions (G)(4)(C)i. - iv., and as provided under division (C)
(9).
         (d)    One water-oriented accessory structure is allowed for each
riparian lot or parcel less than 300 feet in width at the ordinary high water
level, with one additional water-oriented accessory structure allowed for each
additional 300 feet of shoreline on the same lot or parcel. Water-oriented
accessory structures are prohibited in the bluff impact zone and must:
            1.   Not exceed 12 feet in height;
            2.   Not exceed 120 square feet in area; and
            3.   Be placed a minimum of ten feet from the ordinary high water
level.
      (5)   Decks and patios in setback areas. Decks and at-grade patios may
encroach into the required setbacks from the ordinary high water level and
blufflines without a variance, when consistent with divisions (I) and (J),
provided that:
         (a)   The encroachment of the deck or patio into the required setback
area does not exceed 15% of the required structure setback; and
         (b)   The area of the deck or patio that extends into the required
setback area occupies no more than 25% of the total area between the required
setback and the 15% using the formula:
[Required setback depth (feet) x 0.15 x lot width (feet) x 0.25 = maximum total
area]
         (c)   The deck or patio does not extend into the bluff impact zone.
See Figure 152.802.3 below.
Figure 152.802.3 Deck and Patio Encroachment
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9626.png]
 
      (6)    Directional signs.
         (a)    Directional signs for patrons arriving at a business by
watercraft must comply with the following standards:
            1.   They must be consistent with M.S. § 86B.115;
            2.   Only convey the location and name of the establishment and the
general types of goods and services available, if located in a shore impact
zone;
            3.   Be no greater than ten feet in height and 32 square feet in
surface area; and
            4.   If illuminated, the lighting must be shielded to prevent
illumination out across the river or to the sky.
      (7)   Fences. Fences between principal structures and the river are
allowed if fences are:
         (a)   Not higher than six feet;
         (b)   Not located within 40 feet of slopes greater than 12%; and
         (c)   Not located in the regulatory flood plain.
   (H)   Performance standards for public facilities.
      (1)   Purpose. To establish design standards for public facilities that
are consistent with best management practices and that minimize impacts to
primary conservation areas, public river corridor views and other resources
identified in the MRCCA plan. Public facilities serve the public interest by
providing public access to the Mississippi River corridor or require locations
in or adjacent to the river corridor and therefore require some degree of
flexibility.
      (2)   General design standards. All public facilities must be designed
and constructed to:
         (a)   Minimize visibility of the facility from the river to the extent
consistent with the purpose of the facility;
         (b)   Comply with the structure placement and height standards in
division (F), except as provided in division (L);
         (c)   Be consistent with the vegetation management standards in
division (I) and the land alteration and storm water management standards in
division (J), including use of practices identified in Best Practices for
Meeting DNR General Public Waters Work Permit GP 2004-0001, where applicable;
         (d)   Avoid primary conservation areas, unless no alternative exists.
If no alternative exists, then disturbance to primary conservation areas must
be avoided to the greatest extent practicable, and design and construction must
minimize impacts; and
         (e)   Minimize disturbance of spawning and nesting times by scheduling
construction at times when local fish and wildlife are not spawning or nesting.
      (3)   Right-of-way maintenance standards. Right-of-way maintenance must
comply with the following standards:
         (a)   Vegetation currently in a natural state must be maintained to
the extent feasible;
         (b)   Where vegetation in a natural state has been removed, native
plants must be planted and maintained on the right-of-way; and
         (c)   Chemical control of vegetation must be avoided when practicable,
but when chemical control is necessary, chemicals used must be in accordance
with the regulations and other requirements of all state and federal agencies
with authority over the chemical's use.
      (4)   Crossings of public water or public land. Crossings of public
waters or land controlled by the commissioner are subject to approval by the
Commissioner according to M.S. §§ 84.415 and 103G.245.
      (5)   Public utilities. Public utilities must comply with the following
standards:
         (a)   High-voltage transmission lines, wind energy conversion systems
greater than five megawatts, and pipelines are regulated according to M.S.
Chapters 216E, 216F, and 216G respectively;
         (b)   If overhead placement is necessary, utility facility crossings
must minimize visibility of the facility from the river and follow other
existing right of ways as much as practicable;
         (c)   The appearance of structures must be as compatible as
practicable with the surrounding area in a natural state with regard to height
and width, materials used, and color; and
         (d)   Wireless communication facilities, according to division (E)(2)
(f).
      (6)   Public transportation facilities. Public transportation facilities
shall comply with structure placement and height standards in division (F).
Where such facilities intersect or about two or more MRCCA districts, the least
restrictive standards apply. Public transportation facilities must be designed
and constructed to give priority to:
         (a)   Providing scenic overlooks for motorists, bicyclists, and
pedestrians;
         (b)   Providing safe pedestrian crossings and facilities along the
river corridor;
         (c)   Providing access to the riverfront in public ownership; and
         (d)   Allowing for use of the land between the river and the
transportation facility.
      (7)   Public recreational facilities. Where such facilities intersect or
abut two or more MRCCA districts, the least restrictive dimensional standards
apply. Public transportation facilities must be designed and constructed to
give priority to:
         (a)   Buildings and parking associated with pubic recreational
facilities must comply with the structure placement and height standards in
division (F), except as provided in division (L).
         (b)   Roads and driveways associated with public recreational
facilities must not be placed in the bluff or shore impact zones unless no
other placement alternative exists. If no alternative exists, then design and
construction must minimize impacts to shoreline vegetation, erodible soils and
slopes, and other sensitive resources.
         (c)   Trails, access paths, and viewing areas associated with public
recreational facilities and providing access to or views of the Mississippi
River are allowed within the bluff and shore impact zones if design,
construction, and maintenance methods are consistent with the best management
practice guidelines in Trail Planning, Design, and Development Guidelines.
            1.   Hard-surface trails are not allowed on the face of bluffs with
a slope exceeding 30%. Natural surface trails are allowed, provided they do not
exceed eight feet in width.
            2.   Trails, paths, and viewing areas must be designed and
constructed to minimize:
               a.   Visibility from the river;
               b.   Visual impacts on public river corridor views; and
               c.   Disturbance to and fragmentation of primary conservation
areas.
         (d)   Public water access facilities must comply with the following
requirements:
            1.   Watercraft access ramps must comply with Minn. Rules Chapters
6115.0210 and 6280.0250; and
            2.   Facilities must be designed and constructed consistent with
the standards in Design Handbook for Recreational Boating and Fishing
Facilities.
         (e)   Public signs and kiosks for interpretive or directional purposes
are allowed in the bluff or shore impact zones, provided they are placed and
constructed to minimize disturbance to these areas and avoid visual impacts on
public river corridor views.
         (f)   Public stairways, lifts, and landings must be designed as
provided in division (G)(4)(c).
   (I)   Vegetation management.
      (1)   Purpose. To establish standards that sustain and enhance the
biological and ecological functions of vegetation; preserve the natural
character and topography of the MRCCA; and maintain stability of bluffs and
steep slopes and ensure stability of other erosion-prone areas.
      (2)   Applicability. This section applies to:
         (a)   Shore impact zones;
         (b)   Areas within 50 feet of a wetland or natural drainage way;
         (c)   Bluff impact zones;
         (d)   Areas of native plant communities; and
         (e)   Significant existing vegetative stands identified in the MRCCA
plan.
      (3)   Activities allowed without a vegetation permit.
         (a)   Maintenance of existing lawns, landscaping and gardens;
         (b)   Removal of vegetation in emergency situations as determined by
the City Manager;
         (c)   Right-of-way maintenance for public facilities meeting the
standards division (H)(3);
         (d)   Agricultural and forestry activities meeting the standards of
divisions (E)(2)(A) and(E)(2)(C); and
         (e)   Selective vegetation removal, provided that vegetative cover
remains consistent with the management purpose of the MRCCA District,
including:
            1.   Vegetation that is dead, diseased, dying, or hazardous;
            2.   To prevent the spread of diseases or insect pests;
            3.   Individual trees and shrubs; and
            4.   Removal of invasive non-native species.
      (4)   Activities allowed with a vegetation permit.
         (a)   The following intensive vegetation clearing activities are
allowed with a vegetation permit:
            1.   Clearing of vegetation that is dead, diseased, dying, or
hazardous;
            2.   Clearing to prevent the spread of diseases or insect pests;
            3.   Clearing to remove invasive non-native species;
            4.   Clearing to prepare for restoration and erosion control
management activities consistent with a plan approved by the City Manager; and
            5.   The minimum necessary for development that is allowed with a
building permit or as an exemption under division (L).
         (b)   Conditions of vegetation permit approval.
            1.   Development is sited to minimize removal of or disturbance to
natural vegetation;
            2.   Soil, slope stability, and hydrologic conditions are suitable
for the proposed work as determined by a professional engineer or (insert name
of resource agency, if someone other than professional engineer is desired);
            3.   Clearing is the minimum necessary and designed to blend with
the natural terrain and minimize visual impacts to public river corridor views;
            4.   Any native plant communities removed are replaced with
vegetation that provides equivalent biological and ecological functions
consistent with an approved vegetation restoration plan as provided in division
(I)(6)(b). If replaced, priorities for restoration are stabilization of
erodible soils, restoration or enhancement of shoreline vegetation, and
revegetation of bluffs or steep slopes visible from the river;
            5.   All other vegetation removed is restored with natural
vegetation to the greatest extent practicable consistent with an approved
vegetation restoration plan as provided in division (I)(6)(b). Priorities for
replacement are the same as under division(I)(4)(b)iv.;
            6.   Any disturbance of highly erodible soils is replanted with
deep-rooted vegetation with a high stem density;
            7.   Vegetation removal activities are conducted so as to expose
the smallest practical area of soil to erosion for the least possible time;
            8.   Areas of vegetation restoration priorities identified in the
MRCCA plan are restored, if applicable; and
            9.   Any other condition determined necessary to achieve the
purpose of this section.
      (5)   Prohibited activities. All other intensive vegetation clearing is
prohibited.
      (6)   Vegetation restoration plan.
         (a)   Development of a vegetation restoration plan and reestablishment
of natural vegetation is required:
            1.   As a condition of a vegetation permit issued under divisions
(I)(4)(b)iv and(I)(4)(b)v;
            2.   Upon failure to comply with any provisions in this section; or
            3.   As part of the planning process for subdivisions as provided
in division (K).
         (b)   The vegetation restoration plan must satisfy the application
submittal requirements in divisions (C)(6), and:
            1.   Include vegetation that provides suitable habitat and
effective soil stability, runoff retention, and infiltration capability.
Vegetation species, composition, density, and diversity must be guided by
nearby patches of native plant communities and by Native Vegetation
Establishment and Enhancement Guidelines;
            2.   Be prepared by a qualified individual; and
            3.   Include a maintenance plan that includes management provisions
for controlling invasive species and replacement of plant loss for three years.
         (c)   A certificate of compliance will be issued after the vegetation
restoration plan requirements have been satisfied.
   (J)   Land alteration standards and stormwater management.
      (1)   Purpose. To establish standards that protect water quality from
pollutant loadings of sediment, nutrients, bacteria, and other contaminants;
and maintain stability of bluffs, shorelines, and other areas prone to erosion.
      (2)   Land alteration permit.
         (a)   Within the bluff impact zone, land alteration is prohibited,
except for the following, which are allowed by permit.
            1.   Erosion control consistent with division (J)(6);
            2.   The minimum necessary for development that is allowed as an
exception under division (L); and
            3.   Repair and maintenance of existing buildings and facilities.
         (b)   Within the water quality impact zone, land alteration that
involves more than ten cubic yards of material or affects an area greater than
1,000 square feet requires a permit.
      (3)   Rock riprap, retaining walls, and other erosion control structures.
         (a)   Construction, repair, or replacement of rock riprap, retaining
walls, and other erosion control structures located at or below the OHWL must
comply with Minn. Rules, Chapters 6115.0215, Subp. 4, Item E, and 6115.0216,
Subp. 2. Work must not proceed until approved by the Commissioner. See Figure
152.802.4.
Figure 152.802.4 Riprap Guidelines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9628.png]
 
         (b)    Construction or replacement of rock riprap, retaining walls,
and other erosion control structures within the bluff impact zone and the water
quality impact zone are allowed with a permit consistent with provisions of
division (K)(6) provided that:
            1.    If the project includes work at or below the OHWL, the
Commissioner has already approved or permitted the project.
            2.   The structures are used only to correct an established erosion
problem as determined by the City Manager.
            3.   The size and extent of the structures are the minimum
necessary to correct the erosion problem and are not larger than the following,
unless a professional engineer determines that a larger structure is needed to
correct the erosion problem:
               a.   Retaining walls must not exceed five feet in height and
must be placed a minimum horizontal distance of ten feet apart; and
               b.   Riprap must not exceed the height of the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
         (c)   Repair of existing rock riprap, retaining walls, and other
erosion control structures above the OHWL does not require a permit provided it
does not involve any land alteration under division (J)(2).
      (4)   Stormwater management.
         (a)   In the bluff impact zone, storm water management facilities are
prohibited, except by permit if:
            1.   There are no alternatives for storm water treatment outside
the bluff impact zone on the subject site;
            2.   The site generating runoff is designed so that the amount of
runoff reaching the bluff impact zone is reduced to the greatest extent
practicable;
            3.   The construction and operation of the facility does not affect
slope stability on the subject property or adjacent properties; and
            4.   Mitigation based on the best available engineering and
geological practices is required and applied to eliminate or minimize the risk
of slope failure.
         (b)   In the water quality impact zone, development that creates new
impervious surface, as allowed by exemption in division (L), or fully
reconstructs existing impervious surface of more than one acre requires a storm
water permit or approved storm water plan. Multipurpose trails and sidewalks
are exempt if there is down gradient vegetation or a filter strip that is at
least five feet wide.
         (c)   In all other areas, storm water runoff must be directed away
from the bluff impact zones or unstable areas.
      (5)   Development on steep slopes. Construction of structures, impervious
surfaces, land alteration, vegetation removal, or other construction activities
are allowed on steep slopes if:
         (a)   The development can be accomplished without increasing erosion
or storm water runoff;
         (b)   The soil types and geology are suitable for the proposed
development; and
         (c)   Vegetation is managed according to the requirements of division
(I).
      (6)   Conditions of land alteration permit approval.
         (a)   Temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures
retain sediment onsite consistent with best management practices in the
Minnesota Stormwater Manual;
         (b)   Natural site topography, soil, and vegetation conditions are
used to control runoff and reduce erosion and sedimentation;
         (c)   Construction activity is phased when possible;
         (d)   All erosion and sediment controls are installed before starting
any land disturbance activity;
         (e)   Erosion and sediment controls are maintained to ensure effective
operation;
         (f)   The proposed work is consistent with the vegetation standards in
division (I); and
         (g)   Best management practices for protecting and enhancing
ecological and water resources identified in Best Practices for Meeting DNR
General Public Waters Work Permit GP 2004-0001.
      (7)   Compliance with other plans and programs. All development must:
         (a)   Be consistent with M.S. Chapter 103B, and local water management
plans completed under Minn. Rules Chapter 8410;
         (b)   Meet or exceed the wetland protection standards under Minn.
Rules, Chapter 8420; and
         (c)   Meet or exceed the flood plain management standards under Minn.
Rules, Chapter 6120.5000 - 6120.6200
   (K)   Subdivision and land development standards.
      (1)   Purpose.
         (a)   To protect and enhance the natural and scenic values of the
MRCCA during development or redevelopment of the remaining large sites;
         (b)   To establish standards for protecting and restoring biological
and ecological functions of primary conservation areas on large sites; and
         (c)   To encourage restoration of natural vegetation during
development or redevelopment of large sites where restoration opportunities
have been identified in MRCCA Plans.
      (2)   Applicability.
         (a)   The design standards in this section apply to subdivisions,
planned unit developments and master-planned development and redevelopment of
land involving ten or more acres for contiguous parcels that abut the
Mississippi River and 20 or more acres for all other parcels, including smaller
individual sites within the following developments that are part of a common
plan of development that may be constructed at different times:
            1.   Subdivisions;
            2.   Planned unit developments; and
            3.   Master-planned development and redevelopment of land.
         (b)   The following activities are exempt from the requirements of
this section:
            1.   Minor subdivisions consisting of three or fewer lots;
            2.   Minor boundary line corrections;
            3.   Resolutions of encroachments;
            4.   Additions to existing lots of record;
            5.   Placement of essential services; and
            6.   Activities involving river-dependent commercial and industrial
uses.
      (3)   Application materials. Project information listed in Section 3.6
must be submitted for all proposed developments.
      (4)   Design standards.
         (a)   Primary conservation areas, where they exist, must be set aside
and designated as protected open space in quantities meeting the following as a
percentage of total parcel area:
            1.   CA-ROS District: 50%;
            2.   CA-RN District: 20%;
            3.   CA-RTC, CA-UM, and CA-UC Districts: 10%; and
            4.   CA-SR District: 10% if the parcel includes native plant
communities or provides feasible connections to a regional park or trail
system, otherwise no requirement.
         (b)   If the primary conservation areas exceed the amounts specified
in division (K)(4)(a), then protection of native plant communities and natural
vegetation in riparian areas shall be prioritized.
         (c)   If primary conservation areas exist but do not have natural
vegetation (identified as restoration priorities in the MRCCA Plan), then a
vegetation assessment must be completed to evaluate the unvegetated primary
conservation areas and determine whether vegetation restoration is needed. If
restoration is needed, vegetation must be restored according to division (I)(6)
(b).
         (d)   If primary conservation areas do not exist on the parcel and
portions of the parcel have been identified in the MRCCA plan as a restoration
area, vegetation must be restored in the identified areas according to division
(I)(6)(b) and the area must be set aside and designated as protected open
space.
         (e)   Storm water treatment areas or other green infrastructure may be
used to meet the protected open space requirements if the vegetation provides
biological and ecological functions.
         (f)   Land dedicated under §
151.061 for public river access, parks, or other open space or public
facilities may be counted toward the protected open space requirement.
         (g)   Protected open space areas must connect open space, natural
areas, and recreational areas, where present on adjacent parcels, as much as
possible to form an interconnected network.
      (5)   Permanent protection of designated open space.
         (a)   Designated open space areas must be protected through one or
more of the following methods:
            1.   Public acquisition by a government entity for conservation
purposes;
            2.   A permanent conservation easement, as provided in M.S. Chapter
84C;
            3.   A deed restriction; or
            4.   Other arrangements that achieve an equivalent degree of
protection.
         (b)   Permanent protection methods must ensure the long-term
management of vegetation to meet its biological and ecological functions,
prohibit structures, and prohibit land alteration, except as needed to provide
public recreational facilities and access to the river.
   (L)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide exemptions to structure placement, height and
other standards for specific river or water access dependent facilities as
provided in M.S. § 116G.15 Subd. 4.
      (2)   Applicability.
         (a)   Uses and activities not specifically exempted must comply with
this section. Uses and activities exempted under shore impact zone and bluff
impact zone must comply with the vegetation management and land alteration
standards in Sections 9 and 10.
         (b)   Uses and activities in division (L)(3) are categorized as:
            1.   Permitted-P. This means that the use or activity is allowed;
            2.   Conditional-C. This means that the use or activity is allowed
only if no alternatives exist, as a conditional use;
            3.   Permitted with additional standards-S. This means that a use
or activity is not exempt and must meet the standards of this chapter; or
            4.   Not permitted-NP. The use is prohibited.
      (3)   Use and activity exemptions classification.
         (a)   General uses and activities.
TABLE 152.802.1
Use or activity Setbacks Height limits SIZ BIZ Applicable standards with which
                                               the use or activity must comply
TABLE 152.802.1
                                                        Applicable standards
Use or activity        Setbacks Height limits SIZ  BIZ  with which the use or
                                                        activity must comply
Industrial and utility
structures requiring                                    Structure design and
greater height for                                      placement must minimize
operational reasons       S     P         �  �interference with
(such as elevators,                                     public river corridor
refineries and                                          views.
railroad signaling
towers)
Barns, silos, and farm    S     P         �   S
structures
Bridges and bridge        P     P         �  �§
approach roadways                                       152.802(H)
Wireless communication    NP    NP        �  �§
towers                                                  152.802(E)(2)(f)
Chimneys, church
spires, flag poles,
public monuments, and     S     P         �   S
mechanical stacks and
equipment
Historic properties                                     Exemptions do not apply
and contributing          P     P         �  �to additions or site
properties in historic                                  alterations.
districts
 
         (b)   Public utilities.
 
TABLE 152.802.2
                                                         Applicable standards
Use or activity         Setbacks Height limits SIZ  BIZ  with which the use or
                                                         activity must comply
Electrical power           P     P         �  �§
facilities                                               152.802(H)
Essential services                                       §
(other than storm water    P     P         �  �152.802(H)
facilities)
Storm water facilities     P     S         �  �§
                                                         152.802(J)
Wastewater treatment       P  S             P    NS   §
                                                         152.802(H)
Public transportation   P        S             C    C    §
facilities                                               152.802(H)
 
         (c)   Public recreational facilities.
TABLE 152.802.3
Use or activity Setbacks Height limits SIZ BIZ Applicable standards with which
                                               the use or activity must comply
TABLE 152.802.3
                                                        Applicable standards
Use or activity        Setbacks Height limits SIZ  BIZ  with which the use or
                                                        activity must comply
                                                        §
Accessory structures,                                   152.802(H); within BIZ,
such as monuments,                                      only on slopes
flagpoles, light          P     P         �  �averaging less than
standards, and similar                                  30%. Exemptions do not
park features                                           apply to principal
                                                        structures.
Picnic shelters and                                     §
other open-sided          P     S         �  �152.802(H)
structures
                                                        §
                                                        152.802(H); within BIZ,
                                                        only with 20 feet of
Parking lots           C        S             C    C    toe of bluff; not on
                                                        face of bluff; and must
                                                        not affect stability of
                                                        bluff.
Roads and driveways    C        S             C    C    §
                                                        152.802(H)
Natural-surfaced                                        §
trails, access paths,  P        S             P    P    152.802(H)
and viewing areas
                                                        §
Hard-surfaced trails   P        S             P    C    152.802(H); within BIZ
and viewing platforms                                   only on slopes averages
                                                        less than 30%.
Water access ramps     P        S             P    C    §
                                                        152.802(H)
Public signs and
kiosks for             P        S             P    C    §
interpretive or                                         152.802(H)
directional purposes
 
         (d)   River-dependent uses.
 
TABLE 152.802.4
                                                       Applicable standards
Use or activity       Setbacks Height limits SIZ  BIZ  with which the use or
                                                       activity must comply
                                                       §
                                                       152.802(E)(2)(e);
                                                       Exemptions do not apply
Shoreline facilities     P     S1        �  �to buildings,
                                                       structures, and parking
                                                       areas that are not part
                                                       of a shoreline
                                                       facility.
Private roads and
conveyance structures    P     S1        �  �§
serving river-                                         152.802(E)(2)(e)
dependent uses
1 River-dependent commercial, industrial, and utility structures are exempt
from height limits only if greater height is required for operational reasons.
 
         (e)   Private residential and commercial water access and use
facilities.
TABLE 152.802.5
Use or activity Setbacks Height limits SIZ BIZ Applicable standards with which
                                               the use or activity must comply
TABLE 152.802.5
                                                        Applicable standards
Use or activity        Setbacks Height limits SIZ  BIZ  with which the use or
                                                        activity must comply
                                                        §
                                                        152.802(I); in BIZ,
                                                        only on slopes
                                                        averaging less than
Private roads serving     C     S         �  �30%. Exemption does not
3 or more lots                                          apply to private roads
                                                        serving fewer than 3
                                                        lots or to private
                                                        driveways and parking
                                                        areas.
Access paths              P     S         �  �§
                                                        152.802(E)(2)(e)
Water access ramps     P        S             P    S    §
                                                        152.802(I)
Stairways, lifts, and  P        S             P    P    §
landings                                                152.802(I)
Water-oriented         P        S             P    S    §
accessory structures                                    152.802(I)
Patios and decks       P        S             N    S    §
                                                        152.802(I)(5)
                                                        §
Directional signs for                                   152.802(I)(6);
watercraft (private)   P        S             P    S    exemption does not
                                                        apply to off-premise
                                                        advertising signs.
Temporary storage of
docks, boats, and      P        S             P    S
other equipment during
the winter months
Erosion control                                         §
structures, such as                                     152.802(J)(3),
rock riprap and        P        S             P    C    §
retaining walls                                         152.802(J)(5), and §
                                                        152.802(J)(6)
Flood control          P        S             P    C    §
structures                                              152.802(J)
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.803 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Development Overlay is to promote
creative and efficient use of land by providing design flexibility in the
application of the provisions of a primary zoning district by providing an
overlay district on top of any of the primary zoning districts. It is the
applicant's responsibility to demonstrate that the proposed planned development
is not simply for enhanced gain and accomplishes one or more of the following:
      (1)   Introduce flexibility of site design and architecture for the
conservation of land, natural features and open space through clustering of
structures, facilities, amenities and activities for public benefit.
      (2)   Improve the efficiency of public streets and utilities through a
more efficient and effective use of land, open space and public facilities
through assembly and development of land in larger parcels.
      (3)   Internal organization and adequacy of various uses or densities,
circulation and parking facilities, urban services, recreation areas, open
spaces, screening and landscaping, and the ability to demonstrate that a viable
development will be created.
      (4)   Provide mixed land use and land use transitions in keeping with the
character of adjacent land uses and the underlying zoning districts; and,
      (5)   Provide for the clustering of land parcels for development as an
integrated, coordinated unit as opposed to a parcel by parcel, piecemeal
approach and to maintain these parcels by central management including
integrated and joint use of parking, maintenance of open space and similar
features, and harmonious selection and efficient distribution of uses.
   (B)   Intent. The intent of this designation is to encourage development
that is superior in quality and design than could be achieved through
traditional zoning. The boundaries of this overlay are amended for each
application as approved through on the development plan through the rezoning
process outlined elsewhere in this chapter.
   (C)   Flexibilities. The City Council may grant certain flexibility to
zoning requirements if the applicant demonstrates to the Council's satisfaction
that the purpose and intent have been satisfied. Such flexibilities may
include:
      (1)   Land use. Flexibility in land use may be provided by a PDO,
however, the uses in the underlying zoning district may be further restricted.
      (2)   Density. Flexibility in density may be granted if consistent with
the land use designation in the comprehensive plan.
      (3)   Site design. Specific lot area, lot width, setbacks, height, yard,
floor area ratio, landscaping, and open space requirements may be established
for the PDO.
      (4)   Parking and loading. Flexibility in the design and location of off-
street parking facilities and loading areas is permitted with the approval of
such facilities by the city engineer; however, in no case shall gravel parking
areas be permitted.
      (5)   Signage. Flexibility in the design and location of signage is
permitted; however, in no case shall pylon signs be permitted.
      (6)   Stormwater. Stormwater facilities may be shared between parcels if
part of an approved PDO.
   (D)   Procedures. Planned development projects shall adhere to the rezoning
procedure listed in §
152.309 and site plan review listed in §
152.303.
   (E)   Maintenance requirements. If common open space or service facilities
are provided within the PDO, the PDO shall contain provisions to assure the
continued operation and maintenance of such open space and service facilities
to a predetermined reasonable standard. Open space and facilities may be placed
under the ownership of one of the following, as approved by the City Council:
      (1)   Dedicated to the public, where a community-wide use is anticipated,
and the City Council agrees to accept the dedication;
      (2)   Landlord control, where only use by tenants is anticipated; or
      (3)   Property owners' association, provided all the following conditions
are met:
         (a)   Prior to the use, occupancy, sale, or the execution of contract
for sale of individual buildings, units, lots, parcels, tracts or common areas,
a recorded declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, or an
equivalent document as specified by state statute, must be filed with the city.
         (b)   Such document shall be filed with and reviewed and approved by
the City Attorney prior to recordation with the county.
   (F)   Phasing of public and common open space. When a PDO provides for
common private or public open space, and is planned for a phased development
over a period of time, the total area of common or public open space or land
escrow security in any phase of development may, at a minimum, bear the same
relationship to the total open space to be provided in the entire PDO as the
phases or units completed or under development bear to the entire PDO.
   (G)   Modifications or amendments. Minor modifications, as determined by the
City Manager, are subject to the site plan review process established in §
152.303. Major modifications or amendments, including changes in land use,
density, maintenance of open space or common areas, or extensive changes to
road, utility, or open space must follow the same procedures for submittal,
notification, and public hearing as the original PDO.
   (H)   List of approved active Planned Development Overlays and ordinance
numbers.
Ord. number Planned Development Overlay
Ord. number Planned Development Overlay
2003-998    Unnamed
2005-1050   Unnamed
2006-1056   West Broadway and Candlewood Drive
2009-1109   Gateway 2nd Addition southwest interchange of Highways 169 and 610)
2013-1156   7800 Lakeland Avenue North
2014-1168   North Business Center
2014-1176   Gateway 3rd Addition (Outlot C)
2017-1178   North Cross Business Park
2014-1179   Six Ten Commerce Center Third Addition
2014-1181   Mississippi Gardens
2015-1188   Capstone Quadrangle 2nd Addition
2015-1193   North Park Business Center
2015-1194   Six Ten Zane
2015-1199   Villas of Rush Creek Trail
2016-1210   Midas Station
2017-1220   Six Ten Zane Second Addition
2017-1226   Gateway 3rd Addition (Outlots B and D)
2018-1236   Villas of Rush Creek Trail 4th Addition
2020-1252   9501 Louisiana Avenue North (unplatted)
2020-1257   9489 Winnetka Avenue Noth
2021-1264   Six Ten Commerce Center 5th Addition
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.804 PEDESTRIAN PRIORITY OVERLAY DISTRICT (PPOD).
   (A)   Purpose. The Pedestrian Priority Overlay District (PPOD) is
established to provide pedestrian-oriented development on streets designated as
pedestrian priority streets in the Comprehensive Plan. This district is applied
at a 150-foot depth from the front lot line of parcels fronting a pedestrian
priority street.
   (B)   District standards.
      (1)   Minimum floor area ratio. Notwithstanding the regulations of the
underlying zoning district, the minimum floor area ration for new development
in the PPOD is one-half.
      (2)   Required commercial uses. The first floor of all new developments
in the PPOD shall provide commercial uses, subject to the requirements of this
section.
      (3)   Size of required commercial use space. In a multi-story building
the commercial use or uses shall occupy at least 60% of the building's ground-
floor street frontage and a minimum depth of 20 feet. In a single-story
building the commercial use or uses shall occupy 100% of the building's street
frontage and a minimum interior depth of 20 feet.
      (4)   Use of required commercial space. Required commercial use areas
shall be occupied by one or more of the following uses. Building amenities
intended for use solely by building occupants and not open to the general
public shall not qualify as a required commercial use.
         (a)   Retail and service.
         (b)   Restaurant and brewpubs.
         (c)   Medical clinics.
         (d)   Child care.
         (e)   Adult day care.
         (f)   Breweries and micro-distilleries.
         (g)   Taprooms and cocktail rooms.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
STANDARDS
Land Use Performance Standards
§ 152.900 RESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, PRINCIPAL USES.
   All residential principal uses shall comply with the following supplemental
regulations, which shall be in addition to all other regulations of this zoning
code. In the event there is a conflict between these supplemental regulations
and other portions of this zoning code, the more restrictive regulations shall
govern.
   (A)   Single family (detached). All new detached single-family dwellings
must comply with the following conditions:
      (1)   All dwellings, including manufactured or mobile housing, must
include a basement;
      (2)   No single-family dwelling may be constructed less than 25 feet
wide, as measured along 50% of its length;
      (3)   Once the front yard has been established and an address determined,
the building or yards may not be reversed;
      (4)   The minimum required finished floor area must comply with the
following:
         (a)   UR District: 960 square feet.
         (b)   R-1 District: 1,040 square feet.
         (c)   R-2 District: 1,040 square feet.
         (d)   R-3 District: 960 square feet.
      (5)   All residential parking and driveways shall be paved with
bituminous or asphalt surface, or permeable pavement with approval by the City
Engineer.
   (B)   Two-family (attached). The conditions for the construction and zero-
lot line subdivision of attached two-family dwellings are as follows.
      (1)   No attached two-family dwellings may be constructed less than 20
feet wide (per unit).
      (2)   For a two-unit building that is split by ownership, the applicant
or the property owner(s) must execute and record at their expense a declaration
of covenants, conditions and restrictions or the equivalent document shall be
submitted for review and approval by the City Attorney.
      (3)   The authority to divide a single structure containing two dwelling
units may be subject to Chapter 151 and the Council may impose other reasonable
conditions as required by the situation.
      (4)   All residential parking and driveways shall be paved with
bituminous or asphalt surface, or permeable pavement with approval by the City
Engineer.
      (5)   Two-family (attached) dwellings existing on the date of this
chapter shall be a permitted use in the R-2 Detached Single Family District.
   (C)   Townhouses. All townhouses, attached or detached, must comply with the
following conditions.
      (1)   All yard requirement areas must be free of encroachments, such as
buildings, accessory structures, and interior vehicular circulation systems.
Driveways that provide direct access to the garage area are not considered an
encroachment.
      (2)   All buildings within an attached townhouse development must be a
minimum of 15 feet apart, except for adjacent garages, which shall be set back
a minimum of ten feet.
      (3)   All residential parking and driveways shall be paved with
bituminous or asphalt surface, or permeable pavement with approval by the City
Engineer.
      (4)   A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or the
equivalent document shall be submitted for review and approval by the City
Attorney.
      (5)   Townhouses existing on the date of this chapter shall be a
permitted use in the R-2 Detached Single Family District.
   (D)   Mobile home park. Subject to the approval of a site plan which
includes:
      (1)   Internal street system with all-weather hard surfaced roadways, to
city standards, not less than 25 feet in width;
      (2)   All units must be connected to city sewer and water systems prior
to occupancy;
      (3)   All hydrant locations must be approved by the city prior to
occupancy of any units;
      (4)   All mobile homes must be setback a minimum of 25 feet from any
internal roadway;
      (5)   Minimum lot size or lot size equivalent per mobile home must not be
less than 40 feet wide by 100 feet long or 4,000 square feet; and
      (6)   Each mobile home park must provide a recreation area(s) equal to
800 square feet per unit and a development plan shall be submitted and
approved. None of the 800 square feet must be included in the minimum lot
calculation.
   (E)   Multifamily housing.
      (1)   Community and recreational facilities. On site amenities and
recreational facilities shall be provided in all multi-family developments.
Minimum amenities in all developments 50 units or greater shall include outdoor
common landscape areas and indoor/outdoor facilities that meet the needs of the
intended population including such things as a community/party room, theatre,
indoor/outdoor recreation areas such as swimming pools, indoor fitness centers,
tennis courts, play equipment, walking trails, community gardens, and
basketball courts. Details as to the proposed community and recreational
facilities shall be provided during site plan review.
   (F)   Mixed income housing policy.
      (1)   Purpose. Regulations governing mixed income housing are intended to
fulfill the city's housing goals by creating high quality housing for
households with a variety of income levels, ages, and sizes.
      (2)   Applicability. Any rental residential development that adds or
creates ten or more residential dwelling units must comply with the city's
mixed income housing policy.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.901 ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   All accessory residential uses shall comply with the following supplemental
regulations, which shall be in addition to all other regulations of this zoning
code. In the event there is a conflict between these supplemental regulations
and other portions of this zoning code, the more restrictive regulations shall
govern.
   (A)   Community garden. Shall adhere to the same standards as a principal
use community garden.
   (B)   Day care (12 or fewer persons). Permitted only within single family
structures.
   (C)   Home occupations.
      (1)   All vocations based in a dwelling unit shall have an administrative
permit.
      (2)   All home occupations shall adhere to all applicable city, county,
state, and federal regulations. Home occupations that violate or cannot operate
in compliance with those regulations are prohibited.
      (3)   Any hazardous materials handling permits must be reported to the
City Manager or his/her designated agent.
      (4)   Deliveries are limited to the type that typically service
residences.
      (5)   The home occupation may be carried out by the residents of the
dwelling unit and no more than one nonresident employee.
      (6)   Repair services.
         (a)   Repair services are limited to those appliances or other goods
small enough to be carried by one person.
         (b)   Motor and recreational vehicles and equipment and small engine
repair are not permitted except for minor emergency repairs and minor
maintenance to autos, non-commercial trucks, or recreational vehicles and
equipment that are licensed to residents of the property, provided they can be
completed within a 24-hour period or are conducted inside a garage or accessory
structure and are in compliance with the city code.
         (c)   Vehicle painting is prohibited in residential districts.
      (7)   Parking.
         (a)   Parking for clients or customers coming to the property must
comply with §
152.1019 and all other applicable sections of the city code.
         (b)   Parking is limited to five vehicles at any one time.
      (8)   Sales. No retail sale of merchandise produced off-site is
permitted, except those products that are not marketed and sold in wholesale or
retail outlets.
   (D)   Keeping domestic and farm animals on residential properties.
      (1)   Farm animals may be kept on parcels five acres or larger at the
rate of one animal unit per acre.
      (2)   Boarding or breeding for commercial purposes may not be permitted
in residential districts.
      (3)   The keeping of animals must be in conformance with all other
sections of the city code.
   (E)   Live/work units.
      (1)   The commercial portion of a live/work use shall not occupy more
than 50% of the entire square footage of the structure/or unit.
      (2)   The residential portion of the live/work use, if located on the
ground floor, shall be completely located behind the commercial portion of the
structure or unit such that the ground floor street façade is a commercial use
and commercial façade.
   (F)   Outdoor storage and parking of commercial vehicles.
      (1)   Storage of agricultural equipment may be permitted only on land
assessed, used, and zoned as agricultural and must comply with all other
applicable sections of the city code.
      (2)   Outdoor parking of commercial vehicles is limited to one vehicle
per dwelling unit. Parking of commercial vehicles must comply with §
152.1019. Outdoor parking of semi trucks, semi trailers, dump trucks, tow
trucks, and commercial vehicles with a registered gross weight over 15,000
pounds or in excess of 30 feet in length is not permitted except when the
vehicle is being used for loading or unloading or for rendering a service on
the property.
      (3)   Firewood storage.
         (a)   Firewood must be stacked on an impervious surface or be elevated
at least three and a half inches off the ground and may not include more than
two cords of wood per property.
         (b)   Unrestrained stacks may not exceed six feet in height.
         (c)   Firewood stacks located next to structures and supported by
restraints, may not exceed ten feet in height and may be so contained as not to
constitute a safety hazard, as determined by City Manager.
         (d)   Firewood storage must comply with accessory structure setbacks
in §
152.1000(A)(2).
      (4)   Personal vehicles.
         (a)   Vehicles stored outside on residential property must be owned by
a person who resides on that property.
         (b)   Students who are away at school for periods of time or persons
on military leave, but still claim the property as their legal residence, will
be considered residents on the property. This does not include vehicles or
equipment being used by occasional guests or a commercial vehicle regularly
used by a resident of the property.
      (5)   Private outdoor recreational equipment provided the equipment is
not for display, storage or sales in connection with any vocation except a
daycare.
      (6)   Recreational vehicles, equipment, and trailers. If stored in a
front yard, the following standards shall apply:
         (a)   Items stored in the front yard must be located on a continuous
impervious surface;
         (b)   Storage is not allowed on landscaped or grass areas in the front
yard;
         (c)   Gravel parking areas is not permitted; and
         (d)   All front yard storage must not encroach on any sidewalk or
obstruct visibility of vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
(Ord 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1317, passed 9-8-25)
§ 152.902 TEMPORARY RESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   All temporary residential uses shall comply with the following supplemental
regulations, which shall be in addition to all other regulations of this zoning
code. In the event there is a conflict between these supplemental regulations
and other portions of this zoning code, the more restrictive regulations shall
govern.
   (A)   Garage sale.
      (1)   Each property is limited to four garage sales per year.
      (2)   Each sale is limited to three days.
   (B)   Model homes.
      (1)   Model home or temporary real estate office lighting must comply
with §
152.1014.
      (2)   Signs must comply with the sign regulations as contained in
Chapter 150.
      (3)   The model home or temporary real estate office is permitted only
until all the other lots in the subdivision have active building permits.
      (4)   The applicant for a model home may be required to submit a cash
bond to guarantee the conversion of the model home to a single-family home in a
timely manner if alterations to the site have occurred such as the provision of
paved parking, removal of lighting, and similar uses. Such conversion includes,
but is not limited to, the provision of landscaping, turf restoration and the
removal of parking lots, signage, and lighting.
   (C)   Portable storage containers.
      (1)   One temporary portable storage container is allowed per dwelling
unit for a maximum of 30 consecutive days in a calendar year.
      (2)   The storage container must be located on the driveway of the
dwelling unit it is serving. An alternate location may be approved by the City
Manager.
   (D)   Temporary family healthcare dwellings. The city opts out of the
requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary family
health care dwellings.
   (E)   Equipment, materials, and dumpsters may be stored outside if in
compliance with the following:
      (1)   All items must be directly related to a current on-site
construction or landscaping project;
      (2)   Except as otherwise allowed in division (E)(3) below, no items may
be stored outside for more than three months in any calendar year;
      (3)   All items directly related to a project for which a valid building
permit has been issued are allowed to be stored outside while the permit is
active; and
      (4)   All debris must be contained within the dumpster and prevented from
becoming airborne.
   (F)   All items must be located on private property and must not block
sidewalks, trails, hydrants, or emergency access.
      (1)   All items must be immediately removed from the property upon
completion of the current on-site project.
      (2)   Sale of motor and recreational vehicles.
         (a)   The vehicle(s) must have current registration plates.
         (b)   The vehicle(s) must be licensed to a resident of the property.
         (c)   The vehicle(s) must comply with the parking requirements in all
applicable sections of the city code and this chapter.
         (d)   No more than two vehicle and equipment sales may be permitted
per parcel per calendar year.
(Ord 2024-1304, passed 7-29-2024)
§ 152.903 NONRESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, PRINCIPAL USES.
   All nonresidential principal uses shall comply with the following
supplemental regulations, which shall be in addition to all other regulations
of this zoning code. In the event there is a conflict between these
supplemental regulations and other portions of this zoning code, the more
restrictive regulations shall govern.
   (A)   Automobile sales and showrooms.
      (1)   Impervious surface. All areas on which motor vehicles are stored or
displayed must be paved with concrete or a bituminous surface. No display,
sale, or storage of automobiles or other vehicles are permitted on landscaped
areas.
      (2)   Parking. In addition to the requirements of §
152.1019, the parking areas must be:
         (a)   Shown and designated on the site plan;
         (b)   Kept free of display vehicles, on a continual basis; and
         (c)   Appropriately designated with signs for use by customers and
employees.
      (3)   Damaged and inoperable vehicles. All damaged and inoperable
vehicles may be kept in an enclosed building or area completely screened from
public streets and adjacent property.
      (4)   Display vehicle parking.
         (a)   Each display vehicle parking space must meet the required size
of a parking space as defined in §
152.1019 and must be striped accordingly.
         (b)   No vehicles may be displayed on elevated platforms, jacks, or
berms; however, parking will be allowed in approved/designated concrete display
areas with a maximum height of six inches above the parking lot surface.
         (c)   No rows of display vehicles may be longer than 180 feet.
Landscaped areas with overstory deciduous trees are required to separate rows
of display vehicles. Required parking lot open space areas may be larger than
typically required in the district to accomplish this objective.
         (d)   No display parking of vehicles may be permitted in the drive
aisles.
      (5)   No outside storage of scrap metal, auto parts, or the like is
allowed.
      (6)   No vehicles may be unloaded from transport trucks in the public
rights-of-way.
      (7)   Signs. In addition to the regulations found elsewhere in the city
code, the following may apply:
         (a)   No signs may be permitted in or on any display vehicles except
the following, and no signs may be readable from a public right-of-way or
adjacent property:
            1.   Disclosure statements required by state and/or federal law.
            2.   Identification of the displayed vehicles by make, model, year,
and price.
      (8)   All outdoor illumination on sales lots may be provided with lenses,
reflectors, or shades that concentrate the light upon the premises to prevent
glare or direct rays of light from being visible upon any adjacent public
right-of-way or any private property occupied for residential purposes.
Lighting from any source on the property may not exceed three foot candles as
measured from the centerline of any adjacent street nor three foot candles at
any property line which is not also a public right-of-way line.
   (B)   Car wash.
      (1)   All car wash operations shall be staffed during operating hours.
      (2)   All drive-through car washes shall contain room for a minimum
stacking of six cars and must not extend into drive aisles.
      (3)   All car wash bays shall have a separate entrance and exit.
      (4)   If within 200 feet of a residential district or use, the car wash
bays shall be closed when in operation.
   (C)   Community garden.
      (1)   Private community garden areas may be divided into separate garden
plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively
by members of the group.
      (2)   A community garden may include common areas (e.g., storage sheds)
maintained and used by the groups.
      (3)   The community garden must comply with the lot and building
standards for its zoning district.
      (4)   Community garden or private garden may serve as a permitted
accessory use in any residential, business, public institution district or city
owned park or open space. A community garden may be permitted as an interim use
on a vacant lot in any residential district. A community garden area may count
towards required open space in any zoning district. The following conditions
shall be met for all community gardens:
         (a)   The garden area shall be limited to growth of food crops and/or
non-food ornamental crops such as flowers. Maintaining, livestock and poultry
shall be prohibited.
         (b)   Community gardens may not be located within any easement without
the property owner obtaining written permission from the easement holder.
         (c)   The garden shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all
property lines to provide a vegetated buffer of grass or other plants to
minimize the transfer of sediment and to delineate the edges of the garden.
         (d)   Paths may be installed to access the garden and individual
garden plots provided the paths are constructed using natural landscape
materials including wood chips, mulch, landscape rock or pea gravel.
         (e)   Fences are allowed as permitted by this chapter and provided
they are made of sturdy, rust resistant woven wire and/or rot resistant wood,
are well maintained and neat in appearance.
         (f)   The garden area shall be properly maintained throughout the year
by:
            1.   Weekly collecting rotting vegetables/fruits from garden areas
and providing off-site disposal of this waste.
            2.   Weekly collecting and removing all trash and debris that is
deposited on the site.
            3.   Providing for season end removal of all dead plant growth/
waste no later than October 1.
         (g)   Trash containers may be provided on site provided they have a
cover and meet accessory structure setbacks for the underlying zoning district.
All trash shall be removed from the site at least once per week.
         (h)   Compost bins are permitted provided they meet the accessory
structure standards of the district in which it is located.
         (i)   One non-illuminated sign not exceeding four square feet in area
and six feet in height shall be permitted. The content of the sign shall be
limited to identification of the site as a community garden, sponsorship
contact information and rules/guidelines for the community garden.
         (j)   Parking for the garden shall be provided on streets where
parking is permitted or on an existing parking surface with the written
permission of the owner of the parking surface.
         (k)   Seasonal sales stands shall be permitted but must be removed
from the premises or stored inside a building on the premises during that time
of the year when the garden is not open for public use. All products sold must
be grown within the community garden.
         (l)   One portable restroom shall be permitted on the site.
         (m)   One utility shed shall be allowed on the site under the
following conditions:
            1.   Maximum area of 200 square feet;
            2.   Must be located within the rear yard setback and at least five
feet off the side and rear property lines; and
            3.   Maximum height of ten feet.
         (n)   Any power equipment and attachments, hand tools, fertilizer,
chemicals and other equipment and materials that is kept on the site shall be
stored within a utility shed.
         (o)   The following miscellaneous improvements shall be permitted on
the site:
            1.   Trellises;
            2.   Raised planting beds;
            3.   Benches; and
            4.   Covered trash receptacles.
         (p)   Negative impacts. The site shall be designed and maintained to
prevent negative impacts to adjacent properties from individual gardeners and
gardening activities including, but not limited to, irrigation, fertilizer,
soils, stormwater, cultivated areas, trespassing and garden debris.
         (q)   Site restoration. Upon cessation of the community garden, the
site shall be fully restored to the pre-garden status. All aboveground remains
of the garden shall be promptly removed, and the ground leveled and restored so
it can be utilized for uses permitted in the zoning district.
   (D)   Currency exchanges.
      (1)   All entrances to the business, except for emergency fire exits
which are not usable by patrons, must be visible from the public right-of-way.
When such businesses are located within an enclosed commercial complex, all
patron entrances must open onto the common concourse.
      (2)   Layout of the publicly accessible areas must be designed so that
the management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside
the business can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise
offered for sale.
      (3)   The site must be at least 500 feet from the property line of a
pawnshop, an adult entertainment/adult service, or any residential district and
one-half mile from a site containing another currency exchange business. The
site plan must show the location of the proposed currency exchange business and
any other currency exchange business if any are located within one mile of the
proposed site.
      (4)   All establishments may apply for and obtain a license from the
State of Minnesota before a building permit may be issued.
   (E)   Fuel and service stations.
      (1)   All applications for fuel and service stations must be accompanied
by the following:
         (a)   An evaluation of subsurface conditions, soil resistivity and
groundwater table conditions prepared by a professional engineer, licensed by
the State of Minnesota; and
         (b)   Information that demonstrates compliance with the installation
requirements of §§
93.30 through
93.41 and the requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
      (2)   The minimum frontage on any street must be 150 feet for a station
with four pump/meter stations or less, and stations with additional pump/meter
stations may provide additional frontage and area to provide equivalent and
sufficient space for servicing vehicles, off-street parking, safe vehicular
approaches into the station, and visibility for pedestrians and drivers.
      (3)   Canopies or other weather protection structure (free standing or
projecting from a building).
         (a)   Maximum height. 25 feet.
         (b)   Lighting.
            1.   Except for permitted signs, no lighting or the face of the
canopy is allowed. This includes a prohibition on backlit panels on the face of
the canopy.
            2.   All lighting installed must be recessed into the canopy and
lights must be directed downward and away from adjacent properties in
compliance with §
152.1014.
      (4)   Pump/meter islands.
         (a)   Setbacks.
            1.   From public right-of-way: 50 feet.
            2.   Interior side or rear: 40 feet.
            3.   From a residential district or use: 100 feet.
         (b)   Vehicle stacking.
            1.   Vehicle stacking for gas pump dispensing must be provided for
at least one car beyond the pump island in each direction in which access can
be gained to the pump. The required vehicle stacking area for gas dispensing
may not interfere with the internal circulation drive aisles or designated
parking aisles.
            2.   Vehicle stacking for gas pump dispensing may not be permitted
in any public right-of-way, private access easement, or within the required
parking setback area.
      (5)   All paved areas must be surfaced with concrete or bituminous
surfacing to control dust and provide adequate drainage, designed to meet the
requirements of a minimum seven-ton axle load.
      (6)   Layout of the publicly accessible areas on the site may be designed
so that the employees of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel
inside the business can observe all patrons while they have access to any
merchandise offered for sale in the building or are at fuel pumping areas.
   (F)   Funeral home and mortuary.
      (1)   Loading and unloading areas used by ambulances, hearses or other
such service vehicles shall be screened from public off-site views.
      (2)   If a crematorium is included as part of a funeral home, no more
than 33% of the gross floor area of a funeral home may be devoted to the
crematory, including area for the cremator, cremation observation, crematory
access and maintenance areas, and any additional areas used primarily for
services related to cremation.
      (3)   An employee residence is permitted.
   (G)   General sales and services.
      (1)   In BP and I Zoning Districts general sales are limited to the
following:
         (a)   Accessory sales of products manufactured or produced on site;
         (b)   Structures for retail 25,000 square feet or less, unless
otherwise permitted elsewhere in this chapter; and
         (c)   In multi-tenant structures retail must not exceed 25,000 square
feet of the structure.
   (H)   Hotel or motel.
      (1)   A lodging license pursuant to
Chapter 117, shall be provided.
      (2)   At least two amenities, such as pool, restaurant, lounge, fitness
center, office center, or similar ancillary use, shall be provided in
conjunction with the hotel or motel.
   (I)   Indoor sales of automobiles, trucks, and recreational vehicles and the
like.
      (1)   Must meet minimum state guidelines for dealer license under M.S.
Chapters 168, 168A, and 325F, pertaining to dealer licensing and motor vehicle
titles and registration, as well as Minn. Rule, §§ 7400.0100 through 7400.6000.
      (2)   Storage and display of vehicles must be completely enclosed inside
a building if vehicles are located on site.
      (3)   No vehicles may be unloaded from transport trucks in the public
rights-of-way.
   (J)   Licensed daycare facilities. The pick-up/drop-off area(s) must be near
the front of the building and adjacent to a pedestrian area.
   (K)   Pawnshops.
      (1)   All entrances to the business, except for emergency fire exits
which are not usable by patrons, must be visible from the public right-of-way.
When such businesses are located within an enclosed commercial complex, all
patron entrances must open onto the common concourse.
      (2)   Layout of the publicly accessible areas must be designed so that
the management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside
the business can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise
offered for sale.
      (3)   The site must be at least 500 feet from the property line of a site
containing a religious institution, school, day-care/preschool, another
pawnshop, an adult entertainment/ adult service business, a currency exchange,
or any residential district.
      (4)   All establishments must apply for and obtain a license from the
city, before a building permit may be issued.
   (L)   Essential services. All uses must provide the following evidence:
      (1)   The use is in conformance with the surrounding neighborhood and
required setbacks and side-yard requirements are met;
      (2)   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no
outside storage, except for electrical substation structures; and
      (3)   Adequate screening and landscaping from neighboring residential
districts are provided.
   (M)   Religious institution.
      (1)   Architectural materials allowed for religious institutions shall
follow the regulations for nonresidential districts (see § 152.1005).
      (2)   Residential districts. Places of worship may only be located on
sites located directly at the intersections of two collector streets or along
an arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   An office for a religious institution is considered an office use
provided no worship services, events, or the like are conducted on site.
      (4)   Places of worship with additional uses operating concurrently with
a worship service must be figured into parking requirements.
      (5)   Places of worship may conduct worship and educational programs as
permitted accessory uses in public schools in all zoning districts outside of
normal school instructional hours. Formal site plan review as described in §
152.303 is not required.
   (N)   Restaurants.
      (1)   If the restaurant has an outdoor seating area, refer to the
requirements in §
152.904(M).
      (2)   If the restaurant has a drive-through, refer to the requirements in
§
152.904(E).
   (O)   Sexually oriented businesses.
      (1)   All entrances to the business, except for emergency fire exits
which are not usable by patrons, must be visible from the public right-of-way.
When such businesses are located within an enclosed commercial complex, all
patron entrances may open onto the common concourse.
      (2)   Layout of the publicly accessible areas must be designed so that
the management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside
the business can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise
offered for sale.
      (3)   The site must be at least 750 feet from any school, daycare/
preschool, library, park, playground, or other public or private recreational
facilities in any zone and another adult entertainment/adult service business.
      (4)   No establishment may be open to the public from the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (5)   Signs visible to the public comply with
Chapter 150 and may not contain graphic descriptions or representations of the
adult theme of the operation.
      (6)   All establishments may apply for and obtain a license from the city
before a building permit may be issued.
   (P)   Schools.
      (1)   All schools must conform to the minimum guidelines for open space
and recreational space of the State of Minnesota.
      (2)   Schools must conform to the landscaping requirements for business
zoning districts (see §
152.1013). For sites zoned PI, the B-3 landscaping requirements must be used.
      (3)   Schools located in business zoning districts must conform to the
following performance standards:
         (a)   The city must find that the school use would be compatible with
existing or planned adjacent uses.
         (b)   Schools which include grades kindergarten through eight must be
adjacent to another public elementary school. Schools which include only grades
nine and higher must be within 1,000 feet to public parks.
         (c)   The city must find that traffic speeds and volumes on adjacent
streets do not pose a safety hazard.
         (d)   The city must find that the site has adequate space for school
bus loading and movement, including turnarounds.
         (e)   The site must include sidewalks and/or other pedestrian
facilities appropriate to the site for student safety.
      (4)   Non-affiliated schools are allowed by conditional use permit when
located within a building primarily used for a religious institution.
      (5)   Job training programs are not considered schools for zoning
purposes, but shall be classified by the skill or job being taught.
      (6)   Public and private schools in all zoning districts may permit use
of their facilities to community, civic, charitable, or religious organizations
outside of normal school instructional hours.
   (Q)   Self-service storage facility. Drive aisles between and around storage
buildings must be 30 feet to accommodate through traffic and parking outside
individual storage units.
   (R)   Social clubs.
      (1)   The hours of operation available to customers are limited to 10:00
am to midnight daily. Minor patrons must follow curfew ordinances.
      (2)   The business owner must provide an up-to-date security plan that is
acceptable to the Police Chief. The security plan must be reviewed annually.
      (3)   Commercial kitchen facilities must be licensed and maintained on-
site for preparation and service of food and non-alcoholic beverages available
to patrons.
      (4)   Disorderly conduct, as listed in §
112.003(C), shall be grounds for revocation of a conditional use permit.
      (5)   The establishment may impose a cover charge.
      (6)   The establishment may have live entertainment (including, but not
limited to bands, comedians, and disc jockeys).
      (7)   The establishment is not eligible for alcoholic beverages under any
license type.
   (S)   Wholesale, broker, and auction dealer of automobiles.
      (1)   Must meet minimum state guidelines for dealer license under M. S.
Chapters 168, 168A, and 325F, pertaining to dealer licensing and motor vehicle
titles and registration, as well as Minn. Rules, §§ 7400.0100 through
7400.6000.
      (2)   No storage and display of vehicles is allowed.
   (T)   Cannabis oriented business.
      (1)   Registration. No individual or entity may operate a cannabis retail
business within the city without first registering with the Brooklyn Park
Rental and Business Licensing Division per regulations outlined in
Chapter 127 of this code.
      (2)   Buffer requirements.
         (a)   Registration must not be granted within 300 feet of any school,
daycare facility that serves minors, or park attraction. The measurement must
be made from the entrance of each building or tenancy and not from the property
lines, except park features which will be measured from closest boundary of the
park feature.
         (b)   Registration must not be granted within 300 feet of another
registered cannabis oriented business. The measurement must be made from the
entrance of each building or tenancy and not from the property lines.
         (c)   The buffers established in this section will be established on
the date the city receives the request from the OCM for certification pursuant
to §
127.03 of this code.
         (d)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a cannabis business from
continuing to operate at the same location if a school, day care, or park
feature establishes within the buffer.
      (3)   Cultivation. The cultivation of all cannabis must only occur within
the principal structure. Outdoor commercial cultivation of cannabis is
prohibited.
      (4)   Lighting.
         (a)   Structures used for cultivation shall screen interior lighting
so that no light escapes the structure between sunset and sunrise.
         (b)   Any security lighting shall be downcast and shielded in such a
manner as to prevent light from spilling outside the boundaries of the parcel.
      (5)   Odor control. A cannabis business must maintain a ventilation and
filtration system sufficient to meet the requirements for odor control
established by state administrative rules.
      (6)   Security.
         (a)   Cannabis oriented businesses must implement sufficient security
measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing
cannabis or cannabis products, and to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis
or cannabis products at the business. Except as may otherwise be determined by
the city, these security measures shall include compliance with all regulations
established by the OCM.
         (b)   Every cannabis-oriented business shall provide adequate security
on the premises, including lighting and alarms, to ensure the safety of persons
and to protect the premises from theft. Each cannabis-oriented business shall
prepare and submit a security plan for review and approval by the City Manager,
which approval or denial will be based upon the security standards required by
the OCM. Said plans shall remain updated and secured on file in the protective
custody of the city in accordance with
Chapter 127 of this code. The information provided for purposes of this section
shall be maintained by the city as confidential information and shall not be
disclosed as public records unless pursuant to subpoena issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
         (c)   Cannabis or cannabis products shall not be stored outside at any
time.
         (d)   A cannabis business shall notify the City Manager within 24
hours after discovering any of the following: Significant discrepancies
identified during inventory; diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity
involving the cannabis business or any agent or employee of the cannabis
business; or the loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to
cannabis, registering qualifying patients, primary caregivers, or employees or
agents of the cannabis business.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24)
§ 152.904 ACCESSORY NONRESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Accessory uses listed in Figure 152.601.1 are permitted/conditional in
the individual commercial zoning districts provided that:
      (1)   No accessory use is permitted that changes the character, rating or
appearance of the property or any structures on the property.
      (2)   No accessory use or structure other than a fence or a temporary
construction office for a project to be built on the property is permitted in
any business district without a principal use occupying the property.
      (3)   No exterior storage or display of equipment, materials or products
is allowed, except as permitted by this section and Chapter 150.
   (B)   Day care.
      (1)   All daycares in business districts and as an accessory use within
multi-purpose buildings (i.e., places of worship, schools, private businesses)
must comply with the following:
         (a)   Provide parking in compliance with §
152.1019; and
         (b)   The pick-up/drop-off area(s) must be near the front of the
building and adjacent to a pedestrian area.
   (C)   Car wash.
      (1)   The use must be accessory to a vehicle fuel station.
      (2)   The lot must be a minimum of two acres.
      (3)   The building/structure housing the car wash must meet the minimum
setback of 100 feet to the residential district boundary.
   (D)   Crematories/crematoriums.
      (1)   Licensure by the Minnesota Commissioner of Health shall be required
and compliance with M.S. § 149A.95.
      (2)   Crematoriums shall not be used for the disposal of any waste
materials.
      (3)   Crematoriums shall not emit any visible air emissions nor generate
odors.
   (E)   Drive-throughs.
      (1)   Drive-through facilities and lanes must be located behind the
principal building.
      (2)   All drive-throughs must contain room for a minimum stacking of six
cars from the serving window and stacking must not extend into drive aisles.
      (3)   Queuing lanes must not interfere with pedestrian circulation.
      (4)   Drive-through canopies and other structures, where present, must be
constructed from the same materials as the primary building, and with a similar
level of architectural quality and detailing.
   (F)   Exterior food and beverage machines, ice machines, and propane tank
exchanges.
      (1)   Must be in conjunction with approved businesses.
      (2)   Must be adjacent to and project no further than five feet from the
primary building.
      (3)   Where sidewalks are present, a minimum access width of four feet
must be provided and may not be blocked by the vending machines or containers.
      (4)   Propane tank exchanges must be located within a metal cabinet
painted to blend into the building. The cabinet, not to exceed 52 cubic feet,
must receive a permit from the Fire Chief.
      (5)   Exterior food and beverage vending machines, ice machines, and
propane tank exchanges must be in good repair at all times.
   (G)   Farmer's market.
      (1)   Location.
         (a)   No portion of the use or event shall take place within 200 feet,
as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of
the property upon which the farmers' market is located, to the property line of
any R-1 zoned property with residential buildings.
         (b)   Sales merchandise trailers, temporary stands, etc., shall be
located on an asphalt or concrete surface.
      (2)   Displays.
         (a)   Parking and display areas associated with the sale shall not
distract or interfere with existing business operations or traffic circulation
patterns.
         (b)   Display areas and parking spaces shall use those parking lot
spaces that are in excess of the minimum required parking for the primary use
of that property.
         (c)   No uses or displays shall be permitted in required green areas,
parking setback areas, or any right-of-way or other public property.
         (d)   Display of items shall be arranged in as compact a manner as
reasonably practicable with particular reference to vehicle and pedestrian
safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or
other emergency.
      (3)   Signage shall be limited to one sign not to exceed 32 square feet.
The sign may be a banner, and shall be mounted or erected in an appropriate
location. The sign may be illuminated but must comply with all requirements of
Chapter 150 of this title.
      (4)   Operation and maintenance.
         (a)   All producer merchandise shall be unloaded prior to the opening
of the market and confined to the off-street parking lot area. No on street
parking or unloading shall be allowed.
         (b)   No public address system or speakers shall be used.
         (c)   The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion, free from
litter, refuse, debris, junk, or other waste, which results in offensive odors
or unsightly conditions.
   (H)   Gas tanks (above ground) for propane, liquid nitrogen, etc.
      (1)   Such tank shall be fully screened or located out of public view.
      (2)   Motor vehicle fuel is not permitted.
   (i)   Mobile food units.
      (1)   The owner/operator shall have written permission of the current
property owner to locate at a designated area.
      (2)   The proprietor of the business must keep copy of the mobile food
unit license with the unit and demonstrate compliance with the license upon
inspection.
      (3)   The area(s) designated for the mobile food unit and accessory
outdoor seating may not block sidewalks, impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, or interfere with public safety.
      (4)   No mobile food unit or accessory outdoor seating area may occupy
parking spaces which may be leased to other businesses or used to fulfill its
minimum parking requirements or any handicap accessible parking space.
      (5)   Mobile food unit locations are not permitted in residential
districts.
      (6)   Mobile food units shall be located on an asphalt or concrete
surface.
      (7)   The owner/operator must provide trash receptacles for customer use
and keep the site in a neat and orderly fashion, free from litter, refuse,
debris, junk or other waste which results in offensive odors or unsightly
conditions.
      (8)   Temporary signage is permitted in accordance with §
150.06(A)(6) pedestrian signs.
   (J)   Outdoor entertainment and the use of sound-amplifying equipment.
      (1)   The volume of sound shall not violate §
152.1017.
      (2)   The sound amplifying equipment shall not be used between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   (K)   Outdoor sales and display.
      (1)   The designated sales area must be identified on an approved site
plan.
      (2)   The designated sales area cannot block sidewalks.
      (3)   The designated sales area must not encroach into setbacks.
   (L)   Outdoor dining.
      (1)   Outdoor dining is permitted if depicted on an approved site plan.
The following additional standards relate to outdoor dining areas:
         (a)   Outdoor seating is permitted within any setback area and
temporary seating may be permitted with rights-of-way, provided the sidewalk
remains clear to a width of five feet.
         (b)   Service and consumption of alcohol on outdoor patios and decks
in conjunction with an intoxicating liquor on-sale license or a 3.2% malt
liquor license may be permitted under the following conditions:
            1.   The patio or deck area must be contiguous to the licensed
premises and shall be enclosed with a fence that meets standards set forth in
this code that does not allow entrance from outside the fenced area onto the
patio or deck area.
      (2)   Receptacles for rubbish, garbage, etc., must be provided and
adequately screened.
      (3)   Lighting must be sufficient to promote public safety, directed
downward, and compatible with the surrounding area.
      (4)   Smoking may be allowed on the patio or deck area, provided it
complies with the Minnesota Freedom to Breathe Act of 2007.
      (5)   The outdoor patio or deck area must be included in the required
liquor liability insurance for the premises.
      (6)   These areas may be covered with a canopy or awning but may not be
enclosed.
   (M)   Outdoor display.
      (1)   Outdoor displays of inventory, such as automobiles, tires, nursery
stock, lumber and other merchandise customarily displayed or stored in the
outdoors are permitted, subject to compliance with standard building setback
requirements of the respective zones and all other applicable ordinances and
standards.
      (2)   Outdoor display is limited to no more than 10% of the facade of the
structure in which the business is located.
      (3)   Outdoor display cannot cause a public nuisance, or be located
within the required parking areas or ingress or egress aisles of the lot.
   (N)   Restaurants, retail, or services.
      (1)   May be located within the principal building or as a single tenant
in a multi-tenant building.
      (2)   The area of the building for restaurants, retail, or service
businesses are restricted to one-half of the total gross floor area of the
ground level floor of a multistory building but may not be restricted to any
location in the building, or 10% of the gross floor area of a single story
building.
   (O)   Detached accessory structure.
      (1)   Setback adjacent to rights-of-way. No detached accessory structures
are permitted between a public right-of-way and the principal structure.
      (2)   Interior side or rear setbacks. No detached accessory structures
are permitted closer than five feet from interior side property lines.
      (3)   Structure size. Detached accessory structures may not exceed 2,000
square feet, or 15% of the principal structure footprint, whichever is less.
      (4)   Structure height. Detached accessory structures may not exceed 16
feet in height, or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less.
      (5)   No more than one detached accessory structure is permitted per lot
of record.
      (6)   Detached accessory structures shall not be designed or used for
human habitation.
      (7)   Detached accessory structures shall have the same or similar
exterior finish as the principal building.
   (P)   Warehousing, incidental repair, or processing.
      (1)   In the B-1 through B-4 Districts, accessory warehousing may only be
conducted in up to 30% of the gross floor area of the principal building.
      (2)   Must be necessary and related to the permitted principal use.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.905 TEMPORARY AND SEASONAL NONRESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Christmas tree sales.
      (1)   All temporary buildings or trailers associated with the sales lot,
as well as all tree-related debris and materials, are permitted between
November 15 and December 31.
      (2)   The sales area shall be separated from vehicular uses by the
placement of a fence or barrier to prevent pedestrian and vehicular conflicts.
      (3)   The sales area shall be on a paved surface that does not interfere
with the principal use's minimum parking needs, traffic flow, and emergency
access.
   (B)   Construction buildings.
      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction may be
placed for a period not to extend beyond the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or the end of construction.
   (C)   Firework sales.
      (1)   An annual retail fireworks permit shall be required per §
93.25.
      (2)   Fireworks sales shall only be permitted between June 15 and July 5.
      (3)   The sales area shall be separated from vehicular uses by the
placement of a fence or barrier to prevent pedestrian and vehicular conflicts.
      (4)   Must be on a paved surface that does not interfere with the
principal use's minimum parking needs, traffic flow, and emergency access.
      (5)   No fireworks shall be sold or dispensed from a motor vehicle or
towed vehicle.
      (6)   Outdoor sales lot for consumer fireworks sales shall meet the
specialized requirements laid out in M.S. § 624.20, and all other applicable
ordinances or statutes.
   (D)   Gas/fuel tanks (above ground). Above ground gas and fuel tanks shall
be screened from view of a public street or adjacent residential property.
   (E)   Greenhouse and garden centers.
      (1)   The area(s) designated may not be located in the required parking
areas, block sidewalks, or interfere with public safety.
      (2)   The area(s) designated may not be permitted in the required setback
from residential districts or public rights-of-way.
      (3)   The proprietor of the business must keep a copy of the conditional
use permit on the premises and demonstrate compliance with the permit upon
inspection.
      (4)   Conditional use permits may be revoked by the City Council if the
activity is not used on an annual basis or if violations to any of the above
regulations have been documented and were not corrected in a timely manner as
determined by the City Manager.
      (5)   Garden center sales shall only be permitted between April 1 and
June 30.
      (6)   The sales area shall be separated from vehicular uses by the
placement of a fence or barrier to prevent pedestrian and vehicular conflicts.
      (7)   Must be on a paved surface that does not interfere with the
principal use's minimum parking needs, traffic flow, and emergency access.
   (F)   Outdoor storage of snow removal equipment.
      (1)   The area of storage shall not be placed in any established yard
abutting a street.
      (2)   The area of outdoor storage shall be screened from view from
streets and from all abutting properties by an opaque screen; wherever security
fencing is desired, it shall be placed on the interior side of the opaque
screen.
      (3)   All areas of storage shall be paved.
   (G)   Temporary events. The events include outdoor religious events, tent
sales, employment fairs, and other similar outdoor uses and events as
determined by the City Manager. Construction activities related to the
construction, demolition, or rehabilitation of a dwelling, building, or
structure are not regulated by this section.
      (1)   Permits are required for any event with temporary structures or
tents, preparation and service of food or beverages for sale, road blockage, or
traffic or parking congestion beyond that expected without the event in
compliance with §
152.312.
      (2)   All events may be conducted by the proprietor of the business
conducted within the principal structure on the property.
      (3)   Performance standards for temporary events. Temporary events
include, but are not limited to, outdoor religious events and rental or
employment fairs, but do not include construction activities related to the
construction, demolition, or rehabilitation of a dwelling, building, or
structure.
         (a)   Events are limited to ten days per calendar year and all
equipment, structures, signs, or other evidence of the use must be removed from
the property one week after termination of the event.
         (b)   Disturbed turfed areas must be restored to their pre-event
condition within three weeks.
         (c)   Sanitary facilities must be provided as required by the Building
Official.
         (d)   Any impairment to traffic flow must be mitigated to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer, Fire Chief, and the Police Chief.
         (e)   All other sections of the city code, including but not limited
to compliance with residential quiet hours and the creation of nuisances,
apply.
   (H)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses may include environmental monitoring of
a use and structures for hiding the monitoring equipment and other similar
outdoor uses as determined by the City Manager. No administrative approval of
temporary uses may be given for structures primarily for storage associated
with the principal use.
      (1)   Permits are required for temporary uses.
      (2)   The permit must include a specific date, not to exceed one year,
during which time the use may exist. By the specified date, the use and any
associated structure(s) must be removed from the property and the site returned
to a condition that meets or exceeds the pre-use condition.
      (3)   All uses may be conducted by the proprietor of the business
conducted within the principal structure on the property.
      (4)   Financial guarantees or a cash escrow may be required at the time
of permit application to guarantee the restoration of the site to its pre-use
condition.
   (I)   Transient sales.
      (1)   Location.
         (a)   The location for the sale must have a minimum 150-foot setback
from any intersection.
         (b)   The location for the sale must meet the minimum setbacks for a
principal building on the property and may not be permitted on the following:
public rights-of-way, landscaped areas, fire lanes, or drive aisles.
         (c)   The location for the sale may not occupy more than 100 square
feet.
         (d)   The location for the sale may not occupy the required minimum
parking spaces for the principal use(s) on the site.
         (e)   The location for the sale must be large enough to provide
adequate parking.
      (2)   Hours and duration.
         (a)   Use of the property for transient sales may not exceed ten days
within a maximum period of six months.
         (b)   Transient sales may not take place between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
         (c)   No overnight storage of transient merchant equipment or
merchandise may be allowed. Transient merchant equipment may be permitted on
the premises only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
      (8)   A license may be issued pursuant to the city code and may be
conspicuously posted in the transient merchant's location.
      (9)   Written permission to occupy the property must be filed with the
application for conditional use permit.
   (J)   Cannabis events. Cannabis events are required to obtain a special
event permit and meet all requirements established in Minnesota Statutes for
cannabis special events.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2024-1307, passed 12-9-24)
Development Standards
§ 152.1000 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. Establish specific and quantifiable limitations on identified
types of structures, uses, and other activities which have a high nuisance
potential.
   (B)   Applicability. The performance standards apply in all zoning districts
unless specifically stated to the contrary.
   (C)   Compliance. All structures shall be in continual compliance with all
building, fire, zoning, and health codes of the city and state.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1001 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Accessory structures in residential districts.
      (1)   Purpose. These standards allow the property owner to use the
property in ways that are normally associated with the principal residential
use of the property and allow the city appropriate means to maintain the
residential nature of neighborhoods.
         (a)   No accessory structure shall be permitted without a principal
structure on the same lot.
         (b)   Such uses are subordinate and incidental to the principal
residential use of the property.
         (c)   No accessory use is permitted that changes the residential
character, rating or appearance of the lot or any structures on the lot.
         (d)   No accessory use or structure other than a fence or a temporary
construction office for a project to be built on the property may be permitted
in a residential district without a principal use occupying the property.
         (e)   There may be no exterior storage or display of equipment,
materials, or products except as permitted by §
152.1018.
      (2)   Accessory structures secondary to primary uses that require a
conditional use permit, or those that require site plan review, may also be
considered conditional or needing site plan review and may be subject to the
applicable standards listed below.
         (a)   Standards for accessory structures (except fences and walls).
            1.   Front setbacks. No accessory structures are permitted between
a public right-of-way and the dwelling or principal use, except garages which
must adhere to the same setbacks as the principal building as described in §
152.506.
            2.   Interior side or rear setbacks. No accessory structures are
permitted closer than five feet from interior side property lines.
            3.   Side or rear setback adjacent to public right-of-way. Setback
requirements are the same as for the principal building as §
152.506.
         (b)   Any accessory structures sheltering or housing more than two
animal units on a farm, hobby farm, or the like may not be less than 50 feet
from all dwellings other than that of the owner.
         (c)   Structure size. On any lot zoned UR, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4, the
combined gross floor area of all accessory structures (including the attached
or detached garage) may not exceed the following:
            1.   For lots one acre or less. 1,000 square feet or the foundation
footprint of the habitable portion of the principal building, whichever is
greater.
            2.   For lots greater than one acre. 1,500 square feet or the
foundation footprint of the habitable portion of the principal building,
whichever is greater.
         (d)   Accessory structure height. A maximum of 18 feet or the height
of the principal building, whichever is less. The highest point of the roof of
the accessory structure shall not be higher than the highest point of the roof
of the principal structure. No lot of record may have more than two detached
accessory structures, except public parks and open space.
   (B)   Accessory structures in nonresidential districts.
      (1)   Setback adjacent to rights-of-way. No detached accessory structures
are permitted between a public right-of-way and the principal structure.
      (2)   Interior side or rear setbacks. No detached accessory structure is
permitted closer than five feet from interior side property lines.
      (3)   Structure size. Detached accessory structures may not exceed 2,000
square feet, or 15% of the principal structure footprint, whichever is less.
      (4)   Structure height. Detached accessory structures may not exceed 18
feet in height, or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less.
      (5)   No more than one detached accessory structure is permitted per lot
of record.
      (6)   Detached accessory structures shall not be designed or used for
human habitation.
      (7)   Detached accessory structures shall have the same or similar
exterior finish as the principal building.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1002 ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Purpose. Establish standards by which the installation and operation
of wind, solar, and ground source energy systems shall be governed within the
city.
   (B)   Applicability. Alternative energy systems standards apply in all
zoning districts.
   (C)   Ground source heat pump system.
      (1)   System requirements. Only closed loop ground source heat pump
systems utilizing heat transfer fluids as defined in §
152.105 are permitted. Open loop ground source heat pump systems are not
permitted.
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   All components of ground source heat pump systems including
pumps, borings and loops shall be set back at least five feet from interior
side lot lines and at least ten feet from rear lot lines.
         (b)   Above-ground equipment associated with ground source heat pumps
shall not be installed in the front yard of any lot or side yard of a corner
lot adjacent to a public right-of-way and shall meet all required setbacks for
the application district.
      (3)   Screening. Ground source heat pumps are considered mechanical
equipment subject to screening requirements of §
152.1024.
      (4)   Abandonment. If the ground source heat pump remains nonfunctional
or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed
to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove
the abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit has been
obtained in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The heat pump and any external mechanical equipment shall be
removed.
         (b)   Pipes or coils below the land surface shall be filled with grout
to displace the heat transfer fluid. The heat transfer fluid shall be captured
and disposed of in accordance with applicable regulations. The top of the pipe,
coil or boring shall be uncovered and grouted.
   (D)   Solar energy.
      (1)   Exemption. Passive or building-integrated solar systems are exempt
from the requirements of this section and shall be regulated as any other
building element.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   Location.
            1.   In residential zoning districts, ground-mounted solar energy
systems are limited to the rear yard.
            2.   In nonresidential zoning districts, ground-mounted solar
energy systems may be permitted in the side yard meeting accessory structure
requirements in §
152.1001(B).
         (b)   Height.
            1.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the
maximum height requirements in the applicable zoning district.
            2.   Ground mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 15 feet
in height when oriented at maximum tilt.
         (c)   Screening.
            1.   Solar energy systems shall be screened from view to the extent
possible without impacting their function.
            2.   Roof- or ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be
restricted for aesthetic reasons if the system is not visible from the closest
edge of any public right-of-way other than an alley, or if the system meets the
following standards.
               a.   Roof-mounted systems on pitched roofs that are visible from
the nearest edge of the front right-of-way shall have the same finished pitch
as the roof and be no more than ten inches above the roof.
               b.   Roof-mounted systems on flat roofs that are visible from
the nearest edge of the front right-of-way shall not be more than five feet
above the finished roof and are exempt from any rooftop equipment or mechanical
system screening.
         (d)   Lot coverage. Ground-mounted systems total collector area shall
not exceed half the building footprint of the principal structure.
            1.   Ground-mounted systems shall be exempt from lot coverage or
impervious surface standards if the soil under the collector is maintained in
vegetation and not compacted.
            2.   Ground-mounted systems shall not count toward accessory
structure limitations.
         (e)   Glare. All solar energy systems shall be positioned to minimize
glare towards vehicular traffic and adjacent properties.
         (f)   Feeder lines. The electrical collection system shall be placed
underground within the interior of each parcel. The collection system may be
placed overhead near substations or points on interconnection to the electric
grid.
         (g)   Structures shall not be located such that solar power access
blocks a neighboring property.
      (3)   Abandonment. If a solar energy system remains nonfunctional or
inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to
be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the
abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit has been obtained.
Removal includes the entire structure including transmission equipment.
   (E)   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS).
      (1)   Quantity.
         (a)   No more than one WECS is allowed per residential parcel.
         (b)   No more than ten small or one large WECS is allowed per
nonresidential parcel.
      (2)   Design standards.
         (a)   Height. The highest point above natural grade reached by a rotor
tip or any other part of a wind turbine. The permitted maximum height of a WECS
shall be determined on the type of system proposed.
            1.   Utility wind turbines. The height of a freestanding WECS
located in a BP or I District shall not exceed 125 feet.
            2.   Small wind turbines. The height of a freestanding WECS located
in a business district shall not exceed 75 feet.
            3.   Residential wind turbines. Residential wind turbines can be
either building mounted a maximum height of 20 feet above the roofline of the
principal structure; or mounted on a tower a maximum height of 20 feet above
the roof line of the principal structure. Poles must be connected to the
principal structure and cannot be freestanding. All residential wind turbines
shall be of the vertical axis style.
            4.   The structure upon which the proposed WECS is to be mounted
shall have the structural integrity to carry the weight and wind loads of the
WECS and have minimal vibration impacts on the structure.
         (b)   Blade length. A maximum blade length of 15 feet is permitted.
         (c)   Setbacks for building mounted. A building or roof mounted
vertical axis style WECS shall be located only on the side or rear rooflines.
         (d)   Easements. Wind energy systems shall not encroach on public
drainage, utility roadway or trail easements.
         (e)   Rotor clearance. Blade-arcs created by the WECS shall have a
minimum of 30 feet of clearance over any structure or tree within a 300-foot
radius.
         (f)   Feeder lines. The electrical collection system shall be placed
underground within the interior of each parcel. The collection system may be
placed overhead near substations or points of interconnection to the electric
grid.
         (g)   Aesthetics. All portions of the wind energy system shall be a
nonreflective, non-obtrusive color, subject to the approval of the City
Manager. Only monopole towers are permitted. The appearance of the turbine,
tower and any other related components shall be maintained throughout the life
of the wind energy system pursuant to industry standards. Systems shall not be
used for displaying any advertising, except for applicable warning and
equipment information required by the manufacturer or by federal, state or
local regulations. Systems shall not be illuminated.
      (3)   Noise. Wind energy systems shall comply with Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency standards, as outlined in Minn. Rules Chapter 7030, at all
property lines.
      (4)   Screening. Wind energy systems are exempt from the requirements of
§
152.1024.
      (5)   Safety.
         (a)   Standards. Wind energy systems shall meet minimum standards such
as International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 61400-2 or the American Wind
Energy Association's (AWEA) Small Wind Turbine Performance and Safety Standard
or other standards as determined by the Community Development Director.
         (b)   Maintenance. Wind energy systems shall be maintained under an
agreement or contract by the manufacturer or other qualified entity.
         (c)   The WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and an automatic
braking device capable of stopping the WECS operation in high winds.
         (d)   Tower access. To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must
comply with one of the following provisions:
            1.   Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within 12 feet
off the ground;
            2.   A located anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower;
or
            3.   Tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked,
protective fence at least eight feet high.
      (6)   Utility connection. All grid connected systems shall have an
agreement with the local utility prior to the issuance of a building permit. A
visible external disconnect must be provided if required by the utility.
      (7)   Abandonment. If the wind energy system remains nonfunctional or
inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to
be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the
abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit has been obtained.
Removal includes the entire structure including foundations to below natural
grade and transmission equipment.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1003 BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS, RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. To encourage the construction of quality structures that
exhibit an attractive appearance both to residents and potential future owners.
   (B)   All residential uses. The following design standards are applicable to
all residential uses.
      (1)   Facades of new additions and accessory structures must be
coordinated with the facades of the principal building by integrating some or
all the same materials, textures, and colors.
      (2)   All exterior surfaces must be finished with the appropriate
sealant, stain, paint, or other process (to manufacturer's specifications) to
withstand the elements and prevent fading, chipping, chalking, cracking,
peeling, warping, rot, rust, water damage, or other natural degrading process,
except for those materials, like copper, where the degrading process is
architecturally desirable.
      (3)   The following metals are prohibited as facade materials:
         (a)   Any metal that is not a high-quality commercial thickness/weight
(for example, the minimum for architectural steel panels is .024 thickness,
architectural aluminum panels is .032 thickness and architectural copper panels
is 16-ounce sheets, and the equivalent in other metals).
         (b)   Any metal that has not been treated with a factory applied color
coating system against any applicable degradation listed above.
         (c)   Metal of any kind as a primary facade material (excluding steel
or aluminum lap siding). Metal may be used for trim or accent up to 15% of any
facade.
         (d)   Smooth concrete block is prohibited as a primary facade
material. Smooth concrete block used as part of the foundation may be permitted
to be exposed at up to 15% of any facade.
         (e)   Non-durable siding materials such as plywood, corrugated metal
or fiberglass, or other materials that decay rapidly when exposed to the
elements are prohibited as a facade material.
   (C)   Multifamily standards. The following design standards are applicable
to apartments, condominiums, and townhomes.
      (1)   Building and design standards by unit type.
         (a)   Townhomes.
            1.   Controlled access entry systems are required for all multiple
family buildings.
            2.   Front elevation.
               a.   Each front elevation shall have a minimum of 30% comprised
of natural material consisting of brick, stone, stucco, hardi-board, redwood,
cedar, or other similar materials.
               b.   Homes on corner lots must relate to both streets with
windows, accent and building articulation.
               c.   Prominent front entry, including but not limited to,
covered entry, front porch or similar accent shall be incorporated into the
overall front elevation.
               d.   Design of front exterior elevations shall be varied within
the development
            3.   Garages.
               a.   Garage shall not comprise more than 55% of the viewable
ground floor street-facing linear building frontage. This standard is based on
the measurement of the entire garage structure and not on a measurement of the
garage door or doors only. Corner lots are exempt from this requirement.
               b.   Garage doors shall be architectural styled to match the
exterior design of the home.
            4.   Roof.
               a.   Architectural design roofing materials including
composition, wood shingles (including shake), architectural asphalt shingles,
concrete, clay, or ceramic tile roofs are required on all roofs.
               b.   Overhangs must be a minimum of 12 inches.
            5.   Side and rear facades.
               a.   Each side elevation that faces an interior lot shall have
at least one window or door opening which cannot be a garage. Where a side
elevation faces a street or is visible from a public street, at least two
windows or door openings, which cannot be a garage, shall be provided.
Alternatives may be considered for LEED or other efficiency standards.
               b.   A maximum of 18 inches of the foundation wall may be
exposed on any elevation.
         (b)   Multifamily (stacked) residential development, including
condominiums and apartments.
            1.   Controlled access entry systems are required for all multiple
family buildings.
            2.   Design character.
               a.   Building materials shall be attractive, durable, and of a
quality which is both compatible with adjacent structures.
               b.   All buildings shall be of good aesthetic and architectural
quality, as demonstrated by the inclusion of elements such as accent materials,
entrance and window treatments, contrasting colors, irregular building shapes
and rooflines, or other architectural features in the overall architectural
concept.
            3.   Exterior building finish.
               a.   A minimum of 60% of the combined area of all building
facades shall contain one or more of the following materials, as shown in Table
152.1003.1.
TABLE 152.1003.1 CLASSES OF MATERIALS
Class 1 Class 2
TABLE 152.1003.1 CLASSES OF MATERIALS
Class 1                                 Class 2
Brick                                   Wood
Natural or cementitious stone           Tile (masonry, stone or clay), ceramic
                                        Other materials not listed elsewhere as
Glass, or other glazing materials       approved by the City Manager or as
                                        recommended by the Planning Commission
Masonry stucco                          EFIS in conformance with the ICC ES
                                        report
Architectural metal panels
Specialty concrete block (including
textured burnished, block or rock faced
block)
Architecturally textured and industrial
grade concrete precast panels
Other materials not listed elsewhere as
approved by the City Manager or as
recommended by the Planning Commission
 
               b.   All building and roofing materials shall meet current
accepted industry standards, and tolerances, and shall be subject to review and
approval by the city for quality, durability, and aesthetic appeal. The
applicant shall submit to the city product samples, color building elevations,
and associated drawings which illustrate the construction techniques to be used
in the installation of such materials.
               c.   If complementary building styles, materials, and color
schemes are proposed for a development, the developer shall submit to the city
a plan showing the distribution of the styles, materials, and colors throughout
the development.
               d.   Building elevations shall be articulated to reduce the mass
of the building. Large blank exterior walls shall be prohibited. Variation in
elevations can be accomplished with projections, recesses, covered doorways,
balconies, covered box or bay windows or other similar features, dividing large
facades and walls into human scaled proportions.
      (2)   Common areas.
         (a)   On-site amenities and recreational facilities shall be provided
in all multifamily developments.
         (b)   Minimum amenities in all developments 50 units or greater shall
include outdoor common landscape areas and indoor/outdoor facilities that meet
the needs of the intended population including such things as a community/party
room, theatre, indoor/outdoor recreation areas such as swimming pools, indoor
fitness centers, tennis courts, play equipment, walking trails, community
gardens, and basketball courts.
         (c)   All common areas not dedicated to the public including, but not
limited to, open space, driveways, private drives, parking areas, play areas,
recreational facilities, etc., shall be owned in one of the following manners:
            1.   Condominium ownership pursuant to M.S. § 515A.1-106.
            2.   Townhome common areas shall be owned by the owners of each
unit lot, with each owner of a unit having an equal and undivided interest in
the common area.
            3.   Homeowners' association (HOA). An HOA shall be established for
all townhome developments intended for individual ownership, subject to review
and approval of the City Attorney. The HOA shall be responsible for all
exterior building maintenance, approval of any exterior architectural
modifications, landscaping, snow clearing, and regular maintenance of private
driveways and other areas owned in common.
      (3)   Energy efficiency. All buildings and sites shall be situated on the
site and developed to maximize the benefits solar heating and passive cooling,
and provide other amenities aimed at promoting energy efficiency and
sustainability. Each new building or development shall incorporate a minimum of
three elements:
         (a)   Buildings oriented to optimize passive solar heating and cooling
opportunities;
         (b)   Buildings oriented to minimize wind loads on the structure;
         (c)   Windows placed and appropriately shaded to maximize solar
penetration during the winter months and minimize solar penetration during the
summer months;
         (d)   Use of white membrane roofing material;
         (e)   Installation of a green roof occupying a minimum of 30% of the
total roof area;
         (f)   Installation of solar panels to provide at least 10% of the
project's estimate electricity demand;
         (g)   A minimum of 50% of all exterior light fixtures used within the
development shall be powered by solar panel energy;
         (h)   All lighting shall use LED fixtures;
         (i)   Daylight sensors or times shall be installed and used on all
exterior lighting;
         (j)   Electric vehicle stalls/plug-ins;
         (k)   Indoor bicycle parking;
         (l)   On-site recycling and organic waste disposal;
         (m)   Community garage space available to all residents; or
         (n)   Other such sustainable elements and amenities as proposed by the
applicant to meet desired objectives.
      (4)   Site design.
         (a)   Orient and consolidate structures to complement existing,
adjacent development to create a coordinated and visually attractive
residential setting.
         (b)   Buildings with frontage on a primary street shall orient front
facades parallel to the street.
         (c)   Buildings shall have a clearly defined primary pedestrian
entrance at the street level.
         (d)   Pedestrian connections to the surrounding neighborhood shall be
provided as feasible.
         (e)   Building access and internal hallways shall be so designed that
any one single point of building entry cannot provide full access to the floor
in which the access is located or the entire building.
         (f)   All private driveways for garages in townhouse developments
shall have a maximum grade of 11%.
         (g)   A minimum 20-foot setback is required between driveways, drive
aisles, or parking areas and any building.
      (5)   Unit mix. Apartment and condominium buildings, not including age
restricted, shall include a mix of unit types with no more than 40% of the
units constructed as one-bedroom units and no more than 60% of any other
bedroom type.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1004 BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS, MIXED USE.
   (A)   Architectural materials.
      (1)   Classes of materials. For the purpose of this section, acceptable
exterior materials are divided into Class 1 and Class 2 categories as shown in
the following figure:
 
Figure 152.1004.1 Classes of Materials
Class 1                                                                         Class 2
1.   Brick
2.   Natural or cementious stone                                             1.   Architecturally textured concrete precast panels
3.   Glass, or other glazing materials                                       2.   Wood
4.   Masonry stucco                                                          3.   Tile (masonry, stone or clay), ceramic
5.   Architectural metal panels                                              4.   Other materials not listed elsewhere as approved by the City Manager or as
6.   Specialty concrete block (including textured, burnished block or rock   recommended by the Planning Commission
faced block)                                                                    5.   EFIS in conformance with the ICC ES report
7.   Other materials not listed elsewhere as approved by the City Manager or  
recommended by the Planning Commission
 
      (2)   Required combination of materials. Buildings must incorporate
classes of materials for each façade in the following manner:
         (a)   Front facades and side and rear facades visible from public
right(s)-of-way, the public view from adjacent properties, parks, civic areas,
or residential uses or districts must be composed of at least two or more Class
1 materials totaling 65% of the facade.
         (b)   Side and rear facades not visible from public right(s)-of-way,
parks, public view from adjacent properties or residential uses or districts
must use a combination of Class 1 or 2 materials.
         (c)   Facades visible from public right(s)-of-way must include
windows, doors, canopies, balconies or other visual elements that help mitigate
the appearance of blank walls.
   (B)   Building entries.
      (1)   All main building entrances shall face a public street.
      (2)   Canopies and awnings may encroach into the public right-of-way over
a sidewalk.
   (C)   Ground-floor residential.
      (1)   Permanent ground-floor residential uses fronting a public street or
walkway, where present, shall be separated from the street by landscaping,
steps, porches, grade changes, and low ornamental fences or walls in order to
create a private yard area between the sidewalk and the front door.
      (2)   In mixed-use buildings with a ground floor ultimately intended for
non-residential uses, those standards required per division (C)(1) above, are
not required, however, the first floor shall be built to accommodate future
nonresidential uses with a height of not less than 14 feet.
   (D)   Height transition to residential districts. Where abutting a
residential district at the rear or side lot line, building height at the rear
or side yard setback line shall not exceed three stories. From this point,
building height may increase at a ratio of one foot of rise to one foot of
horizontal distance away from the property line, (a 45 degree angle) up to the
maximum allowed height.
   (E)   Surface parking.
      (1)   Parking lots shall be located in the side or rear of the principal
structure.
      (2)   Non-vehicular access.
         (a)   A separate pedestrian access shall connect the principal
building to the public street or a public trail, on all sides of the lot which
front on a public right-of-way or public trail.
         (b)   Sidewalks shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abut
a public or private street.
         (c)   Pedestrian/bicycle accesses shall be separated from parking
areas by curbed, landscaped islands which have a minimum width of 20 feet
inclusive of sidewalk.
   (F)   If an existing transit stop is located on any adjacent public street,
pedestrian/bicycle access shall be located convenient to that transit stop.
   (G)   TOD-G Transit Oriented Greenfield District- low, medium and high
intensities, greenfield neighborhood building, site, and public realm
standards.
      (1)   Purpose and applicability. The structure of the TOD-G District
provides the city and future development groups with the regulations and
guidelines needed to develop a comprehensive, resilient and pedestrian-oriented
TOD. The subdivision regulations in division (D) provide the following:
         (a)   A network of connected streets and blocks that reflect an
approved station area plan;
         (b)   General block sizes and configurations that support zoning and
land use goals;
         (c)   Maximum block perimeters that foster attractive, safe and
walkable environments, while enhancing circulation through the site;
         (d)   Guidance on meeting regional stormwater requirements as detailed
in the Brooklyn Park Subarea Stormwater Master Plan.
      (2)   Regulating plan. The TOD-G District is implemented through a
regulating plan, approved with the rezoning to TOD-G, which includes a
combination of at least two of the three intensities described below and
regulated by Table 152.1004.2 below. TOD-G areas must be divided into
neighborhoods by the introduction of a primary thoroughfare network, and then
into blocks by the completion of the streets and open spaces. As the area is
subdivided to generate blocks, parcels and individual building sites, the
regulating plan assigns intensities that may be refined with approval by the
City Manager according to §
152.201. Regulating plans, consisting of one or more maps, must show the
following:
         (a)   District boundaries;
         (b)   Existing infrastructure including streets, parks and open space;
         (c)   Thoroughfare network according to division (G)(4) with
thoroughfare assignments according to Tables 152.1004.3 and 152.1004.2; and
         (d)   Civic area in compliance with §
152.1006.
      (3)   Intensities. TOD-G intensities are comprised of:
         (a)   Low intensity. Consists of medium density residential areas,
with a mix of uses, home occupations, and accessory buildings. It contains a
wide range of building types: houses, courtyard housing, townhouses, duplexes,
triplexes, small apartment buildings, and neighborhood commercial uses. This
area must be more than 1,500 feet from a high frequency transit service
station.
         (b)   Medium intensity. Consists of a mix of uses but is primarily
medium to high density residential and neighborhood commercial uses.
         (c)   High intensity. Consists of high density mixed-use buildings
that accommodate retail, offices, institutions, and multi-family housing.
 
TABLE 152.1004.2 REGULATING PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Area in acres Civic space        Intensity % of area
40 min.       Percentage of Area Low      Medium High
              5-10%              20% max. 50-70% 10-30%
 
      (4)   Subdivision regulations. The provisions of this section will be
used upon rezoning to Transit Oriented Greenfield (TOD-G) and subdivision
within any TOD zoning district.
         (a)   The thoroughfare network must be laid out according to Table
152.1004.3 below and comply with the standards below.
 
TABLE 152.1004.3 SUBDIVISION AND BLOCK STANDARDS
Block Dimensions         Dimensions
Block length             400 ft. max.
Block perimeter          1,600 ft. max.
Alley width              16 ft. min.
Mid-block Pedestrian Passages
Pedestrian passage width 12 ft. min., 24 ft. max.
 
            1.   Thoroughfare standards.
               a.   All thoroughfares must connect to other thoroughfares,
forming a network.
               b.   New thoroughfares must connect wherever possible to
thoroughfares on adjacent sites. Cul-de-sacs may only be permitted by approval
of the City Council at time adoption of the regulating plan to accommodate
specific site conditions.
               c.   New thoroughfares must implement the approved station area
plan street network and use street section options from division (G)(4)(a)4.
below.
               d.   A section may be chosen according to right-of-way width and
functional classification. New thoroughfare sections may be created using the
standards in Table 152.1004.5.
            2.   Block dimensions. Block length and perimeter may be adjusted
up to 20% with approval from the City Manager due to topography, existing
development conditions, or if the block is at the perimeter of the TOD
regulating plan. Block lengths up to 800 feet may be approved if a mid-block
pedestrian passage is provided.
            3.   Mid-block pedestrian passages. In areas with adequate
vehicular capacity, pedestrian-only connections may be used mid-block and will
count as a new edge in block perimeter calculations.
            4.   Parking lot layout. In addition to the parking regulations of
§
152.1020(5)(a), parking lots in TOD-G must be laid out as blocks per Table
152.1004.3, with utilities located in the drive aisles. Drive aisles must have
adequate width to redevelop with rights-of-way required by one or more of the
thoroughfare sections in Table 152.1004.4.
TABLE 152.1004.4 THOROUGHFARE SECTIONS
Street ST 98-72 Illustration
TABLE 152.1004.4 THOROUGHFARE SECTIONS
Street ST 98-72                       Illustration
Functional class   Arterial
Right-of-way       98 ft. min.
Design, target     30-35 mph
speed
Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 3
Vehicle lane width 10 ft.1
Movement           Two-way
(PK) Parking lanes 2
Parking lane width 8 ft.
(BL) Bicycle       Buffered lane
facility                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Bicycle facility   6 ft. + 3ft.       220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
width              buffer             IMAGES/0-0-0-9636.png]
(MD) Median        N/A
Turning lanes      At arterial
                   intersections only
Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      7 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     5 ft. min., 7 ft.
width              max.
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 5
                   ft. by 14 ft. min.
Tree spacing       30 ft. on center
1 Subject to MNDOT approval.
Street ST 70-46                        
Functional class   Primary local,
                   local street
                   74 ft. min.
Right-of-way       primary local
                   70 ft. min. local
                   street
Design, target     25 mph
speed
Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 2
Vehicle lane width 10 ft. 2
Movement           Two-way
(PK) Parking lanes 2
Parking lane width 8 ft.
                   Lane (local        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
(BL) Bicycle       street), buffered  220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
facility           lane (primary      IMAGES/0-0-0-9634.png]
                   local)
Bicycle facility   6 ft. + 2 ft.
width              buffer (primary
                   local)
(MD) Median        N/A
Turning lanes      N/A
   Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      7 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     5 ft. min., 7 ft.
width              max.
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 5
                   ft. by 14 ft. min.
Tree spacing       30 ft. on center
2Subject to MNDOT approval.
Street ST 58-30                        
Functional class   Primary local,
                   local street
                   60 ft. min.
Right-of-way       primary local
                   58 ft. min. local
                   street
Design, target     25 mph
speed
Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 2
Vehicle lane width 10 ft. primary
                   local3
Movement           Two-way
(PK) Parking lanes 2
Parking lane width 8 ft.              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
(BL) Bicycle       Sharrow optional   220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
facility                              IMAGES/0-0-0-9632.png]
Bicycle facility   N/A
width
(MD) Median        N/A
Turning lanes      N/A
Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      8 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     6 ft. min., 7 ft.
width              max.
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 6
                   ft. by 14 ft. min.
Tree spacing       30-35 ft. on
                   center
3Subject to MNDOT approval
Street ST 49-27                        
Functional class   Local street
Right-of-way       49 ft. min.
Design, target     20 mph
speed
Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 2
Vehicle lane width 10 ft 4
Movement           Two-way
(PK) Parking lanes 1
Parking lane width 8 ft.
(BL) Bicycle       Sharrow optional   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
facility                              220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
Bicycle facility   N/A                IMAGES/0-0-0-9630.png]
width
(MD) Median        N/A
Turning lanes      N/A
Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      6 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     5 ft. min., 7 ft.
width              max.
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 5
                   ft. by 14 ft.
Tree spacing       30 ft. on center
4 Subject to MNDOT approval            
 
TABLE 152.1004.5 STREET DESIGN CRITERIA
Criteria Local Street Primary Local Arterial
TABLE 152.1004.5 STREET DESIGN CRITERIA
Criteria           Local Street        Primary Local       Arterial
Sidewalk           5 ft. min. plus     6 ft. min. plus     8 ft. min. plus
                   boulevard width     boulevard width     boulevard width
Boulevard          6 ft. wide by 6 ft. 7 ft. wide by 14    7 ft. wide by 14 ft.
                   long min.           ft. long min.       long min.
Parking lane width 8 ft. min.          8 ft. min.          8 ft. min.
Parking lanes      0-2                 2 min.              0-2
required
Travel lane width  9 ft. min. 10 ft.   10 ft. min., 11 ft. 10 ft. min., 11 ft.
                   max.                max.                max.
Travel lanes       1-2                 2-4                 4+ median
required
Movement types     One-way, two-way    Two-way             Two-way
Median             N/A                 Optional, 8 ft.     Optional, 10 ft.
                                       min.                min.
Design speed,      20 mph              25 mph              30 mph
target speed
Bike facility      Optional            Required            Required
required
Bike facility type Sharrow, lane,      Buffered lane,      Buffered lane,
                   route               protected lane      protected lane
Bike lane width    5 ft. min.          6 ft. min.          6 ft. min.
Bike lane buffer   N/A                 2 ft. min.          3 ft. min.
 
   (H)   MU Mixed Use building, site and public realm standards.
      (1)   Purpose and applicability. The structure of the MU District
provides the city and future development groups with the regulations and
guidelines needed to develop a comprehensive, resilient and pedestrian-oriented
neighborhood. The subdivision regulations in division (H)(4) provide the
following:
         (a)   A network of connected streets and blocks that reflect an
approved station area plan;
         (b)   General block sizes and configurations that support zoning and
land use goals;
         (c)   Maximum block perimeters that foster attractive, safe and
walkable environments, while enhancing circulation through the site; and
         (d)   Guidance on meeting regional stormwater requirements as detailed
in the Brooklyn Park Subarea Stormwater Master Plan.
      (2)   Regulating plan. The MU District is implemented through a
regulating plan, to be submitted prior to or in conjunction with other required
applications. Areas zoned MU must be divided into neighborhoods by the
introduction of a primary thoroughfare network, and then into blocks by the
completion of the streets and open spaces. Regulating plans must be recorded
against all properties governed by the plan and must show the following:
         (a)   District boundaries;
         (b)   Existing infrastructure including streets, parks and open space;
         (c)   Thoroughfare network according to division (3) with thoroughfare
assignments according to Tables 152.1004.7 or 152.1004.8; and
      (3)   Civic area in compliance with §
152.1006.
      (4)   Subdivision regulations.
         (a)   The provisions of this section will be used upon subdivision
within the MU Zoning District.
         (b)   The thoroughfare network must be laid out according to Table
152.1004.6 and comply with the standards of division (4)(b)1. below.
 
TABLE 152.1004.6 SUBDIVISION AND BLOCK STANDARDS
Block Dimensions         Dimensions
Block length             400 ft. max.
Block perimeter          1,600 ft. max.
Alley width              16 ft. min.
Mid-block Pedestrian Passages
Pedestrian passage width 12 ft. min., 24 ft. max.
 
            1.   Thoroughfare standards.
               a.   All thoroughfares must connect to other thoroughfares,
forming a network.
               b.   New thoroughfares must connect wherever possible to
thoroughfares on adjacent sites. Cul-de-sacs may only be permitted by approval
of the City Manager to accommodate specific site conditions.
               c.   New thoroughfares must implement any approved small area
plan street network and use street section options from Table 152.1004.7.
               d.   A section may be chosen according to right-of-way width and
functional classification. New thoroughfare sections may be created using the
standards in Table 152.1004.8.
            2.   Block dimensions. Block length and perimeter may be adjusted
up to 20% with approval from the City Manager due to topography, existing
development conditions, or if the block is at the perimeter of the regulating
plan. Block lengths up to 800 feet may be approved if a mid-block pedestrian
passage is provided.
            3.   Mid-block pedestrian passages. In areas with adequate
vehicular capacity, pedestrian-only connections may be used mid-block and will
count as a new edge in block perimeter calculations.
            4.   Parking lot layout. In addition to the parking regulations of
§
152.1020(5)(a), parking lots in MU must be laid out as blocks per Table
152.1004.6, with utilities located in the drive aisles. Drive aisles must have
adequate width to redevelop with rights-of-way required by one or more of the
thoroughfare sections in Table 152.1004.7.
TABLE 152.1004.7 THOROUGHFARE SECTIONS
TABLE 152.1004.7 THOROUGHFARE SECTIONS
Street ST 98-72                       Illustration
Functional class   Arterial
Right-of-way       98 ft. min.
Design, target     30-35 mph
speed
Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 3
Vehicle lane width 10 ft.1
Movement           Two-way
(PK) Parking lanes 2
Parking lane width 8 ft.
(BL) Bicycle       Buffered lane
facility                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Bicycle facility   6 ft. + 3 ft.      220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
width              buffer             IMAGES/0-0-0-9644.png]
(MD) Median        N/A
Turning lanes      At arterial
                   intersections only
Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      8 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     5 ft. min., 7 ft.
width              max.
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 5
                   ft. by 14 ft. min.
Tree spacing       30 ft. on center
1 Subject to MNDOT approval.
Street ST 49-27                        
4 Subject to MNDOT approval            
Street ST 70-46                        
Functional class   Primary local,
                   local street
                   74 ft. min.
Right-of-way       primary local
                   70 ft. min. local
                   street
Design, target     25 mph
speed
Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 2
Vehicle lane width 10 ft. 2
Movement           Two-way
(PK) Parking lanes 2
Parking lane width 8 ft.
                   Lane (local        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
(BL) Bicycle       street), buffered  220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
facility           lane (primary      IMAGES/0-0-0-9642.png]
                   local)
Bicycle facility   6 ft. + 2 ft.
width              buffer (primary
                   local)
(MD) Median        N/A
Turning lanes      N/A
Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      7 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     5 ft. min., 7 ft.
width              max.
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 5
                   ft. by 14 ft. min.
Tree spacing       30 ft. on center
2Subject to MNDOT approval.
Street ST 58-30                        
Functional class   Primary local,
                   local street
                   60 ft. min.
Right-of-way       primary local
                   58 ft. min. local
                   street
Design, target     25 mph
speed
Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 2
Vehicle lane width 10 ft. primary
                   local3
Movement           Two-way
(PK) Parking lanes 2
Parking lane width 8 ft.              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
(BL) Bicycle       Sharrow optional   220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
facility                              IMAGES/0-0-0-9640.png]
Bicycle facility   N/A
width
(MD) Median        N/A
Turning lanes      N/A
Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      8 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     6 ft. min., 7 ft.
width              max.
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 6
                   ft. by 14 ft. min.
Tree spacing       30-35 ft. on
                   center
3Subject to MNDOT approval
Street ST 49-27                        
Functional class   Local street
Right-of-way       49 ft. min.
Design, target     20 mph
speed
Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 2
Vehicle lane width 10 ft 4
Movement           Two-way
(PK) Parking lanes 1
Parking lane width 8 ft.
(BL) Bicycle       Sharrow optional   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
facility                              220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
Bicycle facility   N/A                IMAGES/0-0-0-9638.png]
width
(MD) Median        N/A
Turning lanes      N/A
Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      6 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     5 ft. min., 7 ft.
width              max.
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 5
                   ft. by 14 ft.
Tree spacing       30 ft. on center
4 Subject to MNDOT approval            
 
TABLE 152.1004.8 STREET DESIGN CRITERIA
Criteria Local Street Primary Local Arterial
TABLE 152.1004.8 STREET DESIGN CRITERIA
Criteria           Local Street        Primary Local       Arterial
Sidewalk           5 ft. min. plus     6 ft. min. plus     8 ft. min. plus
                   boulevard width     boulevard width     boulevard width
Boulevard          6 ft. wide by 6 ft. 7 ft. wide by 14    7 ft. wide by 14 ft.
                   long min.           ft. long min.       long min.
Parking lane width 8 ft. min.          8 ft. min.          8 ft. min.
Parking lanes      0-2                 2 min.              0-2
required
Travel lane width  9 ft. min., 10 ft.  10 ft. min., 11 ft. 10 ft. min., 11 ft.
                   max.                max.                max.
Travel lanes       1-2                 2-4                 4+ median
required
Movement types     One-way, two-way    Two-way             Two-way
Median             N/A                 Optional, 8 ft.     Optional, 10 ft.
                                       min.                min.
Design, speed,     20 mph              25 mph              30 mph
target speed
Bike facility      Optional            Required            Required
required
Bike facility type Sharrow, lane,      Buffered lane,      Buffered lane,
                   route               protected lane      protected lane
Bike lane width    5 ft. min.          6 ft. min.          6 ft. min.
Bike lane buffer   N/A                 2 ft. min.          3 ft. min.
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-2024; Am. Ord. 2025-1310, passed 3-24-25)
§ 152.1005 BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS, NONRESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of establishing criteria for architectural design
and exterior facing materials is to ensure a high standard of development that
is compatible with neighboring development and contributes to a community image
of permanence, stability, and visual aesthetics, while preventing impermanent
construction and use of materials that are unsightly, rapidly deteriorate, or
cause urban blight. The standards are further intended to ensure coordinated
design of building facades, additions, and accessory structures in to prevent
visual disharmony.
   (B)   Applicability. The standards apply in all business districts (B-1, B-
2, B-3, B-4, BP, I, PI, OP).
   (C)   General requirements.
      (1)   Building construction and design may be used to create a structure
with equally attractive sides, except for those instances specified in this
section.
      (2)   Primary building entrances must be clearly defined to promote
visual interest and architectural presence.
      (3)   Large, uninterrupted expanses of a single material are not
permitted, unless approved by the City Manager.
      (4)   No wall that faces a public right-of-way, park, the public view
from adjacent properties, or a residential use or district shall have an
uninterrupted length exceeding 100 feet without including at least two of the
following: change in plane, change in texture or masonry pattern, two class one
materials, windows in a manner that is impactful to the design, or an
equivalent element that subdivides the wall into human scale proportions.
      (5)   Any other building, such as the case with multiple buildings on a
single parcel, accessory buildings, or parking structures, should be of
compatible design and materials with emphasis on the position(s) of the
building(s) to give visual interest.
      (6)   Additions for principal buildings constructed before the effective
date of the chapter may be of similar materials and design as the principal
structure.
   (D)   Class of materials. Acceptable exterior materials are divided into
Class 1 and Class 2 categories as shown in
Table 152.1005.1 below.
TABLE 152.1005.1 CLASSES OF MATERIALS
Class 1 Class 2
TABLE 152.1005.1 CLASSES OF MATERIALS
Class 1                                      Class 2
Brick                                        Wood
Natural or cementitious stone                Tile (masonry, stone or clay),
                                             ceramic
                                             Other materials not listed
Glass, or other glazing materials            elsewhere as approved by the City
                                             Manager or as recommended by the
                                             Planning Commission
Masonry stucco                               EFIS in conformance with the ICC
                                             ES report
Architectural metal panels
Specialty concrete block (including
textured, burnished block or rock faced
block)
Architecturally textured and industrial
grade concrete precast panels
Other materials not listed elsewhere as
approved by the City Manager or as
recommended by the Planning Commission   
 
      (1)   Required combination of materials. Buildings must incorporate
classes of materials for each facade in the following manner:
         (a)   Office, service, and retail buildings.
            1.   Front facades and side and rear facades visible from public
right(s)-of-way, the public view from adjacent properties, parks, or
residential uses or districts must be composed of at least two or more Class 1
materials totaling 65% of the facade.
            2.   Side and rear facades not visible from public right-of-way,
parks, public view from adjacent properties or residential uses or districts
must use a combination of Class 1 or 2 materials.
            3.   Facades visible from public right-of-way must include windows,
doors, canopies or other treatments that help mitigate the appearance of blank
walls.
         (b)   Industrial and warehouse buildings, multi-tenant office/
industrial /warehouse or showroom/warehouse or other combinations.
            1.   Front facades must be composed of at least two or more Class 1
materials totaling 65%.
            2.   Side and rear facades visible from public right(s)-of-way,
parks, public view from adjacent properties, or residential uses or districts
must be composed of at least two or more Class 1 materials totaling 50%.
            3.   Side and rear facades not visible from public right(s)-of-way,
parks, public view from adjacent properties or residential uses or districts
must use a combination of Class 1 or 2 materials.
         (c)   Buildings for uses that do not conform to any of the above list
of uses must conform to the materials and proportion of office and retail
buildings listed in division (D)(1)(a), above.
   (E)   Exterior surface finishes. All exterior surfaces must be finished with
the appropriate sealant, stain, paint, or other process (to manufacturer's
specifications) to withstand the elements and prevent fading, chipping,
chalking, cracking, peeling, warping, rot, rust, water damage, or other natural
degrading process, with the exception of those materials, like copper, where
the degrading process is architecturally desirable and must not be allowed to
become or remain in an unsafe condition as defined by the Uniform Building and
Fire Codes.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1006 CIVIC SPACES.
   (A)   Civic spaces are required to be provided in all mixed use district
developments, as part of the regulating plan in compliance with §
152.304.
   (B)   All Mixed Use District developments must dedicate 5-10% of the total
area to civic space.
   (C)   Civic spaces should be placed in such a manner to enhance pedestrian
circulation through the development, and should contain a mixture of civic
space types. The civic spaces must be designed according to
Table 152.1006.1 below.
TABLE 152.1006.1 CIVIC SPACE TYPES
TABLE 152.1006.1 CIVIC SPACE TYPES
Square                                 
Size in acres    0.25 - 2.5
Proportion (a:b) 1:5 max
                 Thoroughfares on a
Edge condition   minimum of two non-
                 adjacent sides       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                 50% maximum paved;   220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
Surface          pervious paving      IMAGES/0-0-0-9652.png]
                 allowed
                 1 tree with mature
Landscape        canopy over 25 ft.
                 per 800 sq. ft. of
                 area min.
Plaza                                  
Size in acres    5,000 - 20,000
Proportion (a:b) 1:5 max.
Edge condition   Thoroughfares on a
                 minimum of two sides
                 50% minimum paved;   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Surface          pervious paving      220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
                 allowed; bituminous  IMAGES/0-0-0-9650.png]
                 pavement prohibited
                 1 tree with mature
Landscape        canopy over 25 ft.
                 per 1,000 sq. ft. of
                 area min.
Pocket Park
Size in acres    1,000 - 5,000
Proportion (a:b) 1:4 max
                 1 side minimum along
Edge condition   a thoroughfare or    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                 pedestrian passage   220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
Surface          May be paved or      IMAGES/0-0-0-9648.png]
                 landscaped
                 1 tree with mature
Landscape        canopy over 20 ft.
                 per 600 sq. ft. of
                 area min.
Pedestrian Passage                     
Width            12 ft. min., 24 ft.
                 max.
                 Active frontages
Edge condition   required in high     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                 intensity blocks     220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
Walkway width    6 ft. min.           IMAGES/0-0-0-9646.png]
                 3 ft. minimum
Landscape        landscape edge in
                 medium and low
                 intensity blocks
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1007 CLEAR VIEW TRIANGLE.
   A 50-foot clear view triangle shall be maintained between the rights-of-way
of intersecting streets.
   (A)   No building, structure, fence, or planting may be erected within the
clear view triangle except for fences 42 inches or less, trees trimmed to a
distance of at least seven feet above the curb line, or shrubs three feet in
height or less and do not obstruct visibility across the above-described
triangle.
   (B)   No fence may be erected inside a 30-foot clear view triangle between a
public right-of-way and an access driveway.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1008 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Commercial vehicles in nonresidential districts. Outdoor parking of
commercial vehicles is permitted as an accessory use in nonresidential zoning
districts subject to the following:
      (1)   Commercial vehicles must either be related to the principal use or
the owner/operator of the vehicle must have written permission of the property
owner; and
      (2)   Outdoor parking of commercial vehicles is restricted to the
following locations:
         (a)   In a parking space in compliance with §
152.1019 provided that no vehicle occupies more than one legal parking space;
         (b)   In a staging area in compliance with §
152.1015; and
         (c)   In the Business Park (BP), General Industrial (I), Transit-
Oriented Development Employment (TOD-E) Districts, commercial vehicles may be
parked on a paved surface behind the front of the building provided that the
vehicles do not block drive aisles or public right-of-way.
   (B)   Commercial vehicles in residential districts. Outdoor parking of
commercial vehicles is limited to one vehicle per dwelling unit. Parking of
commercial vehicles must comply with §
152.1019. Outdoor parking of semi trucks, semi trailers, dump trucks, tow
trucks, and commercial vehicles with a registered gross weight over 15,000
pounds or in excess of 30 feet in length is not permitted except when the
vehicle is being used for loading or unloading or for rendering a service on
the property.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1317, passed 9-8-25)
§ 152.1009 DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   Except for properties where gravel driveways existed prior to the
enactment of this chapter, all driveways shall be paved with a continuous
impervious surface or an approved pervious surface, with the exception of farms
and interim or temporary uses in the UR Urban Reserve District.
   (B)   If a driveway that was installed before the enactment of this chapter
is expanded or enlarged by 20% or more in surface area, the entire driveway
must be paved with a continuous impervious surface or an approved pervious
surface.
   (C)   All driveways, regardless of when installed, must be maintained in
compliance with
Chapter 106.
   (D)   No vehicle can be parked so that it blocks a public sidewalk, trail,
emergency access way, or a public or private fire hydrant.
   (E)   All residential driveways must be no wider than 30 feet at the
property line.
   (F)   No residential property may have driveway access to more than one
street.
   (G)   Residential horseshoe driveways must have two access points totaling
30 feet at the property line.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1010 FENCES AND RETAINING WALLS.
   (A)   Residential fences and retaining walls.
      (1)   Fences or walls which detain or inhibit the flow of surface water
drainage to and from abutting properties are prohibited. Retaining walls are
prohibited from being placed in easements.
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front. Fences and walls more than 42 inches in height must be
setback 15 feet from the property line. Multiple family dwelling developments
or townhouse developments may have wrought iron (or similarly designed)
decorative fences constructed up to the front property line.
         (b)   Interior side or rear. No setback.
         (c)   Side or rear abutting public right-of-way.
            1.   Fences and walls must be setback 15 feet from the property
line unless they qualify for one of the following exemptions. Fences may be
allowed up to the property line if:
               a.   Properties are located on corners with controlled
intersections, (i.e., stop signs or stop lights).
               b.   Fence or wall does not encroach into the clear view
triangle as defined and regulated in §
152.1007.
         (d)   Fences measuring 42 inches or less may be placed anywhere on a
lot, provided they comply with traffic visibility requirements set forth
herein.
      (3)   Access required.
         (a)   Detached single and attached two-family dwellings. Where any
fence connects to a building at least one gate with a minimum width of two
feet, six inches is required to allow access around the building.
         (b)   All other uses. Plans for fences and gates controlling access to
the property must be approved by the Police and Fire Departments before
construction begins.
      (4)   Fence height. No fence may exceed eight feet, six inches as
measured from the top of the fence or supports to grade.
      (5)   Prohibited fence materials. Electric, concertina or barbed wire, or
chicken wire fences are prohibited.
      (6)   Restricted fence materials.
         (a)   Silt and other construction fences must be removed from the
property at project completion.
         (b)   Snow fences may not be installed before November 1st and must be
removed from all properties by April 1st. If snow is present within one foot of
the fence location, the presence of the snow fence may be maintained at the
discretion of the City Manager.
         (c)   Chain link fences must have a top rail and posts must be spaced
at intervals not to exceed ten feet.
         (d)   Chain link fences in the front yard must have a black, brown, or
green vinyl coating. Bare galvanized chain link fences are not allowed in front
yards. Privacy slats are not allowed in chain link fences in the front yard.
   (B)   Finished sides of fences and walls. If the visible facade material is
not finished on both sides, the finished side of the material must be on the
outside, facing the abutting or adjoining properties, and all posts or
structures supporting the fence or wall must be on the inside.
   (C)   Nonresidential and Mixed Use fences and retaining walls.
      (1)   Fences or walls that detain or inhibit the natural flow of surface
water drainage to and from abutting properties are prohibited.
      (2)   All fences must be constructed of durable, weather resistant
materials and properly constructed and anchored in compliance with the
Minnesota Building Code.
      (3)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Public right-of-way. Fences and walls more than 30 inches in
height may not be constructed between the public right-of-way and the facade of
the principal building.
         (b)   Interior side or rear. No setback.
      (4)   Access required.
         (a)   Where any fence connects to a building at least one gate with a
minimum width of two feet, six inches is required to allow access around the
building.
         (b)   Fences and gates controlling access to the property must be
approved by the City Manager before a building permit may be issued or approval
is given through another process.
      (5)   Height. No fence may exceed eight feet, six inches as measured from
the top of the fence or supports to grade. Exceptions to this height may be
made for fences enclosing tennis courts and other similar recreational uses
with the approval of the City Manager.
      (6)   Prohibited fence materials include electric, chicken, concertina,
or barbed wire fences.
      (7)   Restricted fence materials.
         (a)   Silt and other construction fences must be removed from the
property at project completion.
         (b)   Snow fences must be removed from all properties by April 1st. If
snow is still present within one foot of the fence location, removal may be
extended at the discretion of the City Manager.
         (c)   Chain link fences must have a top rail, barbed ends must be
placed at the bottom of the fence, and posts must be spaced at intervals not to
exceed ten feet.
         (d)   Chain link fences must have a black, brown, or green vinyl
coating.
      (8)   Finished sides. If the material used in fence construction is not
finished on both sides, the finished side of the material must be on the
outside, facing the abutting or adjoining properties and all posts or
structures supporting the fence or wall must be on the inside.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1011 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS, RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of establishing minimum landscape standards is to
enhance the city's environmental and visual character for its' residents use;
and enjoyment; preserve and stabilize the ecological balance in the city;
establish a healthy environment by using vegetation to mitigate pollution's
ill-effects; and promote high quality development in the city.
   (B)   Landscape plan required. Prior to the issuance of a building permit
for new construction or expansion of a multifamily structure, a landscape plan
must be submitted for review and approval to the City Manager in compliance
with the site plan review process in §
152.303. Landscape plans must be prepared by a landscape architect and be
overlaid on the grading plan.
   (C)   Installation of landscape materials. All landscaping elements must be
installed with professional horticultural standards as established with the
most current edition of the Landscape Construction Reference Manual as
published by the Minnesota Nursery and Landscape Association within 90 days of
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or by June 15 for homes for which
a certificate of occupancy is issued between September 1 and March 1.
   (D)   Minimum open space requirements for residential sites.
 
TABLE 152.1011.1 MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN SPACE
                   Single and two-family Townhouse    Multiple family
                   dwellings             developments dwellings
                   25% total, to include
Minimum open space a minimum of 50% of      40%       40%
                   front yard
                                         10% of interior parking lot area.
Parking areas         N/A             This area counts towards total
                                         green area of the site.
 
   (E)   Minimum tree and shrub quantities. All developments and subdivisions
that occur in the residential districts after the effective date of this
chapter shall provide the minimum number of trees and shrubs as specified in
the following table:
 
TABLE 152.1011.2 MINIMUM REQUIRED TREE AND SHRUB REQUIREMENTS AT INSTALLATION
                              Single and two- Townhouse        Multiple family
Vegetation type Size          family          developments     dwellings
                              dwellings
                                                               2 per dwelling
                              2 in the front                   or 1/1,000 gross
                              yard, 1 of      5 per unit or 1/ sq. ft. of
                              which must be   40 lineal feet   building area
Overstory       2 inch bb     within 1 foot   of site          (grade level
deciduous trees (caliper)     of the front    perimeter,       floor) or 1/40
                              property line,  whichever is     lineal feet of
                              3 additional on greater.         site perimeter,
                              property.                        whichever is
                                                               greater.
                              May be
                              substituted for May be
                              any of the      substituted on a Minimum of 30%
Coniferous                    overstory       1 for 1 basis    of required
trees           6 ft. bb      deciduous trees for the          overstory trees
                              except the      overstory        must be
                              front yard tree deciduous trees. coniferous.
                              at the property
                              line.
                                              1 per unit
                                              required. 2      2 may be
                                              additional may   substituted for
                              2 may be        be substituted   1 overstory
Ornamental      1.5 ft. bb    substituted for for 1 overstory  (maximum
deciduous trees (caliper)     1 overstory     (maximum         substitution =
                              tree.           substitution =   50% of required
                                              50% of required  overstory
                                              overstory        trees).
                                              trees).
                                                               1/300 gross sq.
                                                               ft. of building
                                                               footprint area
Understory      3 gal. potted 10 per unit     5 per unit       or 1/30 lineal
shrubs          or 18 in.                                      feet of site
                                                               perimeter,
                                                               whichever is
                                                               greater.
 
   (F)   Additional residential landscape requirements. All portions of a site
that are not covered by a building, hard surface coverage or water on a
permanent basis must be planted with ground cover and landscaping materials.
      (1)   All site areas must be covered with sod from curb(s) to all
interior property lines. Seeding may not be permitted. Rock and mulch may be
substituted for sod in landscaping planting beds and along the perimeter of
buildings. Native plant communities may be reestablished as a part of a site
plan review in compliance with all other sections of the city code. Exceptions:
         (a)   Areas for gardens, decorative landscape plantings, and/or native
plant communities;
         (b)   Developments in the Urban Reserve District (UR); and
         (c)   Berms, swales, drainage ponds, and the like with slopes greater
than 4:1.
      (2)   Prior to sodding, all single-family and two-family lots subdivided
after the effective date of this chapter must have a minimum of three inches of
black dirt as topsoil.
      (3)   Intersection visibility. All landscape materials must comply with
the intersection visibility requirements of §
152.1007.
      (4)   Overstory trees may not be installed underneath overhead utility
lines, nor may any landscape materials be installed over utility lines except
in compliance with city policy.
      (5)   All sodded or landscaped areas for multiple family dwellings,
townhouses, or nonresidential uses must have and maintain irrigations systems,
including landscaped parking islands and boulevards.
   (G)   Quantity credits. Existing healthy trees that are not susceptible to
disease, alternate sized trees, or decorative landscaping may be credited
toward the required trees detailed above and the additional trees required for
screening as defined in Table 152.1011.3 below. The following table establishes
the landscaping credits.
 
TABLE 152.1011.3 CREDITS
   Vegetation type     Size                      Exchange credit
Existing trees            2 in. (caliper)           1 tree
                          4 in. (caliper)           2 trees
New larger trees          4 in. (caliper) or 14 ft. 2 trees
                          coniferous
                                                    2 smaller trees for 1
Smaller trees             Min. 1.5 deciduous        overstory tree. Maximum
                                                    substitution = 50% of
                                                    required overstory trees
                                                    10 shrubs for 1 tree (1.5
Shrubs (non- residential                           in. bb ornamental or 2 in.
uses only)                                          bb overstory or 6 ft.
                                                    coniferous)
                                                    Exterior sculptures,
                                                    fountains, decorative
                                                    walks, courtyards and/or
                                                    additional ponds beyond
Decorative landscape yard                          those required, shown on a
                                                    landscape plan that meets
                                                    the intent of this section
                                                    to the satisfaction of the
                                                    City Manager
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1012 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS, MIXED USE.
   (A)   Purpose. Enhance the city's environmental and visual character;
preserve and stabilize the ecological balance in the city; establish a healthy
environment by using vegetation to mitigate pollution's ill-effects; and
protect public and private investments.
   (B)   Landscape plan required. A landscape plan is required prior to the
issuance of a building permit for new construction or expansion of a
nonresidential or mixed use structure in any district. Landscape plans must be
prepared by a landscape architect.
   (C)   Installation of landscape materials.
      (1)   All landscaped areas must be in conformance with the approved
landscaping plan.
      (2)   Planted landscaped materials must be replaced if it becomes
diseased, dies, or removed.
      (3)   All landscaped areas and adjacent rights-of-way must be maintained
in conformance with
Chapter 97.
      (4)   All landscaping elements and plant materials must be installed with
current professional horticultural standards.
      (5)   All landscape materials must comply with the intersection
visibility requirements of §
152.1007.
      (6)   Overstory and coniferous trees may not be installed underneath
overhead utility lines, nor may any landscape materials be installed over
utility lines except in compliance with the city code and policy.
   (D)   Landscape areas. The landscape requirements have been divided into
four categories: canopy cover (C), foundation landscape (FL), open areas
landscape (OL), landscape screen (LS) and street trees (ST).
      (1)   Canopy cover (CC). The purpose of this requirement is to mitigate
the effects of vehicular hardscape by establishing tree canopy cover to
intercept rainfall, protect pavement from sun deterioration, reduce the heat
island affect, and improve aesthetics. Vehicular hardscape area shall include
all loading drives, parking lots, driveways, drop-offs, and other areas covered
with a hard surface intended for vehicles.
         (a)   A minimum of one large tree or two medium trees shall be
provided per 360 square feet of required parking lot area green space. These
trees shall be located within parking areas and not within any required
perimeter landscaping area. Pervious pavements are considered 50% hardscape.
         (b)   Required canopy trees shall be located within the parking lot
area islands (minimum width of six feet and total area of 180 square feet if
designed as end island or nine feet in width if designed as continuous island
between bays.
      (2)   Foundation landscape (FL).
         (a)   The purpose of this requirement is to soften and enhance
building architecture, define access points, add color and seasonal interest,
and to blend buildings in with the natural environment.
         (b)   At least 40% of the total building perimeter shall be sodded or
landscaped with approved ground cover, low level plantings in an area of no
less than six feet in width.
      (3)   Open areas landscape (OL). The purpose of this requirement is to
provide general site beautification and high aesthetic quality with a mix of
plant materials in open areas. Open areas include all areas not occupied by
building or hardscape.
         (a)   Each development must have at least the minimum percentage open
space shown in the following table.
 
TABLE 152.1012.1 MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN SPACE
                       LW  NMU MU  TOD-C TOD-E TOD-G
                                               Low: 30%
Total development site 30% 30% 20% 20%   30%   Med: 30%
                                               High: 20%
 
         (b)   Open space areas must not be covered by a building or other
impervious surface, and must be planted with trees, shrubs, flowers, native
plant species or similar and covered with sod, landscape rock or mulch. All
site areas and areas that have been disturbed during construction must be
covered with sod to property lines and/or adjacent rights-of-way. Rock and
mulch may be substituted for sod in landscaping planting beds. Areas used for
demonstrated parking cannot be used to fulfill the open space requirement.
Interior parking lot landscaping provided on site to meet requirements in §
152.1019 counts towards this open space requirement.
         (c)   Plant diversity. No more than 25% of any trees planted shall
come from the same family and 15% of the same species. In addition, the
landscape plan design shall, at a minimum, provide at least three of the
following required numbers of trees and shrubs in addition to any trees and
shrubs required for screening in §
152.1024:
            1.   One overstory tree per 3,000 square feet of open area.
            2.   One ornamental tree per 1,500 square feet of open space.
            3.   One evergreen tree per 3,000 square feet of open area, except
on sites where security, pedestrian or traffic safety are a concern evergreens
may be excluded or installed in a reduced number.
            4.   One deciduous or evergreen shrub per 100 square feet of open
area.
         (d)   Street trees (ST).
            1.   Street trees are required to meet streetscape requirements
established in §
152.1025.
            2.   Evergreens shall not be planted as a street tree.
            3.   Street trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches
measured six inches above grade.
            4.   The street tree planting site must be located as follows:
               a.   50 feet or greater from street curb intersections as per §
152.1007.
               b.   At least 15 feet from curb on Class-I collector and any
arterial streets.
               c.   At least ten feet from curb on local or Class-II collector
streets.
               d.   At least ten feet from any sewer line, water line, or
driveway.
               e.   At least five feet from a fire hydrant per §
93.26 and the International Fire Code.
               f.   At least five feet from any gas, electric, telephone, cable
TV or other underground utility.
               g.   At least three feet from any sidewalk or trail.
               h.   At least 20 feet from overhead utility cables or using an
approved ornamental dwarf tree noted in
Table 152.1012.2 below.
            5.   Street trees shall be balled and burlapped and a minimum size
of 2 inch caliper unless noted in §
152.1012(E).
            6.   Street tree species and placement will be reviewed and
approved by the Operations and Maintenance Department as not to interfere with
existing or proposed utility systems.
 
TABLE 152.1012.2
Acceptable Shade Trees         Acceptable Ornamental Dwarf Trees
Bi-Color Oak (swamp white oak)
Columnar Norway Maple
Freeman Maple                  Amur Maple (single stem)
Ginko (no seed producing)      Heritage River Birch
Hackberry                      Ironwood
Imperial Honey Locust          Japanese Lilac Tree
Little Leaf Linden             Korean Mountain Ash
New Horizon Elm                Newport Plum
Northwood Maple                Pink Spire Crabapple
Sugar Maple                    Red Splendor Crabapple
River Birch
Triumph Elm (street)
Additional species may be allowed with City Manager approval
Prohibited Tree and Shrub Species
American Elm
Amur Maple
Box Elder
Common Buckthorn
Cottonwood
North American Ash
Lomardy Poplar
Russian Honeysuckle
Siberian Elm
Above listed trees/plants are prohibited due to their high maintenance costs,
surface roots, intolerance to storms, undesirable fruiting habits, or a
susceptibility to disease or pests.
 
   (E)   Minimum size requirements. The minimum plant size requirements are
described in the following table:
TABLE 152.1012.3
Plant Type Minimum Size*
TABLE 152.1012.3
Plant Type                        Minimum Size*
                                  Bare root - 1.75 in.
Large trees                       Balled and burlapped or container - 2 in.
                                  caliper
                                  Bare root - 1.5 in.
Medium and small trees            Balled and burlapped or container - 1.5 in.
                                  caliper
Evergreen trees                   6 ft. height
Large shrubs                      5 gallon container
Medium shrubs, small shrubs and   3 gallon container
groundcovers
Ornamental grasses and perennials 4 in. pot
*City may limit bare root plantings in areas of high visibility. In selected
situations the city may allow ten whip bare root plantings, or five 3/4 in.
caliper bare root plantings to be substituted for 1 large tree. Bare root
plantings must be protected with rodent guards.
 
   (F)   Credits. Existing healthy trees that are not susceptible to disease,
new larger or smaller sized trees, or decorative landscaping may be credited
toward the required trees detailed in this section, and the additional trees
required for screening as defined in the table below. The following table
establishes the landscaping credits.
TABLE 152.1012.4
Vegetation Type Size Exchange Credit
TABLE 152.1012.4
Vegetation Type           Size                       Exchange Credit
                          2 in. bb (caliper)
                          deciduous or between 6 ft. 1 tree
Existing trees            and 14 ft. coniferous
                          4 in. bb (caliper)
                          deciduous or 14 ft.        2 trees
                          coniferous or larger
                          4 in. bb (caliper) or 14   2 trees
New larger trees          ft. coniferous
                          Two 3 in. bb (caliper)     Three 2 in. trees
                                                     2 trees may be substituted
Ornamental deciduous                                 for 1 overstory deciduous
trees or smaller          Min. 1.5 in. (caliper)     tree (maximum substitution
overstory deciduous                                  = 50% of required
                                                     overstory trees).
Shrubs                    10 large shrubs            1 tree
                                                     Exterior sculptures,
                                                     fountains, decorative
                                                     walks, courtyards and/or
                                                     additional ponds beyond
Decorative landscape yard                            those required, shown on a
                                                     landscape plan that meets
                                                     the intent of this section
                                                     to the satisfaction of the
                                                     City Manager and/or City
                                                     Council.
 
   (G)   Irrigation system required.
      (1)   All landscaped areas, including parking area islands must be
equipped with an underground, automatic irrigation system or an alternative if
approved by the City Engineer. The irrigation system must include a flow meter,
moisture sensing devices and must be calibrated to meet all applicable city
codes. Irrigation of adjacent rights-of-way is required; however, irrigation
equipment must not be located within the right-of-way without approval from the
City Manager.
      (2)   In lieu of an underground automatic irrigation system, an
alternative irrigation plan may be approved. An alternative plan can include,
but is not limited to, rain gardens, closed rain barrels, or greywater systems.
Any alternative system must ensure that landscaping will be provided with
adequate irrigation.
         (a)   The greywater shall be contained on the site where it is
generated.
         (b)   Greywater shall be directed to and contained within an
irrigation or disposal field.
         (c)   Ponding or runoff is prohibited and shall be considered a
nuisance.
         (d)   Greywater may be released above the ground surface provided at
least two inches of mulch, rock, or soil, or a solid shield covers the release
point. Other methods which provide equivalent separation are also acceptable.
         (e)   Greywater systems shall be designed to minimize contact with
humans and domestic pets.
         (f)   Greywater shall not contain hazardous chemicals derived from
activities such as cleaning car parts, washing greasy or oily rags, or
disposing of waste solutions from home photo labs or similar hobbyist or home
occupational activities.
      (3)   Arid landscaping plans are exempt from irrigation requirements.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1013 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS, NONRESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. Enhance the city's environmental and visual character;
preserve and stabilize the ecological balance in the city; establish a healthy
environment by using vegetation to mitigate pollution's ill-effects; and
protect public and private investments.
   (B)   Landscape plan required. A landscape plan is required prior to the
issuance of a building permit for new construction or expansion of a
nonresidential or mixed use structure in any district. Landscape plans must be
prepared by a landscape architect.
   (C)   Installation of landscape materials.
      (1)   All landscaped areas must be in conformance with the approved
landscaping plan.
      (2)   Planted landscaped materials must be replaced if it becomes
diseased, dies, or removed.
      (3)   All landscaped areas and adjacent rights-of-way must be maintained
in conformance with
Chapter 97.
      (4)   All landscaping elements and plant materials must be installed with
current professional horticultural standards.
      (5)   All landscape materials must comply with the intersection
visibility requirements of §
152.1007.
      (6)   Overstory and coniferous trees may not be installed underneath
overhead utility lines, nor may any landscape materials be installed over
utility lines except in compliance with the city code and policy.
   (D)   Landscape areas. The landscape requirements have been divided into
four categories: canopy cover (C), foundation landscape (FL), open areas
landscape (OL), landscape screen (LS) and street trees (ST).
      (1)   Canopy cover (CC). The purpose of this requirement is to mitigate
the effects of vehicular hardscape by establishing tree canopy cover to
intercept rainfall, protect pavement from sun deterioration, reduce the heat
island affect, and improve aesthetics. Vehicular hardscape area shall include
all loading drives, parking lots, driveways, drop-offs, and other areas covered
with a hard surface intended for vehicles.
         (a)   A minimum of one large tree or two medium trees shall be
provided per 360 square feet of required parking lot area green space. These
trees shall be located within parking areas and not within any required
perimeter landscaping area. Pervious pavements are considered 50% hardscape.
         (b)   Required canopy trees shall be located within the parking lot
area islands (minimum width of six feet and total area of 180 square feet if
designed as end island or nine feet in width if designed as continuous island
between bays.
      (2)   Foundation landscape (FL).
         (a)   The purpose of this requirement is to soften and enhance
building architecture, define access points, add color and seasonal interest,
and to blend buildings in with the natural environment.
         (b)   At least 40% of the total building perimeter shall be sodded or
landscaped with approved ground cover, low level plantings in an area of no
less than six feet in width.
      (3)   Open areas landscape (OL). The purpose of this requirement is to
provide general site beautification and high aesthetic quality with a mix of
plant materials in open areas. Open areas include all areas not occupied by
building or hardscape.
         (a)   Each development must have at least the minimum percentage open
space shown in the following table.
 
TABLE 152.1013.1 MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN SPACE
                       B-1 B-2 B-3, B-4 BP  I   PI  OP
Total development site 30% 25% 20%      15% 15% 30% 40%
 
         (b)   Open space areas must not be covered by a building or other
impervious surface, and must be planted with trees, shrubs, flowers, native
plant species or similar and covered with sod, landscape rock or mulch. All
site areas and areas that have been disturbed during construction must be
covered with sod to property lines and/or adjacent rights-of-way. Rock and
mulch may be substituted for sod in landscaping planting beds. Areas used for
demonstrated parking cannot be used to fulfill the open space requirement.
Interior parking lot landscaping provided on site to meet requirements in §
152.1019 counts towards this open space requirement.
         (c)   Plant diversity. No more than 25% of any trees planted shall
come from the same family and 15% of the same species. In addition, the
landscape plan design shall, at a minimum, provide at least three of the
following required numbers of trees and shrubs in addition to any trees and
shrubs required for screening in §
152.1024:
            1.   One overstory tree per 3,000 square feet of open area.
            2.   One ornamental tree per 1,500 square feet of open space.
            3.   One evergreen tree per 3,000 square feet of open area, except
on sites where security, pedestrian or traffic safety are a concern evergreens
may be excluded or installed in a reduced number.
            4.   One deciduous or evergreen shrub per 100 square feet of open
area.
         (d)   Street trees (ST).
            1.   Street trees are required at the rate of one tree per 70
linear feet of road frontage, within the property line, where the property
fronts any public road. Acceptable and unacceptable species are listed in the
table below.
            2.   Evergreens shall not be planted as a street tree.
            3.   Street trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches
measured six inches above grade.
            4.   The boulevard (planting area) must be at least eight feet in
width.
            5.   The street tree planting site must be located as follows:
               a.   50 feet or greater from street curb intersections as per §
152.1007.
               b.   At least 15 feet from curb on Class-I collector and any
arterial streets.
               c.   At least ten feet from curb on local or Class-II collector
streets.
               d.   At least ten feet from any sewer line, water line, or
driveway.
               e.   At least five feet from a fire hydrant per §
93.26 and the International Fire Code.
               f.   At least five feet from any gas, electric, telephone, cable
TV or other underground utility.
               g.   At least three feet from any sidewalk or trail.
               h.   At least 20 feet from overhead utility cables or using an
approved ornamental dwarf tree noted in Table 152.1013.2 below.
            6.   Street trees shall be balled and burlapped and a minimum size
of two inch caliper unless noted in §
152.1013(E).
            7.   Street tree species and placement will be reviewed and
approved by the Operations and Maintenance Department as not to interfere with
existing or proposed utility systems.
 
TABLE 152.1013.2
Acceptable Shade Trees         Acceptable Ornamental Dwarf Trees
Bi-Color Oak (swamp white oak)
Columnar Norway Maple
Freeman Maple                  Amur Maple (single stem)
Ginko (no seed producing)      Heritage River Birch
Hackberry                      Ironwood
Imperial Honey Locust          Japanese Lilac Tree
Little Leaf Linden             Korean Mountain Ash
New Horizon Elm                Newport Plum
Northwood Maple                Pink Spire Crabapple
Sugar Maple                    Red Splendor Crabapple
River Birch
Triumph Elm (street)
Additional species may be allowed with City Manager approval.
Prohibited Tree and Shrub Species
American Elm
Amur Maple
Box Elder
Common Buckthorn
Cottonwood
North American Ash
Lomardy Poplar
Russian Honeysuckle
Siberian Elm
Above listed trees/plants are prohibited due to their high maintenance costs,
surface roots, intolerance to storms, undesirable fruiting habits, or a
susceptibility to disease or pests.
 
   (E)   Minimum size requirements. The minimum plant size requirements are
described in the following table:
TABLE 152.1013.3
Plant Type Minimum Size*
TABLE 152.1013.3
Plant Type                        Minimum Size*
                                  Bare root - 1.75 in.
Large trees                       Balled and burlapped or container - 2 in.
                                  caliper
                                  Bare root - 1.5 in.
Medium and small trees            Balled and burlapped or container - 1.5 in.
                                  caliper
Evergreen trees                   6 ft. height
Large shrubs                      5 gallon container
Medium shrubs, small shrubs and   3 gallon container
groundcovers
Ornamental grasses and perennials 4 in. pot
*City may limit bare root plantings in areas of high visibility. In selected
situations the city may allow ten whip bare root plantings, or five 3/4 in.
caliper bare root plantings to be substituted for 1 large tree. Bare root
plantings must be protected with rodent guards.
 
   (F)   Credits. Existing healthy trees that are not susceptible to disease,
new larger or smaller sized trees, or decorative landscaping may be credited
toward the required trees detailed in this section, and the additional trees
required for screening as defined in the table below. The following table
establishes the landscaping credits.
TABLE 152.1013.4
Vegetation Type Size Exchange Credit
TABLE 152.1013.4
Vegetation Type           Size                       Exchange Credit
                          2 in. bb (caliper)
                          deciduous or between 6 ft. 1 tree
Existing trees            and 14 ft. coniferous
                          4 in. bb (caliper)
                          deciduous or 14 ft.        2 trees
                          coniferous or larger
                          4 in. bb (caliper) or 14   2 trees
New larger trees          ft. coniferous
                          Two 3 in. bb (caliper)     Three 2 in. trees
                                                     2 trees may be substituted
Ornamental deciduous                                 for 1 overstory deciduous
trees or smaller          Min. 1.5 in. (caliper)     tree (maximum substitution
overstory deciduous                                  = 50% of required
                                                     overstory trees).
Shrubs                    10 large shrubs            1 tree
                                                     Exterior sculptures,
                                                     fountains, decorative
                                                     walks, courtyards and/or
                                                     additional ponds beyond
Decorative landscape yard                            those required, shown on a
                                                     landscape plan that meets
                                                     the intent of this section
                                                     to the satisfaction of the
                                                     City Manager and/or City
                                                     Council.
 
   (G)   Irrigation system required.
      (1)   All landscaped areas, including parking area islands must be
equipped with an underground, automatic irrigation system or an alternative if
approved by the City Engineer. The irrigation system must include a flow meter,
moisture sensing devices and must be calibrated to meet all applicable city
codes. Irrigation of adjacent rights-of-way is required; however, irrigation
equipment must not be located within the right-of-way without approval from the
City Manager.
      (2)   In lieu of an underground automatic irrigation system, an
alternative irrigation plan may be approved. An alternative plan can include,
but is not limited to, rain gardens, closed rain barrels, or greywater systems.
Any alternative system must ensure that landscaping will be provided with
adequate irrigation.
         (a)   The greywater shall be contained on the site where it is
generated.
         (b)   Greywater shall be directed to and contained within an
irrigation or disposal field.
         (c)   Ponding or runoff is prohibited and shall be considered a
nuisance.
         (d)   Greywater may be released above the ground surface provided at
least two inches of mulch, rock, or soil, or a solid shield covers the release
point. Other methods which provide equivalent separation are also acceptable.
         (e)   Greywater systems shall be designed to minimize contact with
humans and domestic pets.
         (f)   Greywater shall not contain hazardous chemicals derived from
activities such as cleaning car parts, washing greasy or oily rags, or
disposing of waste solutions from home photo labs or similar hobbyist or home
occupational activities.
   (3)   Arid landscaping plans are exempt from irrigation requirements.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1310, passed 3-24-25)
§ 152.1014 LIGHTING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide regulations to
balance lighting needs for visibility and personal and property safety with the
negative impacts of off-site light spill-over.
   (B)   Applicability. The following standards shall apply to all new
development. Seasonal lighting is not regulated by this section.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   Wall or roof lighting may be used to illuminate pedestrian
walkways, entrance areas, loading docks, and yard areas within 20 feet of the
building.
      (2)   No wall or roof lighting may be used to primarily illuminate areas
for motor vehicle parking or access beyond 20 feet from the building.
      (3)   Any open area used for motor vehicle parking, storage or access
must be primarily illuminated with free-standing luminaires.
      (4)   Free-standing luminaire regulations. Height maximums, as measured
from the average elevation of the finished grade within ten feet of the
structure or fixture to the highest point of the luminaire (including the
support structure), may be as follows:
         (a)   Within 250 feet of any property zoned residential: 15 feet
including any base or support structures.
         (b)   Farther than 250 feet from any property zoned residential or if
the height of the building effectively blocks the light from a residential
zone: 25 feet.
      (5)   Cut-off angles must be equal to or less than 90 degrees.
      (6)   Low-pressure sodium fixtures may only be used for: single-family,
duplex, and townhouse developments.
      (7)   Lighting intensity must adhere to the standards in the table below.
 
TABLE 152.1014.1 REQUIRED MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM LIGHT INTENSITIES
                                                           Maximum intensity at
Use                  Minimum intensity* Maximum intensity* side or interior
                                                           property line*
Parking areas for    1                  15                 0.5
nonresidential uses
Private sidewalks
and other pedestrian 2                  20                 0.5
walkways
Building entrances   5                  20                 0.5
and exits
Exterior storage     N/A                15                 0.5
areas
*Measured in foot candles at ground level
 
   (D)   Glare. All lighting must be arranged so as not to produce glare. All
properties must be in compliance with the following:
      (1)   All light sources must be controlled and equipped with lenses,
louvers, shields, or prismatic control devices designed to prevent off-site
views of the light source.
      (2)   No flickering or flashing lights except those associated with
public safety activities may be permitted.
      (3)   Light sources that are integrated into a canopy must be designed to
be recessed and flush with the ceiling of the canopy and equipped with a flat
lens surface.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1015 LOADING DOCKS AND STAGING AREAS.
   (A)   Applicability. All business and industrial uses must have an area
designated for loading, unloading, or staging of delivery vehicles in
compliance with the following.
   (B)   Loading docks must be provided in the Business Park and Industrial
Districts, at a minimum, in compliance with the following:
 
Building Size (in square feet) Required Loading Docks
>10,000 and < or = to 20,000   2
>20,000 and < or to 50,000     3
>50,000                        4
 
   (C)   All staging areas and loading docks must be off-street and must be
located on the same lot as the building or use to be served. A loading dock or
staging area must not be located between the principal building and a public
right-of-way or residential property. All loading docks and staging areas
visible from public rights-of-way or residential areas must be screened in
compliance with §
152.1024.
   (D)   All loading docks and staging areas must be located with the
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner
which will least interfere with traffic.
   (E)   Additional standards for loading docks.
      (1)   Outdoor storage of goods and materials is prohibited in loading
dock area.
      (2)   May not be included as part of the space requirements necessary to
meet the off-street parking area.
   (F)   Additional standards for staging areas.
      (1)   Temporary parking of commercial vehicles is allowed for 96 hours or
less.
      (2)   Any commercial vehicles in the staging area must be related and
necessary to the principal permitted use of the property.
      (3)   Outdoor storage of goods or materials is prohibited in the staging
area.
      (4)   Temporary parking spaces cannot be blocking drive aisles or public
right-of-way and must be properly marked and surfaced for orderly site design.
      (5)   Must be maintained, organized and free of trash or debris.
      (6)   Must be in a city-approved designated area of the property.
      (7)   May not be included as a part of the space requirements necessary
to meet the off-street parking area.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1016 LOWEST FLOOR ELEVATION.
   (A)   The lowest floor elevation for any residential basement construction
must be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (B)   All nonresidential basements must follow the requirements of §
152.608.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1017 NOISE POLLUTION CONTROL.
   The following state agency regulations are adopted by reference: Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, Noise Pollution Control Section, 6 MCAR 4.2004 and
NPC 1.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1018 OUTDOOR STORAGE.
   Outdoor storage of materials, equipment, and products accessory and
necessary to the principal use must comply with the following:
   (A)   The items in the area designated for outdoor storage must be
completely screened from view from adjacent public rights-of-way or adjacent
properties.
   (B)   The area must not be used for the storage of junk vehicles, trash,
debris, or other nuisance items as defined elsewhere in the city code.
   (C)   The area designated for storage must be clearly defined by fencing,
striping, paving, or other means.
   (D)   Height of materials, vehicles, or equipment in outdoor storage area
shall not exceed the height of the principal structure.
   (E)   The following performance standards apply to outside storage:
TABLE 152.1018.1 OUTDOOR STORAGE REQUIREMENTS, NONRESIDENTIAL
  Zoning Districts
  B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 BP I
TABLE 152.1018.1 OUTDOOR STORAGE REQUIREMENTS, NONRESIDENTIAL
                        Zoning Districts
                        B-1       B-2       B-3       B-4       BP        I
Area limit on storage   15% of    15% of    50% of    70% of    15% of    80%
allowed                 building  building  site      site      building  of
                        footprint footprint                     footprint site
Right-of-way setback    15 feet   15 feet   15 feet   15 feet   75 feet   35
                                                                          feet
            Side and                                                      15
            rear        15 feet   15 feet   5 ft.     5 ft.     50 ft.    ft.
            setback
            Adjacent to
            residential 35 feet   35 feet   35 ft.    35 ft.    NP        5 ft.
            district
                                                                Must be   Side
                                                                located   or
Location               Rear yard Rear yard Side or   Side or   to the    rear
restriction                                 rear yard rear yard rear of   yard
                                                                the front only
                                                                entrance.
Area limit  15% of      15% of    15% of    15% of    15% of    15% of building
on storage  building    building  building  building  building  footprint
allowed     footprint   footprint footprint footprint footprint
Right-of-   30 feet     30 feet   30 feet   30 feet   30 feet   30 feet
way setback
Side and                                                        Low: 20 feet
rear        15 feet     12 feet   12 feet   30 feet   16 feet   Med:16 feet
setback                                                         High:12 feet
Location    Rear yard   Rear yard Rear yard Rear yard Rear yard Rear yard
restriction
 
   (F)   Intermodal shipping containers.
      (1)   Two intermodal shipping containers are permitted for outdoor
storage on nonresidential properties.
      (2)   Shipping containers utilized for permanent storage must be located
in the designated outdoor storage area of a property, in compliance with this
section.
      (3)   Shipping containers used for temporary storage are limited to 90
days per calendar year and must be located in a staging area.
      (4)   The maximum dimensions of an intermodal shipping container are 40
feet long, ten feet wide, and ten feet tall.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1310, passed 3-24-25)
§ 152.1019 PARKING.
   (A)   Purpose. Establish off-street parking standards to allow for the
orderly and adequate storage of vehicles on property, to alleviate and prevent
congestion on public rights-of-way, and control the appearance and maintenance
of parking areas and surfaces.
   (B)   Applicability. All property in the city must comply with the minimum
parking requirements of this subchapter unless an exception is granted per
division (D) below.
   (C)   Required parking. Tables
152.1019.1 and
152.1019.2 below establish the minimum number of off-street parking spaces
required based on land use. For uses not specifically listed, off-street
parking requirements may be established by the City Manager based upon the
characteristics of the use and the district in which the use is located.
   (D)   Exceptions to required parking. Parking requirements may be reduced
when approved by the City Manager in the following cases.
      (1)   Industry standards. Based on verifiable information pertaining to
industry parking standards.
      (2)   Proof of future parking. If it is clearly demonstrated by the owner
that the required parking is more than anticipated demand, all required parking
need not be constructed initially. A minimum number of spaces, as negotiated
between the developer and the City Manager, shall initially be constructed. The
remainder of the required spaces, as shown on the site plan, may be constructed
by the owner if the City Manager determines they are needed. The area of future
parking must be sodded with grass and kept free of shrubs or trees. To ensure
the construction of the future spaces, a financial guarantee may be required by
the city. Any changes to use and/or building size could invalidate the
approval.
      (3)   Shared parking.
         (a)   Parking areas may be shared by uses on adjoining lots within 500
feet of the entrances to the uses it will serve.
         (b)   Cross access easements shall be required to accommodate shared
parking arrangements and access drives, and evidence of the maintenance of all
shared facilities may be provided to the city for review and may be recorded.
      (4)   Public parking and transit. All uses, other than residential,
located in proximity to rapid transit and/or municipal parking facilities shall
be entitled to a reduced parking requirement based on the following criteria.
         (a)   Uses within 650 feet of municipal parking garages or lots shall
be entitled to a 10% reduction in required parking.
         (b)   Uses within 1,000 feet of a bus stop or transit station shall be
entitled to a 20% reduction in required parking.
      (5)   Parking study. A parking study prepared by a registered
professional engineer indicates a reduced number of parking stalls can
adequately serve the proposed use. Said study shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
         (a)   Size and type of uses or activities on site;
         (b)   Composition of tenancy on site;
         (c)   Rate of parking turnover;
         (d)   Peak traffic and parking loads to be encountered;
         (e)   Local parking habits; and
         (f)   Availability of public transportation.
      (6)   Credit for on-street parking. This subsection is intended to reduce
the amount of unnecessary parking spaces and to encourage pedestrian activity
as an alternative means of transportation. Requests for on street parking shall
meet the following requirements:
         (a)   All on street parking facilities shall be designed in
conformance with the standards established by the city.
         (b)   Prior to approving any requests for on street parking, the
development review team shall determine that the proposed on-street parking
will not materially adversely impact traffic movements and related public
street functions.
         (c)   Credit for on street parking shall be limited to the number of
spaces provided along the street frontage adjacent to the use.
         (d)   A public sidewalk must be present or installed along the street
used for on-street parking for the entire length of the property or the area
anticipated for parking, whichever is greater, with a walkway connection to the
entrance of the building.
TABLE 152.1019.1 MINIMUM PARKING SPACES REQUIRED FOR RESIDENTIAL USES
Use                 Surfaces Spaces     Garage Spaces       Bicycle Parking
                    Required            Required
Single family       2 (see garage       2 spaces per unit;  None
(detached)          requirements)       400 sq. ft. garage
Two family          2 (see garage       2 spaces per unit;  None
(attached)          requirements)       400 sq. ft. garage
                    2 spaces per unit,
Townhouse (attached plus 1 space for    2 spaces per unit;  None
or detached)        each unit for guest 400 sq. ft. garage
                    parking
                                        A minimum of one
                                        half of the number
                    2 spaces per unit,  of required parking 1 space per unit
Multifamily         plus 0.5 spaces for spaces must be      for the first 20
                    each unit for guest enclosed within     units, then 1.04
                    parking             garages or an       per unit over 20
                                        underground parking
                                        facility
Mobile home         2 spaces per unit   N/A                 None
                    2 space per unit,                       1 space per unit
Mobile home park    plus 3 per each 6   N/A                 for the first 20
                    units as guest                          units, then 1.05
                    parking                                 per unit over 20
                    1 space per unit,
                    plus 0.5 space for
                    each unit for guest
Senior housing      parking, plus 0.5
(independent        spaces for parking  N/A                 0.5 spaces per
living)             in reserve in the                       dwelling
                    event the
                    development is
                    converted to
                    regular occupancy
                    2 spaces for the
Bed and breakfast   principal
establishments and  residential         N/A                 2 spaces
boarding and        dwelling unit plus
rooming houses      1 space for each
                    rental room
Assisted living     0.5 spaces for each N/A                 0.25 spaces for
housing             unit                                    each employee
                    1 space per 6
                    patient beds, plus
Nursing home        1 space per         N/A                 None
                    employees on the
                    largest work shift
                    No additional
                    spaces required if
Daycare facilities  located in a single N/A                 2 spaces
                    dwelling or one
                    unit in a multiple
                    dwelling structure
Model houses/       4 temporary spaces
temporary real      per dwelling or
estate offices in   office in           N/A                 None
residential units   compliance with
                    152.1020.
                    1 space for each
Offices related to  employee on the
leasing, renting    largest shift, plus
and maintenance of  two visitor spaces  N/A                 2 spaces
multiple family or  or one space for
attached dwellings  each 100 sq. ft.,
                    whichever is
                    greater
                    1 space for each
Residential         staff person on the
facilities          largest shift and   N/A                 2 spaces
(licensed for over  0.5 space for each
6 persons)          resident of the
                    licensed capacity
Agricultural uses   N/A                 N/A
Airports and                            N/A
aeronautical uses
Animal services
                    1 space for each
                    2.5 seats based on
                    the design capacity
                    in the main
                    assembly area, plus
Assembly, banquet,  parking figured
convention halls or separately for      0.05 spaces per each person
conference centers  additional
                    gymnasiums, banquet
                    rooms, meeting
                    rooms, offices, and
                    other multi-use
                    spaces
                    1 space for each
                    2,000 sq. ft. of
                    land up to the
                    first 8,000 sq.
Automobile rental   ft., plus 1 space
containing more     for each 4,000 sq.  N/A
than 6 cars on site ft. up to a parcel
                    of 24,000 sq. ft.,
                    plus 1 space for
                    each 6,000 sq. ft.
                    over 24,000
                    See offices for
Bank                parking             0.05 spaces per each employee
                    requirements
                    4 spaces plus 1
Boat and other      additional space
recreational        for each 500 sq.    N/A
equipment and       ft. of gross floor
vehicle sales       area over the first
                    1,000 sq. ft.
Body art            1 per chair         N/A
                    5 spaces per lane,
                    plus additional
Bowling alley       parking calculated  0.05 spaces per lane
                    separately for
                    restaurants and
                    other related uses
 
TABLE 152.1019.2 MINIMUM PARKING SPACES REQUIRED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES
Use Surfaces Spaces Required Bicycle Parking
TABLE 152.1019.2 MINIMUM PARKING SPACES REQUIRED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES
Use                       Surfaces Spaces Required   Bicycle Parking
Agricultural uses         N/A                        N/A
Airports and aeronautical                            N/A
uses
Animal services
                          1 space for each 2.5 seats
                          based on the design
                          capacity in the main
Assembly, banquet,        assembly area, plus        0.05 spaces per each
convention halls or       parking figured separately person
conference centers        for additional gymnasiums,
                          banquet rooms, meeting
                          rooms, offices, and other
                          multi-use spaces
                          1 space for each 2,000 sq.
                          ft. of land up to the
Automobile rental         first 8,000 sq. ft., plus
containing more than 6    1 space for each 4,000 sq. N/A
cars on site              ft. up to a parcel of
                          24,000 sq. ft., plus 1
                          space for each 6,000 sq.
                          ft. over 24,000
Bank                      See offices for parking    0.05 spaces per each
                          requirements               employee
Boat and other            4 spaces plus 1 additional
recreational equipment    space for each 500 sq. ft. N/A
and vehicle sales         of gross floor area over
                          the first 1,000 sq. ft.
Body art                  1 per chair                N/A
                          5 spaces per lane, plus
                          additional parking
Bowling alley             calculated separately for  0.05 spaces per lane
                          restaurants and other
                          related uses
Bus or truck storage or
service shops including   N/A                        N/A
fuel stations
Care center, convalescent                            N/A
home, and assisted living
Carwash                   N/A                        N/A
                          1 space for each staff
Clinics- (medical,        doctor or dentist or 1     0.05 spaces per each
dental, chiropractic,     space for each 150 sq. ft. employee
etc.)                     of gross floor area,
                          whichever is greater
                          1 space per each person at 0.05 spaces per each
Clubs                     maximum capacity, plus 1   person
                          space for each employee
Commercial indoor         1 for every 2 users at     0.05 spaces per each
recreational facility     maximum capacity, plus 1   person
2,450 sq. ft. or under    space for each employee
Commercial indoor         1 for every 2 persons at
recreational facility     maximum capacity per fire  0.05 spaces per each
over 2,450 sq. ft.        code, plus 1 space for     person
                          each employee
Commercial outdoor        1 for every 2 users at     0.25 spaces per each
recreational facilities   maximum capacity, plus 1   person
                          space for each employee
Conservation uses
including drainage
control, forestry,
wildlife sanctuaries and  N/A                        N/A
facilities for making
same available and useful
to public
                          1 space per employee plus
Daycare, preschools,      1 space per 7 children of  0.05 spaces per each
except residential        licensed capacity of the   employee
                          facility
                          1.5 spaces per producer    0.05 spaces per each
Farmer s market           and 1.5 customer parking   vendor
                          stalls per producer
                          4 spaces plus 3 spaces for
                          each enclosed service      2 spaces per every 10,000
Fuel or service stations  stall plus parking figured sq. ft. of gross floor
                          separately for retail or   area
                          office space
                          4 spaces for each green,
Golf courses, driving     plus 1 for each employee   0.05 spaces per each
ranges                    on the largest shift, plus employee
                          2 spaces for each driving
                          tee on a driving range
                          1.25 spaces per rental
                          room plus additional       2 spaces or 0.05 spaces
Hotel, motel              parking calculated         per each employee,
                          separately for banquet     whichever is greater
                          rooms, meeting rooms, and
                          restaurants
Hospitals                 2 spaces for each patient  4 spaces
                          bed
Manufacturing,            4 spaces plus 1 space for
fabricating, or           each 400 sq. ft. of gross  N/A
processing of a product   floor area
or material
                          1 space for each 2.5 seats 2 spaces per every 10,000
Movie theaters            of design capacity         sq. ft. of gross floor
                                                     area
Offices, including        Minimum of 5 spaces with a
government buildings and  maximum of 5.5 spaces per  2 spaces or 0.05 spaces
other professional        1,000 sq. ft. of gross     per each employee,
offices >6,000 sq. ft. of floor area                 whichever is greater
floor area
Offices, including        Offices, including         Offices, including
government buildings and  government buildings and   government buildings and
other professional        other professional offices other professional offices
offices 6,000 sq. ft. of  6,000 sq. ft. of floor     6,000 sq. ft. of floor
floor area or less        area or less               area or less
                          1 space for each 2,000 sq.
                          ft. of land up to the
                          first 8,000 sq. ft., plus
Open sales lots           1 space for each 4,000 sq. N/A
                          ft. up to a parcel of
                          24,000 sq. ft., plus 1
                          space for each 6,000 sq.
                          ft. over 24,000.
                          1 space for each 40 sq.
Restaurants and           ft. of gross floor area of 2 spaces or 0.05 spaces
delicatessens             dining and bar plus 1      per each employee,
                          space for each 80 sq. ft.  whichever is greater
                          of kitchen area
                          1 space per 50 sq. ft. of
                          gross floor area, plus 1   2 spaces or 0.05 spaces
Restaurants, fast food    space per employee on the  per each employee,
                          largest work shift, plus 6 whichever is greater
                          off street stacking spaces
                          per drive-through lane
Restaurants where no      1 space for each 15 sq.
interior serving areas    ft. feet of building
are present, such as a    dedicated to patron        N/A
drive-in or take out      service and 5 spaces for
business                  employees
                          1 space for each 200 sq.
                          ft. of gross floor area.
                          No retail or service use
Retail or service use,    may provide parking in     2 spaces or 0.05 spaces
unless otherwise          excess of 10% above the    per each employee,
specified                 minimum required parking   whichever is greater
                          spaces. Such properties
                          may hold parking in
                          reserve if depicted on an
                          approved site plan
Self-service storage      3 spaces, plus 1 per every
facility                  75 units                   N/A
                           
Self-service storage      3 spaces, plus 1 per every
facility (indoor or       75 units                   N/A
climate-controlled)
Shopping centers and      Maximum of 5 spaces per    2 spaces per every 10,000
retail uses less than     1,000 sq. ft. of gross     sq. ft. of gross floor
50,000 sq. ft.            floor area                 area
Shopping centers and      Maximum of 4 spaces per    2 spaces per every 10,000
retail uses 50,000 sq.    1,000 sq. ft. of gross     sq. ft. of gross floor
ft. or greater            floor area                 area
Showrooms for display or  1 space per 400 sq. ft.    1 space per every 10,000
sales including furniture for first 25,000 sq. ft.,  sq. ft. of gross floor
stores, carpet stores,    plus 1 space per 600 sq.   area
etc.                      ft. thereafter
                          5 spaces for customer
                          parking for every acre of
                          total site area, plus 5
Showrooms for sale of     spaces for customer        1 space per every 10,000
automobiles               service parking for every  sq. ft. of gross floor
                          acre of total site area,   area
                          plus 1 space for each 400
                          sq. ft. of gross floor
                          area for employees
Skating rinks (indoor),
dance halls, miniature
golf, ice arenas          1 space per 300 sq. ft. of 2 spaces or 0.05 spaces
(indoor), health and      gross floor area, plus 1   per each employee,
fitness clubs, commercial space per employee on the  whichever is greater
indoor recreational       largest work shift
facility over 2,450 sq.
ft., etc.
Warehousing (and storage) 1 space for each 600 sq.
in structures < 6,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area,   N/A
ft.                       with a minimum of 5 spaces
Warehousing (and storage) 1 space for each 2,000 sq.
in structures > 6,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area,   N/A
ft.                       with a minimum of 10
                          spaces
 
   (E)   Parking of motorized vehicles outside of driveway locations is only
allowed on areas paved with continuous impervious surface or approved
impervious surface, or on legal non-conforming parking areas.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24; Am. Ord. 2025-1310, passed 3-24-25)
§ 152.1020 PARKING AREA DESIGN.
   (A)   Applicability. All new construction, expansion, repaving, or
modification of parking areas with more than four parking spaces must comply
with the following parking lot design standards.
   (B)   Setbacks. parking areas created after the effective date of this
chapter must be designed and constructed so that no part of any vehicle may
ever be nearer than the following:
      (1)   Side or rear setback when adjacent to a residential use- 35 feet.
      (2)   All other interior side or rear setback- five feet.
      (3)   Setback from public rights-of-way- 15 feet.
   (C)   Drive aisles. Each parking space and drive aisle must be unobstructed
and must adhere to the design requirements included in the following table:
TABLE 152.1020.1 REQUIRED LENGTH AND WIDTH OF PARKING SPACES
     90 Degrees       60 Degrees       45 Degrees
Type Standard Compact Standard Compact Standard Compact
TABLE 152.1020.1 REQUIRED LENGTH AND WIDTH OF PARKING SPACES
                             90 Degrees       60 Degrees       45 Degrees
Type                         Standard Compact Standard Compact Standard Compact
Minimum width of space at    9 ft.    8 ft.   10 ft.   9 ft.   13 ft.   9 ft.
curb (nonresidential use)
Minimum width of space at    10 ft.   8 ft.   12 ft.   9 ft.   14 ft.   9 ft.
curb (retail uses)
Minimum length of space from 18 ft.   16 ft.  21 ft.   17 ft.  21 ft.   17 ft.
curb
Minimum drive aisle width    20 ft.   20 ft.  18 ft.   18 ft.  15 ft.   15 ft.
(one way)
Minimum drive aisle width    25 ft.   25 ft.  25 ft.   25 ft.  25 ft.   25 ft.
(two way)
 
      (1)   Parking spaces for the disabled or for specially equipped vehicles
for the disabled must comply with the State Building Code requirements and the
Americans with Disability Act standards.
      (2)   Where parking spaces abut perimeter curbs, the length of the spaces
may be shortened to account for the car overhang. They shall not be shorted
adjacent to sidewalks.
      (3)   All parking spaces must be designated by clearly visible painted
lines.
      (4)   Nonresidential driveway width shall be approved at the time of site
plan review based on expected traffic demands and road classification.
   (D)   Curbing required. Paving areas must be separated with curb and gutter
from all designated landscaping areas, curb islands, and at ingress-egress
locations to the traveled roadway. Curbing must be constructed of poured-in-
place concrete equipped with a gutter and must be of a six-inch non-
surmountable design. Other curb options may be allowed as approved by the city.
   (E)   Paving requirements.
      (1)   All areas shall be surfaced with concrete, bituminous, pavers, or
pervious paving/paver systems provided appropriate soils and site conditions
exist for the pervious systems to function. Gravel driveways are prohibited.
This paving requirement includes the entire parking area including parking
stalls, aisles and driveways.
      (2)   The use of pervious paving/paver systems is encouraged for
pedestrian walkways, parking areas, overflow parking areas, snow storage areas,
within raised medians and islands, emergency vehicle lanes and other low
traffic areas. The owner shall provide soils information and the City Engineer
shall make the final determination if soils are conducive for use of pervious
paving/paver systems. Owners of property in Business, Industrial and Mixed-Use
Districts shall enter into a maintenance agreement to ensure ongoing
maintenance and operation of all pervious paving/paver systems. This
requirement also applies to open sales lots, open rental lots, and outdoor
storage or display areas. Other materials such as decorative rock, gravel,
sand, or bare soil are prohibited.
      (3)   Any parking spaces proposed in excess over minimum requirements, as
listed in §
152.1019, shall use a pervious paver system (provided appropriate soil
conditions exist, as determined by the City Engineer), within the total square
footage of excess parking proposed, as approved by the City Engineer.
   (F)   Drainage. Driveways shall not exceed a grade of 4% and all parking
lots except those for less than four vehicles shall include a minimum of a 1%
grade. Catch basins, sumps, and underground storm sewers must be installed if
required by the City Engineer.
   (G)   Traffic regulatory signs. Stop signs are required at all driveway
exits to city streets. Other signs may be required as part of the site plan
review process.
   (H)   Shared parking. Parking areas may be shared by uses on adjoining lots
within 500 feet of the entrances to the uses it will serve provided that the
following are met:
      (1)   The marking or signing of parking spaces in multitenant building
for the exclusive use of specific tenants is not permitted.
      (2)   Certain uses that have their highest peak demand for parking at
substantially different times of the day or week can consider a plan to provide
required parking by sharing parking with adjacent uses based on the following
criteria:
         (a)   Up to 50% of the off-street parking stalls required for a
theatre, bowling alley, dance hall, bar, or restaurant may be supplied by the
off-street parking facilities provided by types of uses specified as a
primarily daytime use in division (H)(2)(d) below.
         (b)   Up to 50% of the off-street parking stalls required for any use
specified under division (H)(2)(d) below as primary daytime uses may be
supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following nighttime or
Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches,
bowling alleys, dance halls, theatres, bars, or restaurants.
         (c)   Up to 50% of the off-street parking stalls required by §
152.1019 for a religious institution or for an auditorium incidental to a
public or parochial school may be supplied by off-street parking facilities
provided by uses specified under division (H)(2)(d) below as primarily daytime
uses.
         (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following uses are
considered as primarily daytime uses, such as banks, business offices, retail
stores/shopping centers, personal service shops, household equipment or
furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing,
wholesale, and similar uses.
      (3)   The parking area must have a pedestrian connection, which includes
a trail or walkway, paved with a continuous impervious surface that connects to
all users of the shared parking.
      (4)   The parking plan for the area must demonstrate that all other
applicable ordinances can be met.
      (5)   Any adjacent properties with approved shared parking agreements
must have vehicle access between them.
      (6)   The agreement between all affected property owners may be approved
as to content by the City Attorney and may define responsibilities for
maintenance. Where shared use of parking exists within the same site or across
sites, a properly drawn legal instrument, drafted and executed by the parties
concerned, must be filed as a deed restriction on both properties with the
records for both properties in the Registrar of Titles' or Recorder's Office of
Hennepin County with proof thereof presented to the city. The intent in either
case is that the agreement will be in the public record in perpetuity, and not
altered unless approved by the city.
      (7)   Revocation. Failure to comply with the shared parking provisions of
this section constitutes a violation of this code. A shared parking agreement
may be revoked by the parties to the agreement only if off-street parking is
provided as otherwise set forth in §
152.1019, or if an alternative shared parking plan is approved by the city.
      (8)   Multi-tenant buildings. A parking lot for a building containing
more than one tenant or user is considered shared between all users. Exclusive
parking spaces are not permitted.
      (9)   Time-limited (i.e., ten-minute parking) parking spaces are
permitted.
   (I)   Parking areas for interim or temporary uses in the UR Urban Reserve
District are exempt from provisions in §
152.1019 only when approved through the interim use permit process as described
in §
152.306.
   (J)   Parking lot landscaping and screening. This section is intended to
break up large impervious areas and provide greater shading and reduction of
heat island effect. Review and approval of a landscape plan shall be required
for new parking lots and changes to existing parking areas that create or
affect more than four stalls prior to issuance of any permits, including snow
removal.
      (1)   All landscaped areas, including parking area islands must be
equipped with an underground, automatic irrigation system. The irrigation
system must include a flow meter, moisture sensing devices and must be
calibrated to meet all applicable city codes.
      (2)   10% of the impervious, interior parking area must be landscape
islands, rain gardens or other green space. The 10% is included as part of the
total open space requirement.
      (3)   Landscape islands.
         (a)   All parking lots of at least 25 parking stalls or more shall be
designed with landscaped parking lot islands distributed throughout the entire
parking area.
         (b)   To ensure adequate distribution of landscaped islands within
parking lots no more than the maximum number of stalls as displayed in
Table 152.1020.2 below may be installed without abutting some type of
landscaped islands.
         (c)   Landscaped islands may be designed at the ends of stalls, in a
continuous row between bays as shown in the diagram below, or in other
patterns, provided that an island is abutting parking stalls based on
Table 152.1020.2 below.
         (d)   Islands designed at the end of rows shall have a minimum size of
180 square feet. Continuous parking lot islands shall be at least nine feet in
width.
         (e)   Islands can be designed at the end of rows or in a continuous
row to meet the maximum number of stalls between island requirements.
 
TABLE 152.1020.2 LANDSCAPE ISLAND REQUIREMENTS
Use Type                             Maximum Number of Stalls Between Island
Residential - multiple family uses   12 stalls
Commercial, mixed use, civic and     22 stalls
institutional uses
Industrial and business park uses    22 stalls
Open storage warehouse and like uses 50 stalls
 
         (f)   Type and quantity of landscaping required in islands and within
the parking area shall comply with landscaping standards in §
152.1012. Each landscape island must be planted with a minimum of one deciduous
large or two medium trees, two shrubs and pervious ground cover as required in
§
152.1012. Rain gardens shall be finished with hardy native plant species that
will survive and remain aesthetically pleasing in wet and dry conditions. The
trees and shrubs in the landscape islands and rain gardens shall count toward
the overall required landscaping in §
152.1012.
      (4)   Parking areas greater than 50,000 square feet shall be divided both
visually and functionally into smaller parking courts.
      (5)   Screening. Screening must be required for any off-street parking or
loading area and may be any combination of landscaping, decorative fencing, and
berms, approved through the site plan review process or as required elsewhere
in this chapter, unless further restricted by the following:
         (a)   Residential. All parking and loading areas over four spaces must
be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts. Screening must be a
minimum of six feet in height when installed as measured from the parking area
surface to the satisfaction of the City Manager. Fences alone shall not meet
this requirement.
         (b)   Street rights-of-way. All parking areas containing more than
four stalls and all loading areas must be screened from adjacent public rights-
of-way. Screening must be a minimum of three feet in height as measured from
the top of the adjacent parking area surface.
      (6)   Perimeter parking area landscaping standards. Where a parking area
serving a use abuts a street right-of-way, vacant land, or any other
development (except another parking use area), perimeter landscaping strips
shall be provided and maintained between the vehicle use areas and the abutting
right-of-way or property line in accordance with the following standards:
         (a)   Location.
            1.   Perimeter landscaping strips shall be located on the same land
where the parking use area is located.
            2.   Perimeter landscaping strips may not be placed within future
street rights-of-way as identified on the city's transportation plans.
         (b)   Minimum width. When the parking use area is located within 50
feet of a street right-of-way, the perimeter landscaping shall be located
within a planting strip at least six feet wide. In all other instances, the
strip shall be the minimum width necessary to assure required landscaping is
not damaged by vehicle or other on-site activity. In no instance shall the
strip be less than three feet wide.
         (c)   Landscaping. Each perimeter landscaping strip shall include
landscaping screening of three feet in height as measured from the top of the
adjacent parking area surface or screening that is 80% opaque where a parking
lot abuts a residential zoning district.
   (K)   Stormwater management. Rainwater and snowmelt shall be managed to
encourage infiltration, evapotranspiration, and water reuses to achieve water
quality and quantity measures as required by the applicable watershed district.
Additionally, a minimum of two of the following stormwater management
techniques shall be implemented. The appropriate watershed district shall have
final review and permitting authority for all surface water management measures
proposed.
      (1)   Permeable paving for parking spaces, drive aisles, overflow
parking, snow storage areas, and other hard surfaces in the parking lot.
      (2)   Trees, shrubs, and other absorbent landscaping throughout the
parking lot to provide shade and places for water uptake.
      (3)   Bio-retention areas, such as swales, vegetated islands, and
overflow ponds.
      (4)   Catch basin restrictors and oil/grit separators.
      (5)   Rainwater harvesting from rooftops and other hard surfaces for
landscape irrigation.
      (6)   Bio-retention areas shall be appropriately designed and located to
filter, store, and/or convey the expected stormwater flows from surrounding
paved areas.
      (7)   Cart storage. Where shopping carts are used, ample space shall be
provided for cart storage within off-street parking areas (unless all carts are
stored and returned at the building entry). The need and specific amount of
required cart storage space shall be determined as part of site plan review.
When required, cart storage areas shall not occupy required off-street parking
space, shall be clearly delineated, and include facilities for cart
confinement.
   (L)   Mixed use parking design standards.
      (1)   Off-street parking must be set back from frontages according to
Figure 152.607.02, except where parking is located underground.
      (2)   Location. Required vehicular parking may be fulfilled in the
following locations:
         (a)   Parking spaces provided on-site, or between multiple connected
sites with a recorded shared use parking agreement.
         (b)   Parking spaces provided along a parking lane on-street
corresponding to the site frontages.
      (3)   Access. Parking access must meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Driveways are limited to 20 feet in width.
         (b)   Sites with alley access must use the alley for ingress and
egress.
         (c)   Pedestrian access to off-street parking must be provided from
frontages with walkways a minimum of six feet in width.
      (4)   Screening. Parking areas must be screened from public streets,
sidewalks and paths by a masonry wall or evergreen hedge. The height of the
screen must be a minimum of 36 inches and a maximum of 48 inches in height.
      (5)   Required parking. LW, NMU and MU districts must comply with parking
minimums and maximum requirements as established by §
152.1019. TOD-C, TOD-E and TOD-G districts are exempt from parking requirements
established in §
152.1019.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1021 PARKING RAMP.
   (A)   Applicability. All new parking ramps or garages shall adhere to the
following standards.
   (B)   Design. Parking ramps comply with the following:
      (1)   Ground floor active uses are required; in this instance, an active
use shall mean a principal nonresidential use.
      (2)   Design features that facilitate future conversion of parking
garages to other uses, including flat floors, are encouraged.
      (3)   Multi-level parking deck or garage structures, whether stand-alone
or part of a larger development, shall comply with the following standards:
         (a)   Facades of the parking deck or garage that are facing a street
or within 100 feet of open space shall be harmonious and complement the
principal structure and contain all of the following architectural treatments:
            1.   Facade articulation (i.e. wall offsets);
            2.   Horizontal and vertical projections;
            3.   Material and color variation; and
            4.   Varied proportions of openings.
         (b)   No vehicles parked within or on the roof of the deck or garage
shall be visible from the street.
         (c)   All internal elements such as plumbing pipes, fans, ducts, and
lighting shall be screened.
         (d)   No deck or garage ramp areas shall be visible from the street
and shall be internal to the building.
         (e)   Openings off any street shall not exceed two lanes in width or
30 ft maximum per entrance/exit. Entrances/exits on alleys/service roads are
exempt from this requirement.
         (f)   If the deck or garage is accessed from a street, there shall be
only one point of access to the garage area from that street.
         (g)   Pedestrian entrances to the deck or garage shall be directly
from a frontage line through an exterior or interior pedestrian passage or a
combination thereof running from the rear to the front of the lot. Parking
spaces serving residential units are exempt from these requirements.
      (4)   Accessory parking ramps in all MU Districts shall be one level less
than the adjacent principal structure.
      (5)   Structured parking. The ground floor of any parking structure
abutting a public street must have habitable space for a depth of 30 feet
facing the street. METRO parking structures may be eligible for a waiver from
this requirement if a façade that limits vehicle visibility is provided.
         (a)   Upper floors must be designed and detailed in a manner
consistent with adjacent buildings.
         (b)   Entrances must minimize conflict with pedestrian movement.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1022 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION (SIDEWALKS AND WALKWAYS).
   (A)   Purpose. Establish design criteria for pedestrian circulation
facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles, provide opportunities for
recreational walking throughout the city, and ensure safe pedestrian movement
between properties and from off-street parking areas to building entrances.
   (B)   Applicability. Except for platted single-family and two-family sites,
walkways must be provided within all sites.
   (C)   Sidewalks standards.
      (1)   Sidewalks are required along all existing and future minor
arterials (high and low density), all major collectors as designated by the
functional classification system included in the Comprehensive Plan, and
according to the provisions of
Chapter 151.
      (2)   Sidewalks may be required on any street where one or more of the
following are present as determined by the city:
         (a)   Concrete curb and gutter have been constructed on the roadway.
         (b)   Traffic volumes on the road exceed 1,000 vehicles per day.
         (c)   A roadway connecting a neighborhood to a commercial area, park,
school, religious institution or other community-oriented facility.
         (d)   Along any street in a business district.
         (e)   A multi-family, office, commercial, or industrial use that is
expected to generate pedestrian traffic.
   (D)   Walkway standards.
      (1)   Walkways must be located to provide convenient, safe pedestrian
access, as determined by the city, between principal uses, parking areas, and/
or adjacent public sidewalks.
      (2)   Walkways must be as direct as possible to minimize distance and
other impediments to walking.
      (3)   All parking lots serving multiple family and nonresidential uses
shall be subject to the following standards to provide a safe pedestrian
environment:
         (a)   A direct and continuous pedestrian network shall be provided to
connect parking lots to building entrances, public sidewalks, transit stops,
and other pedestrian destinations.
         (b)   At least one pedestrian route shall be provided between the main
building entrance and the public sidewalk that is uninterrupted by surface
parking and driveways.
         (c)   In larger parking lots, or where parking lots serve more than
one building or destination, designated pedestrian pathways for safe travel
through the parking lot shall be provided.
         (d)   All pedestrian routes within a parking lot shall include a clear
division from vehicular areas, with a change in grade, soft landscaping, or a
change in surface materials.
         (e)   Where pedestrian routes cross street access driveways and other
major drive aisles, crossings shall be clearly marked and sight distance for
both pedestrian and vehicles shall be unobstructed.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1023 SATELLITE DISHES.
   Dishes may be considered permitted in all districts, provided they meet all
of the following:
   (A)   The communication sending and/or receiving dish is accessory to the
primary use on the site.
   (B)   The dish is not located within any of the building setbacks unless it
is one meter or less in diameter and attached to a building.
   (C)   When placed on a flat roof, the dish must be setback from the edge of
the building a distance equal to the height of the dish, unless it is one meter
or less in diameter. The height of the dish cannot exceed 15 feet.
   (D)   Dishes over one meter in diameter may not be placed on a residential
roof when visible from a public right-of-way.
   (E)   When placed on the ground, setbacks from other properties are at least
equal to the height of the communication device.
   (F)   No more than one satellite dish over one meter in diameter may be
permitted on any one property zoned for residential uses and two satellite
dishes over one meter in diameter are permitted on any one property zoned for
business uses.
   (G)   All other satellite dishes are considered conditional uses, except for
the number allowed per parcel, unless otherwise modified in this chapter.
   (H)   No satellite dishes may exceed five feet in diameter.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1024 SCREENING.
   (A)   Applicability. All mechanical or accessory uses, including, but not
limited to, exterior storage areas, exterior loading docks, service areas,
mechanical areas, waste and refuse areas, and rooftop equipment, must be
screened as follows.
   (B)   Requirements.
      (1)   Screening may be accomplished using a wing-wall, fencing, walls,
earth berms (not to exceed slopes of 4:1), and/or landscape plantings
consisting primarily of evergreens. Must achieve 80% opacity year-round at
maturity. Fences and walls are regulated elsewhere in this chapter.
      (2)   Non-landscaped screening must be designed with the same exterior
materials and incorporate similar architectural features as the principal
building and be designed so that the equipment is not visible from any public
right-of-way or residential development.
      (3)   Rooftop equipment screening must be provided by the building
parapet or incorporate similar architectural features as the building, use the
same exterior materials as the principal structure, or be designed so that the
equipment is not visible from six feet above ground level on any property line
of the applicable site.
      (4)   Incidental equipment deemed unnecessary to be screened by the City
Manager must be of a color to match the building, roof, or the sky, whichever
is most effective.
      (5)   Metal cabinets and/or fences used to enclose and protect mechanical
equipment may not substitute as screening.
      (6)   Residential properties along principal or minor arterial streets
shall adhere to the additional screening requirements for residential
properties per
Table 152.1024.1 below.
      (7)   For all nonresidential and mixed use development projects, a 35
foot berm and landscaped area must be included within the required setback area
from residential district property lines.
      (8)   The City Council may approve alternative screening such as
decorative fencing and landscaping meeting minimum opacity requirements in lieu
of the berming requirements of the table below.
 
TABLE 152.1024.1 ADDITIONAL SCREENING FOR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
                                                Depth of Berms
                                                or Landscaped
                                    Height of   Area (Measured  Amount of Plant
Along...                            Berming (in in feet from    Materials
                                    feet)       the property
                                                line on private
                                                property)*
                                                50-foot bermed  4 coniferous
Principal and “A” minor arterial6           and landscaped  trees and 3
                                                area            deciduous trees
“B” Minor arterials and Class I 3           25-foot         4 trees and 5
collectors                                      landscaped area shrubs
 
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1025 STREETSCAPE, MIXED USE.
   (A)   Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all streetscape
improvements in all Mixed Use Districts.
      (1)   Streetscape improvements including sidewalks, boulevards, furniture
zones, lights and trees must meet the requirements of
Table 152.1025.1 below.
      (2)   Improvements must transition to existing conditions at adjacent
properties to preserve pedestrian access and safety.
 
TABLE 152.1025.1 STREETSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
             Within 1/4 Mile of Station                Greater than 1/4 Mile of Station
Zoning       TOD-C, TOD-E, TOD-G                       LW, NMU, MU, TOD-C, TOD-E, TOD-G
district
Streetscape  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
illustration 220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/ 220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
             IMAGES/0-0-0-9672.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-9670.png]
(1) Sidewalk 10 ft. min. including boulevard width and 6 ft. min. including boulevard width and
width        furniture zone                            furniture zone
Boulevard    5 sq. ft. min. or 4 ft. by 6 ft. min.     5 ft. by 14 ft. min.
size
Tree spacing Adjusted to accommodate shopfront needs   30 - 40 ft. on center
 
      (3)   Curb return radius must meet the standards of the table below.
TABLE 152.1025.2 CURB RETURN RADIUS
Effective return Parking Lane on Both Parking Lane on One No Parking Lanes
radius           Streets              Street
TABLE 152.1025.2 CURB RETURN RADIUS
Effective
return    Parking Lane on Both Streets              Parking Lane on One Street                No Parking Lanes
radius
          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
         220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/ 220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/ 220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
          IMAGES/0-0-0-9668.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-9666.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-9664.png]
Minimum Required Curb Return Radius
Local
street to
local     5 ft. min                                 17 ft. min.                               25 ft. min
street:
25 ft.
Local
street to
primary   5 ft. min.                                22 ft. min.                               30 ft. min.
street:
30 ft.
Primary
local to
primary   8 ft. min.                                27 ft. min                                35 ft. min.
local: 35
ft.
Primary
local to  13 ft. min.                               32 ft. min.                               40 ft. min.
arterial:
40 ft.
Arterial
to        28 ft. min.                               47 ft. min.                               55 ft. mn.
arterial:
55 ft.
Bike lane Curb return radius may be further reduced by the width of the bike facility when present.
reduction
 
         (4)   New frontage lanes adjacent to existing arterials may use the
street sections from the table below in the Mixed Use Zoning Districts.
TABLE 152.1025.3 FRONTAGE LANE SECTIONS
Frontage Lane FL 33-17 Illustration
TABLE 152.1025.3 FRONTAGE LANE SECTIONS
Frontage Lane FL 33-17                Illustration
Functional class   Local street
Right-of-way       35 ft. min.
Design, target     15-20 mph
speed
   Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 1
Vehicle lane width 9 ft.
Movement           One-way
(PK) Parking lanes 1
Parking lane width 8 ft.
(BL) Bicycle       N/A                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
facility                              220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
Bicycle facility   N/A                IMAGES/0-0-0-9662.png]
width
(MD) Median        6 ft. min.
Turning lanes      N/A
   Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      5 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     5 ft. min.
width
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 5
                   ft. by 14 ft. min.
Tree spacing       30 ft. on center
   Frontage Lane FL 42-26           
Functional class   Local
Right-of-way       ft. min.
Design, target     15-20 mph
speed
   Traveled Way
(TL) Vehicle lanes 2
Vehicle lane width 9 ft.
Movement           Two-way
(PK) Parking lanes 1
Parking lane width 8 ft.
(BL) Bicycle       N/A                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
facility                              220685e97893578ebe74f4f5d1e94b992da5501b/
Bicycle facility   N/A                IMAGES/0-0-0-9660.png]
width                                  
(MD) Median        6 ft. min.
Turning lanes      N/A
   Streetscape
(SW) Sidewalk      5 ft. min.
width
(BV) Boulevard     5 ft. min.
width
Boulevard type     Long tree well, 5
                   ft. by 14 ft. min.
Tree spacing       30 ft. on center.
 
   (B)   Drive-through facilities.
      (1)   Drive-through facilities are prohibited for new construction after
date of passage in TOD-G.
      (2)   Drive-through facilities and lanes must be located behind the
principal building.
      (3)   Queuing lanes must not interfere with pedestrian circulation.
      (4)   Drive-through canopies and other structures, where present, must be
constructed from the same materials as the primary building, and with a similar
level of architectural quality and detailing.
   (C)   Outdoor dining areas. Outdoor seating is permitted within any setback
area and temporary seating may be permitted with rights-of-way, provided the
sidewalk remains clear to a width of five feet.
   (D)   Landscaping requirements. All open areas of any site, except for that
portion used for parking, driveways, and storage, must be landscaped and
incorporated in a landscape plan, per the following requirements:
      (1)   The required landscaped area must be planted with trees, ground
cover, low shrubs or flowering plants.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1026 TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS.
   (A)   Purpose. The Council finds that regulations are necessary to
accommodate the communication service facilities to benefit the needs of
residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the community. These regulations are necessary to:
      (1)   Provide for the appropriate locations for the development of
communication facilities to serve the residents and businesses of the city;
      (2)   Minimize adverse visual effects of communication towers and other
facilities through careful design and siting standards;
      (3)   Avoid potential tower failure damage to adjacent properties through
structural standards and setback requirements; and
      (4)   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers, buildings, and
other structures to accommodate wireless telecommunication devices to reduce
the number of towers needed to serve the community.
   (B)   Existing antennas and towers.
      (1)   Previous licensees, owners, operators, or secured parties must
remove all abandoned or unused towers or associated facilities and equipment
within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site. Cessation of
operations means the removal of the antennas from the tower or the cessation of
electricity and/or phone service to the site.
      (2)   All hazardous towers or associated facilities and equipment as
defined in the Uniform Building Codes definition of hazardous structures must
be removed from the property within a maximum of 60 days of the date of the
hazardous determination by the city. The city may require more expeditious
removal based on the nature of the hazard.
   (C)   General requirements.
      (1)   No towers may be constructed in the Mississippi River Critical Area
Overlay.
      (2)   Towers and antennas in parks must obtain a valid lease from the
appropriate city, county, or state agency.
      (3)   Towers and antennas may not be artificially lighted except if
required by the FAA unless they are incorporated into the approved design of
the tower, such as light fixtures illuminating ball fields, parking lots, or a
similar use.
      (4)   Roof or wall-mounted communication devices (excluding satellite
dishes) shall adhere to the following standards.
         (a)   Roof-mounted antennas must be no more than 15 feet in height.
         (b)   Roof-mounted antennas and their accessory equipment/buildings
must be setback from the edge of the principal building or structure a distance
equal to the height of the antenna, equipment, or building.
         (c)   Installation of the antennas requires a building permit. The
applicant must submit a report prepared by a qualified professional engineer
licensed by the State of Minnesota indicating the existing structure or tower's
suitability to accept the antenna, and the proposed method of affixing the
antenna to the structure. Complete details of all fixtures and couplings, and
the precise point of attachment must be indicated.
         (d)   All other antennas may be considered conditional unless
otherwise modified in this chapter.
         (e)   Proof of non-interference with public safety telecommunications.
Each application for construction of wireless communication equipment includes
a statement from a qualified professional engineer licensed by the State of
Minnesota that the construction of the tower, including reception and
transmission functions, will not interfere with public safety
telecommunications, provided however, that no application requires any
statement regarding the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to
the extent that the wireless telecommunication equipment complies with FCC
regulations concerning such emissions. Before the introduction of any new
service or changes in existing service, telecommunication providers must notify
the city and the Hennepin County Sheriff's Radio Systems Manager at least ten
calendar days in advance of such changes to allow interference levels to be
monitored during the testing process.
      (5)   Construction and design requirements. Proposed or modified towers
and antennas must meet the following design requirements:
         (a)   All towers and antennas erected, constructed or located within
the city, and all wiring must comply with the requirements set forth in the
Minnesota Building Code;
         (b)   Towers and antennas must be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural
treatment, except when otherwise dictated by federal or state authorities. The
telecommunications facilities must use as many stealth design techniques as
reasonably possible. Economic considerations alone are not justification for
failing to provide stealth design techniques; and
         (c)   Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers intended
primarily for the support of their related antennas must be self-supporting
monopoles unless the City Council determines that an alternative design would
better blend into the surrounding environment. The use of guyed towers is
prohibited.
      (6)   Permanent platforms or other structures exclusive of antennas that
serve to increase off-site visibility are prohibited.
      (7)   The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or
equipment information signs is prohibited.
      (8)   Accessory buildings and equipment. All accessory equipment related
to towers and antennas must be housed within an existing structure whenever
possible. Any new accessory buildings, lockers, and/or ground mounted equipment
must meet the following:
         (a)   They must be architecturally designed to blend in with the
surrounding environment, subject to the landscaping and screening requirements
of §
152.1013 and §
152.1024.
         (b)   They must meet the minimum setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district, unless they are located on the roof of the
principal building, in which case they must be setback from the edge a distance
equal to their height.
         (c)   Unless the accessory equipment is mounted on an existing
structure or housed within an existing structure, the city may require a
security fence around the base of the tower and/or accessory equipment. If
required, the security fence must have a maximum opacity of 50% and meet the
fencing requirements elsewhere in the city code.
      (9)   Maintenance hours. Nonemergency maintenance of towers, antennas and
associated equipment must be completed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. for all towers within 1,000 feet of a residential district.
      (10)   Collocation requirements. All towers erected, constructed, or
located within the city to support antennas for wireless communication service
providers as defined in §
152.105, must comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   The City Council will not approve a proposal for a new tower
unless it finds that the antennas cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within a one-mile search radius (one-half-mile
search radius for towers 120 feet or less in height) of the proposed tower due
to one or more of the following reasons:
            1.   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified
professional engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota and the existing or
approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate
planned or equivalent equipment;
            2.   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or
building as documented by a qualified professional engineer licensed by the
State of Minnesota and the interference cannot be prevented;
            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search
radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to
function as documented by a qualified professional engineer licensed by the
State of Minnesota;
            4.   Written documentation that the applicant made a good faith,
diligent, but unsuccessful effort to install or collocate the antenna(e) within
the defined search radius. The documentation must include the names, addresses
and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers, buildings, or other
structures of appropriate height, including those on city-owned property; and
            5.   Other unforeseen circumstances as approved by Council.
         (b)   Any proposed tower intended to support antennas for wireless
communication service providers, as defined in §
152.105, and its proposed site must be designed structurally, electrically, and
in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and accessory
equipment and comparable antennas and equipment for at least two additional
users if the tower is over 100 feet in height and for at least one additional
user if the tower is between 60 to 100 feet in height. Towers must be designed
to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept
antennas mounted at varying heights. Alternative designs for towers with more
than three users may be approved by the City Council if they prevent the
construction of multiple towers and are found to be compatible with the
neighborhood; and
         (c)   Any tower proposed at less than 75 feet must be constructed with
a foundation adequate to accommodate an additional 20 feet of height to
accommodate an additional user. The applicant must provide written evidence
that they will allow the extra height added to their tower with a reasonable
request for a collocation lease.
      (11)   Tower and/or antenna setbacks. Towers and antennas must meet the
setbacks of the underlying zoning district, unless modified by the following:
         (a)   A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to
a public street varied, at the sole discretion of the City Council, to allow
the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a
church steeple, light standard, power line support device, or similar
structure;
         (b)   In Business Park (BP) and Industrial (I) Zoning Districts,
towers and/or antennas may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that
the rear property line abuts another property in the Business Park (BP) or
Industrial (I) District and the tower does not encroach upon any easements;
         (c)   All towers and/or antennas must be set back from planned public
rights-of-way as documented in city corridor studies, the Comprehensive Plan,
or the appropriate county or state plans, by a minimum distance equal to one
half of the height of the tower including all antennas and attachments;
         (d)   If applicable, setbacks for towers and/or antennas must be
determined for the full height of the proposed tower, including extension/
expansion height as may be required elsewhere in this chapter;
         (e)   Towers in residential districts shall be setback a distance
equal to four times the height of the structure; and
         (f)   Towers in districts adjacent to residential parcels used
primarily or guided for residential purposes shall be setback a distance equal
to two times the height of the tower.
      (12)   Height. Height may be determined by measuring the vertical
distance from the tower's point of contact with the ground to the highest point
of the tower, including all antennas or other attachments. When towers are
mounted upon or attached to other structures, the combined height of the
structure and tower must meet the height restrictions of this section. In
addition, all towers must meet the following:
         (a)   In all residential zoning districts on parcels other than those
used primarily for residential purposes, the maximum height of any tower,
including all antennas and other attachments, may not exceed one foot for each
four feet the tower is setback from residential parcels used primarily or
guided for residential purposes, up to a maximum height of 125 feet; and
         (b)   In all nonresidential zoning districts, the maximum height of
any tower, including all antennas and other attachments, may not exceed one
foot for each two feet the tower is setback from residential parcels used
primarily or guided for residential purposes up to a maximum height of 125
feet.
      (13)   Preference for identification of tower sites. The following
preferences shall be followed in site selection for new towers when collocation
is not possible:
         (a)   Existing buildings or structures;
         (b)   Public institution sites;
         (c)   Sites zoned BP or I;
         (d)   Sites zoned B-3 or B-4;
         (e)   Sites zoned B-1 or B-2; and
         (f)   Other properties consistent with provisions of this subchapter.
   (D)   Towers and antennas in residential areas. All towers and antennas in
the following residential and mixed-use districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and
in those areas in the PDO guided for low and medium residential development
must comply to the following:
      (1)   Radio and television towers and antennas. Proposed towers for
personal radio and television antennas located on parcels zoned residential and
used primarily for residential purposes may be considered permitted if they
meet the following conditions:
         (a)   The tower and/or antennas, including all accessory antennas and
other attachments, is (are) at or below the maximum height as regulated
elsewhere in the city code;
         (b)   It meets the setbacks of the underlying district;
         (c)   It is located to the rear of the property; and
         (d)   Only one tower is allowed per parcel.
      (2)   Personal (non-commercial) radio and television towers and antennas
that exceed the maximum height defined elsewhere in the city code and
commercial towers shall be considered conditional uses in residential
districts. Commercial towers may only be allowed as a conditional use on the
following parcels:
         (a)   Religious institution sites, when constructed in or as part of a
steeple, spire, bell tower or similar architectural feature;
         (b)   Park sites, if conformance with this section are met to the
satisfaction of the city; and
         (c)   Government, school, utility, and institutional uses.
   (E)   Additional submittal requirements. In addition to the information
required elsewhere in this code, conditional use permit applications for towers
require the following supplemental information:
      (1)   A report from a qualified professional engineer licensed by the
State of Minnesota which:
         (a)   Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate; and
         (b)   Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas.
      (2)   A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her
successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in
writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
      (3)   A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which require the
applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities when they are
abandoned, unused or become hazardous may be submitted as a requirement of the
conditional use permit before any building permits may be issued.
      (4)   In the event that a tower is not removed within 12 months, the
tower and associated facilities may be removed by the city and the costs of
removal, as well as any city staff time spent in processing the removal, may be
assessed against the property.
      (5)   Proposals to erect new towers must be accompanied by any required
federal or state agency licenses.
      (6)   A signed statement that certifies that the proposed tower complies
with regulations administered by Federal Aviation Administration.
      (7)   All applications for towers erected, constructed, or located within
the city to support antennas for wireless communication service providers, as
defined elsewhere in this chapter, may be required to submit a current area
plan map showing their existing towers and the search areas for the towers and
antennas for which the conditional use permit application has been filed. The
area map must include those towers and antennas (including existing and
proposed in the conditional use permit application) within the city and a
radius of one mile outside the city's boundaries.
      (8)   Proof of non-interference with public safety telecommunications.
Each application for construction of wireless communication equipment includes
a statement from a qualified professional engineer licensed by the State of
Minnesota that the construction of the tower, including reception and
transmission functions, will not interfere with public safety
telecommunications, provided however, that no application requires any
statement regarding the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to
the extent that the wireless telecommunication equipment complies with FCC
regulations concerning such emissions. Before the introduction of any new
service or changes in existing service, telecommunication providers must notify
the city and the Hennepin County Sheriff's Radio Systems Manager at least ten
calendar days in advance of such changes to allow interference levels to be
monitored during the testing process.
   (F)   Evaluation and monitoring. As a condition of approval for
telecommunication facilities, the applicant must reimburse the city for its
costs to retain outside expert technical assistance to evaluate any aspect of
the proposed siting of telecommunications facilities, including but not limited
to other possible sites within the city. The owner of a telecommunications
facility must provide the city with current, technical evidence of compliance
with FCC radiation emission requirements, annually or more frequently at the
city's reasonable request. If the owner does not promptly provide the city with
satisfactory technical evidence of FCC compliance, the city may carry out tests
to ensure FCC radiation compliance using a qualified expert. The owner must
reimburse the city for its reasonable costs in carrying out such compliance
testing.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1027 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. Lesson congestion on streets and roads, reduce environmental
pollution associated with vehicular transportation, and generally protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Intent. The standards and regulations are intended to be components of
an overall transportation demand management plan.
   (C)   Applicability. These standards apply to all new construction in
nonresidential districts, mixed use districts, and nonresidential uses in any
residential district.
   (D)   Bicycle parking requirements.
      (1)   The minimum number of bicycle parking spaces provided for any use
shall be 5% of the vehicular parking spaces required for such use.
      (2)   Design standards for bicycle parking spaces.
      (3)   Bicycle parking spaces shall be:
         (a)   Located on the same lot as the principal use;
         (b)   Located to prevent damage to bicycles by cars;
         (c)   In a convenient, highly visible, active, well lighted area;
         (d)   Located so as not to interfere with pedestrian movements;
         (e)   As near the principal entrance of the building as practical;
         (f)   Located to provide safe access from the spaces to the right-of-
way or bicycle lane;
         (g)   Consistent with the surroundings in color and design and
incorporated, whenever possible, into buildings or street furniture design; and
         (h)   Anchored to resist rust or corrosion, or removal by vandalism.
   (E)   Transit service. Parking may be reduced by 10% for any parcel located
within one-quarter mile of a transit stop. This 10% shall be shown on the site
as proof of parking in the event transit services are altered and additional
parking is required. To qualify, the transit stop must be served by regular
transit service on all days of the week that the business or use is in
operation and adequate pedestrian access must be available between the transit
stop and parcel. Regular transit service shall operate at least twice hourly
between 7:30 a.m. and 6:30 p.m. on weekdays and once hourly after 6:30 p.m.
Regular transit service shall operate on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
   (F)   Motorcycle/scooter parking.
      (1)   Two motorcycle/scooter parking spaces may be provided in lieu of
one required automobile parking space. The maximum automobile parking space
reduction under this provision shall be calculated at a 1:30 ratio (for every
30 required automobile parking spaces, one automobile space may be waived).
      (2)   Parking areas under 30 spaces may reduce the parking requirement by
a maximum of one automobile parking space. Motorcycle parking must be properly
labeled with signs and surfaced with concrete. The minimum stall size for one
motorcycle shall be four-foot in width by seven foot in depth.
   (G)   Compact parking stalls.
      (1)   Parking areas including 30 spaces or more may include 35% compact
parking stalls which must be labeled as such on the parking plan and located in
areas of anticipated infrequent use. Compact parking stall sizes are stated in
Table 152.1020.1.
   (H)   Industrial businesses in the General Industrial (I) Zoning District
may, after five years of operation at their current location, reduce the
existing parking space width to eight and a half feet for workforce management.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 152.1028 WASTE ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   Applicability. All uses except single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, and townhouses must store their trash in compliance with one of the
following two options:
      (1)   Indoors. Within a designated area of the interior of the building
in conformance with the following:
         (a)   The adopted Fire and Building Codes;
         (b)   The area must be readily accessible by collection vehicles;
         (c)   The area must be readily accessible to the users by use of a
pedestrian access, such as an easily operable door. The door must remain
closed, except when servicing;
         (d)   The interior walls and floor of the area must be finished with
smooth, non-absorbent material sealed or finished to withstand frequent
cleaning;
         (e)   All waste storage areas must be kept clean and sanitary, and
maintained in good condition;
      (2)   Outdoors.
         (a)   Outdoors within a four-sided accessory structure designed and
sized for this purpose. The enclosure must be in conformance with the adopted
Fire and Building Codes.
         (b)   Design standards. All exterior waste enclosures must meet the
following design standards:
            1.   Walls must be constructed of architectural masonry or similar
materials.
            2.   Enclosures must have an opaque gate made of metal or
decorative wood. Design and materials of the enclosure must be compatible with
the principal building.
            3.   Additional landscape screening may be required for any
enclosure requiring design review.
            4.   Trash enclosures may have a pedestrian entrance when shared by
multiple units. No more than two openings may be present per enclosure and the
openings may not be placed in the same wall section. The opening may be no less
than 32 inches and no more than 36 inches. For nonresidential properties, a
gate is required for the opening. Where a gate is required or provided for the
opening, it must be an opaque metal or decorative wood gate, meeting the design
standards of this chapter.
            5.   Trash enclosures must have minimum inside dimensions,
excluding pedestrian access areas, of eight feet by 12 feet, and must be sized
to accommodate all waste, recycling, organics recycling, and trash storage.
Walls and gates must be of a height to fully screen the view of the bins and
storage. A maximum six inch space may exist at the bottom of the gate to the
ground surface. A maximum of two openings on not more than two sides area
allowed for drainage. Each opening may not exceed eight inches by 16 inches per
wall section.
         (c)   Location.
            1.   Enclosures may not be located in the front or side yards and
may not be closer than five feet of an interior lot line.
            2.   Enclosures must meet all parking setback requirements.
            3.   Enclosure doors must not restrict driveways, extend into
adjacent parking spaces, or obstruct fire hydrants or building exits.
            4.   Enclosures must be located so they are accessible to
collection vehicles.
            5.   Enclosures must remain at least five feet from any combustible
construction or building openings.
   (B)   Construction and maintenance standards.
      (1)   All waste enclosure structures, including gates, must be maintained
in good condition.
      (2)   All gates and doors must be kept closed, except during servicing.
      (3)   The enclosure area must be set on a concrete pad at ground level,
with a minimum slope to prevent accumulation of water from cleaning and rain
runoff.
   (C)   Trash compactors. Trash compactors that are open to or loaded outside
must be located in a waste enclosure meeting the requirements of this chapter.
Self-contained trash compactors that are completely enclosed and loaded only
from the interior of a building must be located in a waste enclosure or meet
the following criteria:
      (1)   Design and materials of the trash enclosure must conform to the
architecture of the buildings in the development and be compatible with the
finish of the principal building, such as matching paint;
      (2)   Landscape screening or other screening may be required to eliminate
or minimize the view from adjacent properties; and
      (3)   Appropriate measures must be taken to prevent or eliminate
nuisances from noise, trash, or other nuisances created by the location or use
of the trash compactor.
   (D)   Alternative compliance.
      (1)   The City Manager may consider alternatives to standard trash
enclosures. Such alternatives shall be evaluated with respect to the following
seven criteria:
         (a)   The proposal provides adequate capacity for the use;
         (b)   The proposal blends with the architecture of the site;
         (c)   The proposal provides convenient access for residents and
businesses located within the development;
         (d)   The proposal meets code requirements for all setback
requirements including, but not limited to, the front and street side yards and
corner cut-offs;
         (e)   The proposal is accessible to trash collection vehicles;
         (f)   The proposal does not generate the potential for undesirable
odors, noise, flies or nuisances; and
         (g)   The proposal represents an improvement upon code requirements
and more adequately meets the needs of the occupants.
      (2)   Requests for consideration of alternatives.
         (a)   Requests for consideration of alternatives must be submitted to
the City Manager with the following items: a written letter explaining the
request, the reason for it, an explanation of how it meets the above seven
criteria, a site plan, and a detail of the proposed alternative including
specifications, colors and materials, and measures that will be taken to
correct any problems associated with the proposed use if approved.
         (b)   After consideration, the City Manager may, upon written findings
reflecting compliance with the above seven criteria, allow installation of the
requested alternative.
         (c)   Alternatively, the City Manager may deny the request. Such
denial shall set forth which criteria are not met.
(Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
CHAPTER 153: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
153.01   Title
   
153.02   Purpose
   
153.03   Scope
   
153.04   Severability
   
153.05   Incorporation by reference
   
153.06   Definitions
   
153.07   Stormwater management plan
   
153.08   Erosion control plan
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 TITLE.
   
Chapter 153 of the Brooklyn Park City Code shall be known and may be referred
to as the "Stormwater Management Ordinance" or the "Stormwater Management
Chapter." When referred to herein it shall be known as "this chapter."
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 153.02 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is established to promote, preserve and enhance natural
resources within the City of Brooklyn Park and protect them from adverse
effects occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible activities by
regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an adverse
and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique or fragile
environmentally sensitive land. This chapter minimizes conflicts and encourages
compatibility between land disturbing and development activities and
environmentally sensitive lands. By requiring detailed review standards and
procedures for land disturbing or development activities proposed for such
areas, this chapter achieves a balance between urban growth and development and
the protection of water and natural resources within the city.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 153.03 SCOPE.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   Every applicant for subdivision approval, conditional use permit,
or a grading permit to allow land disturbing activities must submit a
stormwater management plan to the Engineering Department. The stormwater
management plan shall be submitted with the building permit, grading permit
application, or as directed by the Engineering Department. No subdivision
approval or grading permit will be issued until approval of the stormwater
management plan or a waiver has been obtained in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Every applicant for subdivision approval or a grading permit that
involves wetland disturbing activities or work near wetlands must submit a
wetland assessment and delineation report to the Engineering Department. The
wetland assessment and delineation report shall be submitted with the grading
permit application, or as directed by the Engineering Department. No
subdivision approval, or grading permit will be issued until approval of the
wetland replacement plan application or a Certificate of Exemption has been
obtained in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the Minnesota
Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, M.S. §§ 103G.222 - .2373 ("WCA").
   (3)   Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval,
conditional use permit, or a grading permit must submit an application for an
erosion control plan to the Engineering Department. The erosion control plan
shall be submitted with the building permit application, land use application,
grading permit application, or as directed by the Engineering Department. No
grading permit or building permit will be issued until approval of the erosion
control plan has been obtained in conformance with the erosion control
measures, standards and specifications contained in the MPCA's Minnesota
Stormwater Manual, or as otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      (1)   Any part of a subdivision if a preliminary plat for the subdivision
that has been approved by the City Council on or before the effective date
hereof.
      (2)   Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and
other kinds of posts or poles.
      (3)   Excavations or land moving activities involving less than 50 cubic
yards of soil.
      (4)   Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.
   (C)   Waiver. The Engineering Department, may waive any of the requirements
of this chapter upon making a finding that compliance with the requirement will
involve an unnecessary hardship and the waiver of such requirement will not
adversely affect the water quality and natural resources of the city or
adversely impact environmentally sensitive land. The Engineering Department may
require as a condition of the waiver that the applicant dedicates easements or
construct certain facilities as it deems necessary.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 153.04 SEVERABILITY.
   Every section or subdivision of this chapter is declared separable from
every other section or subdivision. If any section or subdivision is held to be
invalid by competent authority, no other section or subdivision shall be
invalidated by such action or decision.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
§ 153.05 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The following are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference:
      (1)   The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s NPDES/SDS Construction
Stormwater General Permit MNR100001 (CSW Permit) as amended in its entirety as
now consitituted and from time to time amended. The NPDES Construction
Stormwater General Permit.
      (2)   The city's Local Water Management Plan. These standards shall serve
as the official guide for principles, methods, and practices for proposed
development activities.
      (3)   The Shingle Creek and West Mississippi Watershed Management
Commissions Rules and Standards.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 153.06 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The owner, their agent, or representative having interest in land
where an application for city review of any permit, use or development is
required by this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). Practices to reduce the volume of runoff,
and improve water quality, to prevent pollution of waters of the state. BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES are designed to reduce stormwater runoff volume, peak
flows, and/or nonpoint source pollution through evapotranspiration,
infiltration, detention, and filtration, and may include activities,
prohibitions of practices, treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
other management practices.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks
that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Any disturbance to the land that results in a change
in the topography, existing soil cover, or the existing soil topography that
may result in accelerated stormwater runoff, including clearing, grading,
filling, and excavating.
   CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion
and attendant pollution.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure, including
wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff which contains a permanent pool
of water.
   FLOOD FRINGE.  All the land in a flood plain not lying within a delineated
flood way. Land within a floodway fringe is subject to inundation by relatively
low velocity flows and shallow water depths. The flood fringe includes at a
minimum, the areas designated as zone AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
outside of the floodway, except as modified on the Zoning Overlay Map.
   FLOOD PLAIN, GENERAL. A 100-year flood plain area shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map where flood way and flood fringe boundaries and/or 100-year
flood elevations have not been determined. These areas include areas designated
as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map and zone AE areas where a floodway is
not shown.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the flood
plain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the flood water or flood flow of any natural stream or river. The
floodway, at a minimum, includes the floodway areas shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map and as depicted on the Zoning Overlay Map.
   FULL DEPTH RECLAMATION. A rehabilitation method in which the full thickness
of the asphalt pavement is pulverized and blended with a predetermined portion
of underlying materials (base and/or subbase) to provide an upgraded,
homogeneous material.
   FULLY RECONSTRUCTED IMPERVIOUS. Area where impervious surfaces have been
removed down to the underlying soils. Activities such as structure renovation,
mill and overlay projects, full depth reclamation projects, and other pavement
rehabilitation projects that do not expose underlying soils beneath the
structure, pavement, or activity are not considered fully reconstructed (see
figure below). Maintenance activities such as catch basin repair/replacement,
utility repair/replacement, pipe repair/replacement, lighting, and pedestrian
ramp improvement are not considered fully reconstructed.
   HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil, or on
a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of
excessive water content.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface that prevents absorption of water into the
ground. Examples of impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to,
cement, asphalt, and paving brick.
   LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Any change of the land surface
including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading, and the
construction of any structure.
   LINEAR PROJECT. Projects with construction of new or fully reconstructed
roads, trails, sidewalks, or rail lines that are not part of a common plan of
development or sale.
   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT. A document recorded against the property which
provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater treatment practices.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Any construction activity that is not defined as
redevelopment.
   NEW IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any newly constructed surface area that changes the
infiltration rate from a pervious surface to that of an impervious surface.
   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee, and
association.
   PERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface area that allows infiltration of all or the
majority of the precipitation that falls on it. Pervious surfaces include
turfgrass, rain gardens, planting beds, and other infiltration BMPs.
   PLAN. A stormwater management plan governed by this chapter.
   PUBLIC WATERS. Waters of the state as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 15,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Any construction activity where, prior to the start of
construction, the areas to be disturbed have 15% or more of impervious surface.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term BASE FLOOD used
in the Flood Insurance Study.
   RETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure that
provides for the storage of storm water runoff by means of a permanent pool of
water.
   SEDIMENT. Solid matter carried by water, sewage, or other liquids.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The use of structural or non-structural practices
that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge
volumes, and/or peak discharge rates.
   STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES.  Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective and practical means
of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint-source pollution inputs to
stormwater runoff and waterbodies.
   STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed, or erected which is normally
attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen
structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water,
either natural or fabricated, which gathers or carries surface water.
   WATERSHED. The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point.
   WETLAND. Poorly drained, environmentally sensitive lands as designated by
M.S. § 103G.221 et seq. known as the Wetland Conservation Act, or any other
state or federal agency.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 153.07 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Approval procedures.
      (1)   Application. A written application for stormwater management plan
approval, along with a proposed stormwater management plan and maintenance
agreement, shall be filed with the Engineering Division of the Operations and
Maintenance Department. The application shall include a statement indicating
the grounds upon which the approval is being requested, that the proposed use
is permitted by right or as an exception in the underlying zoning district, and
adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will conform to the standards
set forth in this chapter and the City Code.
      (2)   Required plan submittals.
         (a)   Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of
drawings, electronic copy of drawings, and required information shall be
submitted to the Engineering Division of the Public Works Department along with
the process and approval fee. The plans shall be drawn at a minimum scale of
one inch equals 100 feet and shall contain the following information:
            1.   Existing site map. A map of existing conditions showing the
site and immediately adjacent areas within 200 feet of the site, including:
               a.   The name and address of the applicant, the section,
township and range, north point, date and scale of drawing and number of
sheets.
               b.   The location of the property by showing an insert map at a
scale sufficient to clearly identify its location and giving such information
as the name and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions,
cities, townships and districts or other landmarks.
               c.   The existing topography with a contour interval appropriate
to the topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater
than two feet.
               d.   A delineation of all ponds, infiltration features, streams,
rivers, public waters and wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the
site, including the depth of the water, the normal water level (NWL), the 100-
year high water level (HWL), the ordinary high water level (OHW), a description
of all vegetation which may be found in the water, a statement of general water
quality and any classification given to the water body or wetland by the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (MnDNR), the MPCA or the United
States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).
               e.   The location and dimensions of existing stormwater drainage
systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site
delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater is conveyed from the
site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetland, and
setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects.
               f.   A description of the soils of the site, including a map
indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report
containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of storm
water system proposed and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the
applicant to render the soils suitable.
               g.   The location and description of any vegetative cover and a
clear delineation of any vegetation proposed for removal.
               h.   The location of 100-year floodplains, flood fringes and
floodways.
               i.   The locations of any existing overhead or underground
utilities.
               j.   The locations of property lines and easements.
               k.   A city approved benchmark listing location and elevation.
      (3)   Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
         (a)   Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities and any phasing of those activities.
         (b)   Total site area.
         (c)   Total area disturbed.
         (d)   Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt
stockpiles.
         (e)   Locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion
control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. A schedule
of the anticipated start and completion date of each land disturbing activity
including the installation of construction site erosion control measures needed
to meet the requirements of this chapter.
         (f)   Provisions for maintenance of the construction site erosion
control measures during construction.
      (4)   Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on
the same scale as the existing site map showing the proposed site changes,
including:
         (a)   Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as
provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed
changes to existing topography and remaining features.
         (b)   A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including
dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of all
proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the
development.
         (c)   A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which
direction and at what rate stormwater will be conveyed from the site and
setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will be allowed to
collect.
         (d)   The proposed size, alignment and intended use of any structures
to be erected on the site.
         (e)   A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which will be
paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be
used.
         (f)   Any other information pertinent to the particular project which,
in the opinion of the applicant or the Engineering Department, is necessary for
the review of the project.
         (g)   Proposed normal water level (NWL), 100-year high water level
(HWL), ordinary high water level (OHW) of any ponds, infiltration facilities,
streams, rivers, public waters, or wetlands on or downstream from the site.
         (h)   Building elevations including low floor elevations and low
building opening elevations.
         (i)   Overland emergency overflow routes and their elevations.
      (5)   Stormwater calculations. Calculations demonstrating the following
data shall be provided, according to the method established by the Engineering
Department:
         (a)   Drainage maps that show the site, land that drains onto the
site, and land that the site drains onto for existing and proposed conditions.
Delineated drainage areas for ponds, wetlands, or other relevant waters should
be indicated on these maps.
         (b)   A stormwater model conforming to Engineering Department
standards that includes drainage areas, cover types, pond and wetland sizes,
pond and wetland outlets, and natural or piped conveyance systems.
         (c)   Peak runoff rates from the site before and after development
demonstrating that the proposed conditions conform to the policies outlined in
the city's Local Water Management Plan and this chapter's design criteria.
         (d)   Volume of runoff from the site before and after development.
         (e)   National Urban Runoff Program ("NURP") volume below the normal
outlet required and provided in each pond.
         (f)   Infiltration calculations for proposed conditions.
         (g)   A narrative summarizing the calculations and demonstrating that
proposed drainage alterations do not unreasonably burden upstream or downstream
land.
         (h)   Soil borings, if requested by the Engineering Department.
      (6)   Maintenance agreement. The applicant shall enter into a maintenance
agreement with the city that documents all responsibilities for operation and
maintenance of long-term stormwater treatment practices. Such responsibility
shall be documented in a maintenance plan and executed through a maintenance
agreement. All maintenance agreements must be approved by the city and recorded
at the Hennepin County recorder's office prior to final plan approval. At a
minimum, the maintenance agreement shall describe the following inspection and
maintenance obligations:
         (a)   The responsible party who is permanently responsible for
maintenance of the structural and nonstructural measures.
         (b)   Pass responsibilities for such maintenance to successors in
title.
         (c)   Allow the city and its representatives the right- of-entry for
the purposes of inspecting all permanent stormwater management systems.
         (d)   Allow the city the right to repair and maintain the facility, if
necessary maintenance is not performed after proper and reasonable notice to
the responsible party of the permanent stormwater management system.
         (e)   Include a maintenance plan that contains, but is not limited to
the following:
            1.   Identification of all structural permanent stormwater
management systems.
            2.   A schedule for regular inspections, monitoring, and
maintenance for each practice. Monitoring shall verify whether the practice is
functioning as designed and may include, but is not limited to quality,
temperature, and quantity of runoff.
            3.   Identification of the responsible party for conducting the
inspection, monitoring and maintenance for each practice.
            4.   Include a schedule and format for reporting compliance with
the maintenance agreement to the city.
         (f)   The issuance of a permit constitutes a right-of-entry for the
community or city, its contractors, and agents to enter upon the construction
site. The applicant shall allow the community city, its contractors, agents and
any their authorized representatives, upon presentation of credentials, to:
            1.   Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining
information, examination of records, conducting investigations or surveys.
            2.   Bring such equipment upon the permitted development as is
necessary to conduct such surveys and investigations.
            3.   Examine and copy any books, papers, records, or memoranda
pertaining to activities or records required to be kept under the terms and
conditions of the permit.
            4.   Inspect the stormwater pollution control measures.
            5.   Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to
stormwater pollution control measures.
            6.   Correct deficiencies in stormwater and erosion and sediment
control measures.
   (B)   Stormwater management plan review procedure.
      (1)   Process. Stormwater management plans and maintenance agreements
meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the Engineering
Department for review and approval. The Engineering Division shall recommend
approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the stormwater management plan
and maintenance agreement to the Planning Commission. Following Planning
Commission review, the stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement
shall be submitted to the City Council for its review along with the Planning
Commission's recommendation.
      (2)   Duration. Approval of a stormwater management plan and maintenance
agreement submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire two years
after the date of approval by the City Council unless construction has
commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration of
the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the Engineering
Department for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the
reasons for the requested extension, the City Council may grant one extension
of not greater than one single year.
      (3)   Revisions. A stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement
may be revised. All revised plans must contain all information required by this
chapter and must be reviewed and approved by the Engineering Department.
      (4)   Conditions. A stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement
may be approved by the City Council subject to compliance with conditions that
are necessary to ensure that the requirements contained in this chapter are
met. Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or
character of the proposed development; require the construction of structures,
drainage facilities, storage basins and other facilities; require replacement
of vegetation; establish required monitoring procedures; require that the work
be staged over time; require alteration of the site's design to ensure
buffering; or require the conveyance to the city or other public entity of
certain lands or interests therein.
      (5)   Agreement. Upon approval of the stormwater management plan and
maintenance agreement by the City Council, the applicant shall enter into an
agreement with the city to ensure that any required improvements are
constructed, any required easements are granted or dedicated and that there is
compliance with any conditions imposed by the City Council. The agreement shall
guarantee completion and compliance with the conditions within a specific time,
which time may be extended by the City Council. The agreement shall be in a
form acceptable to the city.
      (6)   Financial guarantee. Upon approval of the stormwater management
plan and maintenance agreement by the City Council, the applicant shall submit
a letter of credit, or cash escrow, to cover 125% of the amount of the
established cost of complying with the stormwater management plan. This
financial guarantee shall be in a form acceptable to the city and may be
incorporated into the financial guarantee provided for grading activities and/
or the financial guarantee provided for street and utility activities.
      (7)   Fees. All applications for stormwater management plan and
maintenance agreement approval shall be accompanied by a processing and
approval fee as set by the most recent edition of the city's adopted Fee
Schedule.
   (C)   Stormwater management plan approval and implementation standards.
      (1)   Compliance with standards. No stormwater management plan which
fails to meet the standards contained in this section shall be approved by the
City Council.
      (2)   All stormwater management plans must be submitted to the City
Engineer prior to the start of construction activity. At a minimum all
applicants shall meet the criteria set forth below and observe the standards
established in NPDES Construction Stormwater General Permit requirements.
      (3)   The city adopts the MPCA's Minnesota Stormwater Manual as its
stormwater runoff design standards.
      (4)   All stormwater management plans must address erosion and sediment
control requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   Stormwater management requirements for permanent facilities.
         (a)   An applicant shall install or construct, on or for the proposed
land disturbing or development activity, all stormwater management facilities
necessary to meet the criteria of the NPDES Construction Stormwater General
Permit. No private stormwater facilities will be approved by the city unless a
maintenance agreement and maintenance plan are provided that defines who will
conduct the maintenance, the type of maintenance and intervals of the
maintenance to be performed. In the alternative, or in partial fulfillment of
this requirement and upon approval of the Engineering Department, an applicant
may make an in-kind or monetary contribution to the development and maintenance
of regional stormwater management facilities designed to serve multiple land
disturbing and development activities undertaken by one or more persons,
including the applicant.
         (b)   Proposed stormwater management plans shall incorporate volume
control, water quality control, and rate control as the basis for stormwater
management in the proposed development plan on sites without restrictions. All
proposed projects shall be in conformance with the most current requirements of
the MPCA's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4) Permit and the Shingle
Creek and West Mississippi Watershed Management Commissions, as applicable.
            1.   Volume control.
               a.   New development projects less than one acre in size.
                  i.   The applicant shall provide a detailed plan and/or
narrative describing the BMPs that will be incorporated in the development to
reduce runoff volume and improve water quality.
                  ii.   There shall be no net increase from pre-project
conditions (on an annual average basis) of:
                     1)   Stormwater discharge volume, unless precluded by the
stormwater management limitations as defined by the MPCA's MS4 Permit.
                     2)   Stormwater discharges of total suspended solids
(TSS).
                     3)   Stormwater discharges of total phosphorus (TP).
               b.   New development. For new, nonlinear developments,
stormwater runoff volume abstraction via infiltration will be controlled and
the post-construction runoff volume shall be retained on site for 1.0 inches of
runoff from all impervious surfaces on the site that result in a net increase
of impervious of one acre or greater. If filtration of the water quality volume
is deemed necessary through alternative compliance sequencing, the required
stormwater runoff volume shall be multiplied by 1.82 (i.e. 55% filtration
credit) and the filtration BMP shall provide this storage volume below the
invert of the low overflow outlet of the BMP (perforated drain pipes for
filtration will not be considered the low overflow outlet).
               c.   Redevelopment. For redevelopment projects, stormwater
runoff volume abstraction via infiltration will be controlled and the post-
construction runoff volume shall be retained on site for 1.0 inches of runoff
from the new impervious surfaces created by the project. If filtration of the
water quality volume is deemed necessary through alternative compliance
sequencing, the required stormwater runoff volume shall be multiplied by 1.82
(i.e. 55% filtration credit) and the filtration BMP shall provide this storage
volume below the invert of the low overflow outlet of the BMP (perforated drain
pipes for filtration will not be considered the low overflow outlet). There
shall be a net reduction from pre-project conditions (on an annual average
basis) of:
                  i.   Stormwater discharge volume, unless precluded by the
stormwater management limitations as defined by the MPCA's MS4 permit.
                  ii.   Stormwater discharges of TSS.
                  iii.   Stormwater discharges of TP.
               d.   Linear projects. For linear projects, the water quality
volume must be calculated as the larger of one inch times the new impervious
surface or one-half inch times the sum of the new and the fully reconstructed
impervious surface. Where the entire water quality volume cannot be treated
within the existing right-of-way, a reasonable attempt to obtain additional
right-of-way, easement, or other permission to treat the stormwater during the
project planning process must be made. Volume reduction practices must be
considered first. Volume reduction practices are not required if the practices
cannot be provided cost effectively if additional right-of-way, easements, or
other permission cannot be obtained, owners of construction activity must
maximize the treatment of the water quality volume prior to discharge from the
MS4.
            2.   Water quality control. The water quality requirement is met if
the project meets the volume control requirement outlined in §
153.07(C)(5)(b)1.
               a.   Where infiltration is not advisable or infeasible due to
site conditions, biofiltration must be provided for that part of the
abstraction volume that is not abstracted by other BMPs. Where biofiltration is
infeasible, at a minimum filtration through a medium that incorporates organic
material, iron fillings, or other material to reduce soluble phosphorus must be
provided.
               b.   There shall be no net increase in total phosphorus (TP) or
total suspended solids (TSS) from pre-development land cover to post-
development land cover. Pre-development land cover is defined as the
predominant land cover over the previous ten years.
                  i.   Full abstraction of 1.1 inches of runoff from all
impervious surfaces will satisfy the water quality requirement.
                  ii.   If it is not feasible to achieve the full 1.1-inch
abstraction requirement, a combination of BMPs may be used to achieve the no-
net-increase requirement using a water quality calculation method as outlined
in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual.
                  iii.   If permanent sedimentation and water quality ponds are
used, they shall be designed to the standards set forth in the Minnesota
Stormwater Manual.
                  iv.   Runoff may be directed to a downstream facility within
the same hydrologic subwatershed that has sufficient capacity to provide the
required treatment. This means that no treatment may be required for an
individual development provided there is a regional facility designed and
constructed to accommodate the flow from this property
            3.   Rate control. Rate control measures are required on new
development and redevelopment projects to meet this chapter's design criteria,
the Minnesota Stormwater Manual and Shingle Creek and West Mississippi River
Watershed Management Commissions requirements.
         (c)   The applicant shall reduce the need for stormwater treatment
practices by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover such as
wetlands, ponds, natural swales and depressions as they exist before
development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of
water without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or pond.
         (d)   The following stormwater management practices shall be
investigated by the applicant in developing a stormwater management plan in the
following descending order of preference, and the results of that investigation
shall be provided to the city in written form as a part of the application:
            1.   Natural infiltration of precipitation on-site.
            2.   Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions.
            3.   Green infrastructure by use of rain gardens, bioswales,
constructed wetlands, and other constructed infiltration practices.
            4.   Stormwater retention facilities.
            5.   Stormwater detention facilities.
         (e)   A combination of stormwater treatment practices may be used to
achieve the applicable minimum control requirements specified in the subsection
above. Justification shall be provided by the applicant for the method
selected.
         (f)   Pond design standards. Stormwater detention facilities
constructed in the city shall be designed according to standards established by
the Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance Department, and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following design factors:
            1.   A permanent pool ("dead storage") volume below the principal
spillway (normal outlet) which shall be greater than or equal to the runoff
from a 2.5-inch, 24-hour storm over the entire contributing drainage area
assuming full development.
            2.   A permanent pool average depth (basin volume/basin area) of
four to ten feet.
            3.   An emergency overflow (emergency outlet) adequate to control
the 100-year frequency critical duration rainfall event.
            4.   Basin side slopes below the 100-year high water level should
be no steeper than 4:1, and preferably flatter. A basin shelf with a minimum
width of ten feet and one foot deep below the normal water level is recommended
to enhance wildlife habitat, reduce potential safety hazards, and improve
access for long-term maintenance.
            5.   To prevent short-circuiting, the distance between major inlets
and the normal outlet shall be maximized.
            6.   A flood pool ("live storage") volume above the principal
outlet spillway shall be adequate so that the peak discharge rate from the 1-,
10- and 100-year frequency critical duration storm is not greater than the peak
discharge for a similar storm and predevelopment watershed conditions.
            7.   Effective energy dissipation devices which reduce outlet
velocities to four feet per second or less shall consist of riprap, stilling
pools or other such measures to prevent erosion at all storm water outfalls
into the basin and at the detention basin outlet.
            8.   Consideration for aesthetics and wildlife habitat should be
included in the design of the pond.
            9.   A skimming device must be provided to deter floatable
pollutants from discharging out of pond.
            10.   Pond NWL elevations shall be established above the OHW of
adjacent MnDNR water bodies, except where topography of the site, floodplain
mitigation activities, or other design considerations are determined to be
unfavorable for these conditions to occur. This determination shall be
performed by an engineer, provided by the applicant, and approved by the
Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance Department.
            11.   All constructed ponds shall have a maintenance access bench
sufficient to provide access to all inlets and outlets. The maintenance bench
shall be located within a designated outlot or within a permanent easement. The
maintenance bench shall extend from the outlet elevation to one foot above the
outlet elevation and its cross slope shall be no steeper than 10:1. The
maintenance bench shall connect to the maintenance access.
            12.   All constructed ponds shall be provided a maintenance access
from an adjacent roadway. The maintenance access shall be provided in the form
of an easement no narrower than 20 feet. The maintenance access shall have a
longitudinal slope no steeper than 6:1 and minimal cross slope. Maintenance
access routes, due to their extra width, also serve well as emergency overflow
(EOF) routes.
         (g)   Infiltration requirements. BMPs will be required to the maximum
extent practical as determined by the Engineering Division of the Operations
and Maintenance Department or its designee.
            1.   Maximum extent practical shall be the infiltration of runoff
from the 100-year, 24-hour rainfall event within 48 hours. The maximum extent
practical may be less than this if the Engineering Division of the Operations
and Maintenance Department determines that one or more of the following
conditions apply:
               (a)   Infiltration characteristics of soils on site are not
favorable for infiltration of stormwater.
               (b)   The site's drainage course is to regional infiltration or
detention facilities controlled by the city that reduce runoff volumes.
               (c)   When the site's impervious areas are not increased due to
development.
               (d)   Other site conditions that make infiltration of stormwater
impractical on the site as determined by the Engineering Division of the
Operations and Maintenance Department.
               (e)   If one or more of these conditions apply, the Engineering
Division of the Public Works Department shall quantify infiltration that will
be deemed as the maximum extent practical for the site.
            2.   Infiltration will be prohibited where the infiltration BMP
will be constructed in any of the following areas:
               a.   Where documented past, present, or anticipated future land
uses have resulted in or may result in contamination coming in contact with
stormwater runoff.
               b.   With less than three feet of separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally saturated
soils or the top of bedrock.
               c.   Where vehicle fueling and maintenance occur.
               d.   Where industrial facilities are not authorized to
infiltrate industrial stormwater under and NPDES/SDS Industrial Stormwater
Permit issued by the MPCA.
            3.   Infiltration will be restricted and subject to additional city
review where the infiltration BMP will be constructed in any of the following
areas:
               a.   Within 1,000 feet up-gradient, or 100 feet down-gradient of
active karst features.
               b.   Where drinking water supply management areas are present,
as defined by Minn. Rules 4720.51000, subp.13, unless precluded by a local unit
of government with an MS4 permit.
               c.   Soils are predominately Hydrologic Soil Group D (clay)
soils.
               d.   Soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches per hour
unless soils are amended to slow the infiltration rate below 8.3 inches per
hour.
            4.   Stormwater runoff shall be treated in a stormwater pond or by
other means prior to entering an infiltration facility.
            5.   The minimum infiltration requirements for any region of the
city will be the requirements of the Shingle Creek and West Mississippi River
Watershed Management Commissions' policies that govern that region. Shingle
Creek and West Mississippi River Watershed Management Commissions' standards
may be met through the use of regional or downstream systems prior to discharge
of runoff to waters of the state.
            6.   Infiltration systems must not be excavated to final grade
until the contributing drainage area has been constructed and fully stabilized.
When the infiltration feature is excavated to final grade, rigorous erosion
prevention and sediment control BMPs must be implemented to keep sediment and
runoff completely away from the infiltration area.
            7.   To prevent clogging of the infiltration system, a pretreatment
device must be used to settle particles before the stormwater discharges into
the infiltrations system.
            8.   Per the stormwater management requirements for permanent
facilities section of this chapter, the infiltration system must provide a
water quality volume (calculated as an instantaneous volume) of one inch of
runoff (or one inch minus the volume of stormwater treated by another system on
the site) from the new impervious surfaces created by the project.
            9.   The applicant must ensure filtration systems with less than
three feet of separation from seasonally saturated soils or from bedrock are
constructed with an impermeable liner.
            10.   A minimum maintenance access of 12 feet is required.
         (h)   Mitigation.
            1.   Where construction projects cannot meet the TSS and/or TP
reduction requirements for new or development projects on the site of original
construction, all methods must be exhausted prior to considering alternative
locations where TSS and TP treatment standards can be achieved. If the City has
determined that all methods have been exhausted, the permittee will be required
to identify alternative locations where TSS and TP treatment standards can be
achieved. Mitigation projects will be chosen in the following order of
preference:
               a.   Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water
that receives runoff from the original construction activity.
               b.   Locations within the same MnDNR catchment area as the
original construction activity.
               c.   Locations in the next adjacent MnDNR catchment area up-
stream.
               d.   Locations anywhere within the City of Brooklyn Park.
            2.   In addition, mitigation projects must also meet the following
criteria:
               a.   Mitigation projects shall involve the establishment new
structural stormwater BMPs or the retrofit of existing structural stormwater
BMPs, or the use of a properly designed regional structural stormwater BMP.
               b.   Previously required routine maintenance of structural
stormwater BMPs cannot be considered mitigation.
               c.   Mitigation projects must be finished within 24 months after
the original construction activity begins.
               d.   A maintenance agreement specifying the responsible party
for long-term maintenance shall be identified.
         (i)   Stormwater and infiltration facilities must be located at least
50 feet away from the top of bluff.
         (j)   Watershed management plans/groundwater management plans.
Stormwater management plans shall be consistent with the Shingle Creek and West
Mississippi River Watershed Management Commissions requirements and groundwater
management plans prepared in accordance with Minnesota Board of Water and Soil
Resources in accordance with state law.
         (k)   Easement. If the stormwater management plan involves direction
of some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any necessary easements or
other property interests to permit the flow of water across the property.
         (l)   Low floor/building opening elevations.
            1.   Any new development or redevelopment shall maintain a minimum
building opening elevation of at least three feet above the anticipated 100-
year high water elevation as a standard practice. However, if the applicant
demonstrates that this requirement would be a hardship, the standard may be
reduced to two feet if all of the following can be demonstrated:
               a.   That, within the two-foot freeboard area, stormwater
storage is available which is equal to or exceeds 50% of the storm water
storage currently available in the basin below the 100-year elevation.
               b.   That a 25% obstruction of the basin outlet over a 24-hour
period would not result in more than one foot of additional bounce in the
basin.
               c.   That an adequate overflow route from the basin is available
that will provide one foot of freeboard for the proposed low building opening.
            2.   Basement floor elevations must be set to an elevation that
meets all of the following criteria:
               a.   The lowest floor elevation must be at least four feet above
the currently observed groundwater elevations in the area.
               b.   The lowest floor elevation must be at least two feet above
the elevation of any known historic high groundwater elevations for the area.
Information on historic high groundwater elevations can be derived from any
reasonable sources including piezometer data, soil boring data, percolation
testing logs, etc.
               c.   The lowest floor elevation must be at least two feet above
the 100-year high surface water elevation for the area unless it can be
demonstrated that this standard creates a hardship. If the two-foot standard is
determined by the City Council to constitute a hardship, the standard shall be
at least one foot above the highest anticipated groundwater elevation resulting
from a 100-year critical duration rainfall event. The impact of high surface
water elevations on groundwater elevations in the vicinity of the structure
should take into consideration the site's distance from the floodplain area,
the soils, the normal water elevation of surface depressions in the area, the
static groundwater table and historic water elevations in the area. This
information shall be provided by a registered engineer or soil scientist.
         (m)   Impervious surface coverage of each lot must not exceed the
impervious surface coverage allowed under the Zoning Ordinance.
         (n)   Storm sewers shall be designed to accommodate discharge rates
associated with a 10-year, 24-hour rainfall event.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 153.08 EROSION CONTROL PLAN.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   Application. An erosion control plan shall be submitted to the
Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance Department when required
by this chapter along with a grading permit application. All applications for a
grading permit shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee as set by
the city's Fee Schedule.
      (2)   Required plan submittals. The erosion control plan shall contain
all of the following with respect to conditions existing on site during
construction and after final structures and improvements have been completed.
         (a)   A description of and specifications for sediment retention and
settling devices.
         (b)   A description of, specifications for, and detail plates for
surface runoff and erosion control devices.
         (c)   A description of vegetative measures.
         (d)   A detailed timetable for restoring all disturbed areas.
         (e)   A graphic representation of the location of all specified
erosion and sediment control devices.
         (f)   An implementation schedule for installing and subsequently
removing devices described above.
         (g)   A maintenance schedule for all sediment and erosion control
devices specified.
         (h)   An estimate of the costs to implement all final and temporary
erosion and sediment control measures.
         (i)   An Information sheet on the parties responsible for constructing
and maintaining the erosion control measures as shown on the erosion control
plan. The information sheet should contain the phone numbers and addresses of
at least two persons and indicate how they can be contacted at all times (days,
nights, weekends, etc.) regarding repairing and maintaining the erosion control
measures.
         (j)   The erosion control plan must contain details to specify which
erosion and sediment control facilities are permanent and which are temporary.
         (k)   If required, a NPDES Construction Stormwater General Permit must
be obtained from the MPCA prior to commencing construction activities. The
associated stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) should be included in
the erosion control plan and approved by the Engineering Division of the
Operations and Maintenance Department prior to construction. A copy of the
NPDES Construction Stormwater General Permit must be provided to the city prior
to construction.
      (3)   Application review and inspection fees.
         (a)   The City of Brooklyn Park shall charge an application review fee
for the review of the building permit application and the erosion control plan.
As part of this review, the city will review the permittee's as-built survey
submitted after the completion of grading activities to ensure that it conforms
to the overall erosion control plan for the area. The application fee shall be
set by the city's Fee Schedule.
         (b)   An inspection fee will be charged for any inspections of the
site by the city that are needed to review corrective erosion control work or
to follow up on previously incomplete work. This inspection fee will be
deducted from the financial security. The amount will be set by the city's Fee
Schedule. If this fee is not paid within 45 days, the fee may be taken from the
financial security provided by the applicant.
   (B)   Implementation of erosion control plan. Prior to the start of any
earthwork activities, the permittee must have in place and functional erosion
and sediment controls as outlined on the approved erosion control plan and/or
SWPPP. Additional erosion control measures may be required as directed by the
Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance Department or its
designee.
      (1)   No earthmoving activities shall commence until the erosion controls
have been field inspected and approved by the Engineering Division of the
Operations and Maintenance Department.
      (2)   At a minimum, the permittee shall meet the specifications set forth
below and observe the standards established in the NPDES Construction
Stormwater General Permit requirements:
         (a)   Soil stabilization. Soil stabilization shall be completed in a
time period as specified by the NPDES Construction Stormwater General Permit
and the city's general specifications and standards. The City of Brooklyn Park
may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative option employed.
         (b)   Seeding. Seeding shall be in accordance with seeding
specifications. All seeded areas shall be fertilized, mulched, and disc
anchored as necessary for seed retention.
         (c)   Soil stockpiles. Soil stockpiles which shall be inactive for a
period of 14 or more days must be stabilized or covered at the end of each
workday. Stockpiles shall include perimeter sediment controls and must not be
placed in natural buffers or surface waters, including stormwater conveyance
systems.
         (d)   90% coverage. The entire site must be stabilized at a 90%
coverage, using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require
germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction season.
         (e)   Site development sediment controls. Site development sediment
controls practices shall include those identified in the city's general
specifications including, but not limited to:
            1.   Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks.
            2.   Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated
buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls.
            3.   Perimeter control including machine sliced silt fence or other
city approved BMP, which shall be in place before, during and after grading of
the site. Fencing shall be removed only after final stabilization.
            4.   Designated as a temporary construction staging area.
         (f)   Temporary sediment basins. For sites that have more than ten
acres of disturbed soil that drains to a common location (or, five or more
acres for special or impaired waters), one or more temporary sediment basins
shall be constructed. Use of temporary basins is encouraged when construction
projects will impact steep slopes or when highly erodible soils are present.
The basin shall provide treatment to the runoff before it leaves the
construction site or enters surface waters. The temporary sediment basins must
be designed and constructed as follows:
            1.   Provide live storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a
two-year, 24-hour storm from each acre drained to the basin. All basins shall
provide at least 1,800 cubic feet of live storage from each acre drained or
more.
            2.   For basins where the calculation in §
153.08(B)(2)(f)1 has not been performed, a temporary sediment basin providing
3,600 cubic feet of live storage from each acre drained to the basin shall be
provided for the entire drainage area of the temporary basin.
            3.   The outlet structure must be designed to withdraw water from
the surface in order to minimize the discharge of pollutants.
            4.   The basin outlet shall be designed to prevent short-circuiting
and the discharge of floating debris.
            5.   Ensure the basin can be completely drawn down to conduct
maintenance activities.
            6.   Include energy dissipation on the outlet of the basin and a
stabilized emergency overflow to prevent failure of pond integrity.
            7.   Be located outside of surface waters or any buffer zone, and
be designed to avoid draining water from wetlands unless appropriate approval
from the USACE and the MnDNR is obtained.
            8.   If installation of a temporary sediment basin is infeasible
equivalent sediment controls such as smaller sediment basins, and/or sediment
traps, silt fences, vegetative buffer strips, or any appropriate combination of
measures are required for all down-slope boundaries of the construction area
and for side-slope boundaries where appropriate. Determination of infeasibility
shall be documented in the erosion and sediment control plan.
         (g)   Individual construction site sediment controls. Individual
construction site sediment controls shall include:
            1.   Rock construction entrance (driveway).
            2.   Perimeter controls including silt fence in-place before,
during and after grading of the site. Fencing shall be removed only after
proper turf establishment.
         (h)   Waterway and watercourse protection. Waterway and watercourse
protection requirements shall include stabilization of the watercourse channel
before, during and after any in-channel work consistent with the city's general
specifications.
            1.   A temporary stream crossing must be installed and approved by
the local government unit and regulating agency if a wet watercourse will be
crossed regularly during construction.
            2.   The watercourse channel shall be stabilized before, during,
and within 24 hours after any in-channel work.
            3.   No in-water work shall be allowed in public waters during the
MnDNR's work exclusion dates.
            4.   Prior to placement of any equipment into any waters, all
equipment must be free of aquatic invasive species.
            5.   All on-site stormwater conveyance channels designed according
to the criteria outlined in this document. Stabilization adequate to prevent
erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels is required.
         (i)   Site dewatering. Site dewatering shall be conducted pursuant to
the NPDES Construction Stormwater General Permit. Water pumped from the site
shall be treated by temporary sediment basins, grit chambers, sand filters, or
other controls as appropriate to ensure adequate treatment is obtained and that
nuisance conditions will not result from the discharge. Discharges from the
site shall not be released in a manner that causes erosion, scour,
sedimentation or flooding of the site to receiving channels or wetlands.
         (j)   Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building
materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic
materials or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed of off-site and
not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer
system.
            1.   Solid waste. All unused building materials and waste
(including, but not limited to: collected sediment, asphalt and concrete
millings, floating debris, paper, plastic, fabric, etc.) must be disposed of
accordingly and shall comply with disposal requirements set forth by the MPCA.
            2.   Hazardous/toxic waste. Paint, gasoline, oil and any hazardous
materials must be properly stored, including secondary containment, to prevent
spills, leaks or other discharges. Access to the storage areas must be
restricted to prevent vandalism. Storage and disposal of hazardous or toxic
substance must be in compliance with the requirements set forth by the MPCA.
            3.   Liquid waste. All other non-stormwater discharges (including,
but not limited to, concrete truck washout, vehicle washing or maintenance
spills) produced during the construction activity shall not be discharged to
any surface waters.
            4.   External washing of equipment and vehicles. All external
washing activities shall be limited to a designated area of the site. All
runoff must be contained and wastes from external washing activities must be
disposed of properly. No engine degreasing shall be allowed on the site.
            5.   Wastes generated by concrete and other washout operations. All
liquid and solid wastes generated by any concrete or other washout operations
must be contained in a leak proof facility or impermeable liner. Concrete waste
must not come into contact with the ground. Concrete waste must be disposed of
properly and in compliance with applicable MPCA regulations.
         (k)   Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be
protected during construction until all sources with potential for discharging
to the inlet have been stabilized. Inlet protection measures must meet the
city's standards and specifications.
         (l)   Energy dissipation. Pipe outlets must have temporary or
permanent energy dissipation within 24 hours of connection to a surface water.
         (m)   Tracking. Vehicle tracking BMPs (including, but not limited to:
rock pads, mud mats, slash mulch, concrete or steel wash racks, or similar
systems) must be installed to minimize track out of sediment from the
construction site. If vehicle tracking BMPs are not actively preventing
sediment from being tracked into the street, the applicant must utilize street
sweeping to contain sediment.
         (n)   Final stabilization. Final stabilization is not complete until
the following criteria are met:
            1.   All land disturbing activities must be finished and all soils
shall be stabilized by a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of
70% or greater of its expected final growth density over the entire pervious
surface area, or other equivalent means necessary to prevent soil failure under
erosive conditions.
            2.   The permanent stormwater management system is constructed,
meets all of the required design parameters and is operating as designed.
            3.   All temporary synthetic and structural erosion prevention and
sediment control BMPs (such as silt fence) have been removed. BMPs designed to
decompose on site may be left in place.
            4.   For residential construction only, individual lots are
considered finally stabilized if the structure(s) are finished and temporary
erosion protection and down gradient perimeter control has been completed and
the residence has been sold to the homeowner.
            5.   For construction projects on agricultural land the disturbed
land has been returned to its preconstruction agricultural use.
      (3)   The permittee must maintain the erosion and sediment control
measures on the site to the satisfaction of the City Engineer throughout the
entire construction process. If erosion and sediment control is not being
maintained to the City Engineer's satisfaction, the city may perform remedial
work on the site as outlined in this section.
      (4)   All erosion control systems must be maintained by the permittee in
an acceptable condition until turf is established or structural surfaces are
constructed to protect the soil from erosion.
   (C)   Inspection of erosion control plan. The city will make periodic
inspections of the site to ensure compliance with the erosion control plan. The
permittee or his/her agent shall ensure that a trained person will regularly
inspect the construction site at least once every seven days until final
stabilization and within 24 hours of a rainfall event of one-half inch or
greater in a 24-hour period. All inspection and maintenance activities
conducted on the site during construction must be recorded in writing and
retained within the erosion control plan. Records of each inspection and
maintenance activity shall include the following:
      (1)   Date and time of inspection.
      (2)   Name of person(s) conducting the inspection.
      (3)   Findings of inspections, including recommendations for corrective
actions.
      (4)   Corrective actions taken, including the dates, times and the name
of the party completing the corrective action.
      (5)   Date and the amount of rainfall events that are greater than one-
half inch in a 24- hour period.
      (6)   Documentation of any changes made to the erosion and sediment
control plan.
   (D)   Site and BMP maintenance. Prior to any construction, the developer
shall provide the City Engineer with a schedule for erosion and sediment
control inspection and maintenance, including schedules for street cleaning,
and street sweeping. All site and BMP maintenance activities must comply with
the requirements of the NPDES Construction Stormwater General Permit. The
applicant shall investigate and comply with the following BMP maintenance
requirements:
      (1)   Perimeter control. All perimeter controls must be repaired,
replaced or supplemented when they become nonfunctional or the sediment reaches
one-half of the height of the fence. Repairs shall be made by the end of the
next business day after discovery or as soon as field conditions allow access.
      (2)   Temporary sediment basins. Temporary sedimentation basins must be
drained and the sediment must be removed when the depth of the sediment
collected in the basin reaches one half the storage volume. Drainage and
removal must be completed within 72 hours of discovery or as soon as field
conditions allow access.
      (3)   Surface waters and conveyance systems. Surface water, including
drainage ditches and conveyance systems, must be inspected for visible signs of
sediment being deposited by erosion. The applicant must remove all sediment
deposited in surface waters, including drainage ways, catch basins, and other
drainage systems and must restabilize the areas of exposed soil as a result of
sediment removal. The removal and stabilization must take place within seven
days of discovery unless legal, regulatory or physical access constraints
prevent remediation. In the event of an access constraint, the applicant shall
use all reasonable efforts to obtain access. If access is precluded, removal
and stabilization must take place within seven calendar days of obtaining
access. The applicant is responsible for contacting all local, regional, state
and federal authorities and obtaining any required permits prior to conducting
any work.
      (4)   Streets and impervious surfaces. Where vehicle traffic leaves any
part of the site, the exit locations must be inspected for visible signs of
off-site sediment tracking onto impervious surfaces. Tracked sediment must be
removed from all off-site impervious surfaces as soon as possible or within 24
hours of discovery.
      (5)   General maintenance. The applicant shall be responsible for the
operation and maintenance of temporary and permanent water quality management
BMPs, as well as erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs for the duration
of the construction work on the site. The applicant remains responsible until
another party has assumed control over all areas of the site that have not
established final stabilization and a notice of termination (NOT) has been
submitted to the MPCA.
      (6)   Infiltration areas. All infiltration areas must be inspected to
ensure that no sediment from ongoing construction activities is reaching the
infiltration area and these areas are protected from compaction caused by
construction equipment driving across the infiltration area.
   (E)   Notification of failure of erosion control plan. The city shall notify
the permittee of the failure of the erosion control measures that have been
constructed. The notification will be by phone or written correspondence to the
parties listed on the information sheet required by this section. The city, at
its discretion, may begin remedial work within 48 hours after notification has
been provided.
   (F)   Erosion off-site. If erosion breaches the perimeter of the site, the
permittee shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan, obtain a
right-of-entry from the adjoining property owner, and implement the cleanup and
restoration plan within 48 hours of obtaining the adjoining property owner's
permission. In no case, unless written approval is received from the
Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance Department, may more
than seven calendar days pass without any corrective action being taken. If at
the discretion of the city, the permittee does not repair the damage caused by
the erosion, the city may perform the remedial work required, after notice is
provided to the permittee.
   (G)   Erosion into streets, wetlands, or other surface waters. If eroded
soils enter, or entrance appears imminent into streets, wetlands, or other
surface waters, cleanup and repair shall be immediate. The permittee shall
provide all traffic control and flagging required to protect the public during
the cleanup operations. If at the discretion of the city, the permittee does
not repair the erosion and sedimentation, the city may perform the remedial
work required, after notice is provided to the permittee.
   (H)   Failure to complete corrective work. When a permittee fails to conform
to any provision of this section within the time stipulated, the city may take
the following actions:
      (1)   Issue a notice of violation. When the city determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
         (a)   The name and address of the owner or applicant.
         (b)   The address when available or a description of the land upon
which the violation is occurring.
         (c)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
         (d)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for
the completion of such remedial action.
         (e)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed.
         (f)   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed
to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of services of
the notice of violation. Service may be accomplished by mail or by personal
delivery of the notice.
      (2)   Withhold the scheduling of inspections.
      (3)   Withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
      (4)   Issue a stop work order.
      (5)   Direct the correction of the deficiency by city forces or separate
contract. The issuance of an erosion control permit constitutes a right-of-
entry for the city or its contractor to enter upon the construction site for
the purpose of correcting deficiencies with respect to erosion and sediment
control. All costs incurred by the city in correcting erosion and sediment
control deficiencies, including administrative expenses, shall be reimbursed by
the permittee. If payment is not made within 30 days after an invoice is
issued, the city may draw from the financial security. If the financial
security is of an insufficient amount, the city may assess the remaining amount
against the property. As a condition of the permit, the owner shall waive
notice of any assessment hearing to be conducted by the city, concur that the
benefit to the property exceeds the amount of the proposed assessment, and
waive all rights by virtue of M.S. § 429.081 to challenge the amount or
validity of assessment.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17; Am. Ord. 2024-1304, passed 7-29-24)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   A person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties imposed by
Minnesota Statutes for misdemeanor offenses.
(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   FRANCHISES
         
II.   STREET NAME CHANGES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.    Date Passed Description
1982-383(A) 3-22-82     Granting a franchise to Northern Cablevision Northwest
                        Inc.
1983-430(A) - -         Granting a franchise to Minnegasco.
1987-575(A) - -         Granting a franchise to Northern States Power.
2003-1006   10-27-03    Granting a franchise to Centerpoint Energy Minnegasco.
                        Granting a franchise to Northern States Power Company
2007-1082   12-3-07     for an electric distribution system and transmission
                        lines.
                        Implementing electric service franchise fee on Northern
2015-1200   11-23-15    States Power Company for providing electric service
                        within the city.
2015-1201   11-23-15    Requiring a gas franchise fee from Centerpoint Energy
                        for providing gas service within the city.
                        Granting a franchise to CenterPoint Energy Resources
2025-1308   2-10-25     Corp. for transportation, distribution, manufacture and
                        sale of gas energy within the city.
                       
 
TABLE II: STREET NAME CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
1977- 1-10-  West 82nd Avenue from approximately Hampshire Avenue North to Zane Avenue
233   77     shall be renamed Candlewood Drive.
(A)
1977- 1-10-
233   77     82nd Court shall be renamed Candlewood Court.
(A)
1977- 1-10-  78th Avenue from Lee Avenue North to Kyle Avenue North shall be renamed
233   77     80th Avenue North.
(A)
1977- 1-10-  75th Court from Newton Avenue westerly to end of cul-de-sac shall be
233   77     renamed 76th Court.
(A)
1977-        74th Avenue from Newton Avenue easterly to Morgan Avenue, and Morgan Avenue
233   1-10-  northeasterly to 75th Avenue, and 75th Avenue from where it joins Morgan
(A)   77     Avenue easterly to the east edge of Holsten's Meadowwood Subdivision shall
             all be renamed Meadowwood Drive.
             In Men Riv Riverdale 2nd Addition 75th Circle shall be renamed 75th Court;
1977- 1-10-  Morgan Avenue North from Meadowwood Drive north to the end of the cul-de-
233   77     sac shall be renamed North Meadowwood Court; and 74th Circle running
(A)          easterly from Meadowwood Drive to the end of the cul-de-sac shall be
             renamed South Meadowwood Court.
1977- 1-10-  In Stonybrook 3rd Addition Florida Circle both north and south of
233   77     Candlewood Drive shall be renamed Florida Court and Douglas Circle both
(A)          north and south of Candlewood Drive shall be renamed Douglas Court.
1977- 1-10-  In the Parkland West Subdivision 81st Lane from Wyoming easterly to 82nd
233   77     Avenue shall be renamed 81st Avenue North.
(A)
1979- 2-26-  Meadow Brook Drive between Boone Avenue and Cavell Avenue shall be renamed
283   79     North Brook Avenue.
(A)
1979- 2-26-  Meadow Brook Circle between North Brook Avenue (as set forth above) and
283   79     Cavell Avenue shall be renamed North Brook Circle.
(A)
1979- 2-26-  Bass Creek Drive from Boone Avenue to the westerly Cavell Avenue shall be
283   79     renamed Bass Creek Avenue.
(A)
1980- 10-14- Pennsylvania Avenue from the junction of Trunk Highway 52; north to the
337   80     junction of C.S.A.H. 30 shall be renamed West Broadway.
(A)
1980- 10-27- Utah Avenue North from 83rd Avenue North 135 feet north to be renamed 83rd
342   80     Court.
(A)
1980- 10-27- 74½ Avenue North from County Road 103 (commonly known as West Broadway) to
342   80     75th Avenue North be changed to 74th Way.
(A)
1980- 12-15- 69th Avenue from Boone Avenue westerly to C.S.A.H #18 shall be renamed
348   80     Erickson Court.
(A)
1981- 11-9-
369   81     73½ Avenue North from Aldrich Avenue North 640 feet east be renamed 73 Way.
(A)
1981- 11-9-  70th Avenue from Boone Avenue North 930 feet to the west be renamed
369   81     Northland Drive.
(A)
1981- 11-9-  Boone Circle and Boone Court be renamed Northland Circle and Northland
369   81     Court, located on the east side of Boone Avenue North at the 70th Avenue
(A)          alignment.
1982- 1-25-
377   82     63½ Avenue from Zane Avenue west 400 feet be renamed Zane Court.
(A)
1982- 1-25-  77th Avenue North from Zane Avenue North westerly to C.S.A.H. 18 shall be
378   82     renamed Brooklyn Boulevard.
(A)
1984- 5-29-  South Park Lane from Boone Avenue North to Mount Curve Boulevard shall be
452   84     renamed Mount Curve Boulevard.
(A)
1984- 5-29-  Aldrich Court, starting at the intersection of Meadowwood Drive and Aldrich
452   84     Avenue North easterly approximately 400 feet shall be named Meadowwood
(A)          Drive.
1984-        Queen Avenue, beginning at Brookdale Drive south approximately 410 feet be
454   6-4-84 renamed Brookdale Court.
(A)
1985- 9-23-  Former CSAH 18 from 81st Avenue to the south city limits of Osseo and the
493   85     current T.H. 169 from the north city limits of Osseo to 109th Avenue be
(A)          named Jefferson Highway.
1986- 9-22-  Formerly 80½ Avenue North from Yates Avenue North to Toledo Avenue North
543   86     shall be renamed 81st Avenue.
(A)
1986- 9-22-  Formerly Kentucky Avenue (cul-de-sac directly south of 85th Avenue North)
543   86     shall be renamed Kentucky
(A)
             Former France Avenue North between 101st and 103rd Avenues North shall be
             renamed Fallgold Parkway North; former Lakeside Drive North shall be
             renamed Welcome Avenue North; part of former Oxbow Commons Boulevard
2003- 9-22-  running east-west east of Zane Avenue shall be renamed 100th Avenue North;
1003  03     part of former Oxbow Commons Boulevard running north-south north of 97th
             Avenue shall be renamed Xenia Avenue North; former Oxbow Lake Place shall
             be renamed 99th Avenue North; and former Oxbow Way North shall be renamed
             Xenia Avenue North.
2003- 11-17- Former 105th Avenue North between Noble Parkway and Winnetka Avenue shall
1009  03     be renamed Oxbow Creek Drive.
             That roadway commonly referred to as 97th Avenue North between Noble
             Parkway and West Broadway with future extension to Highway 169, platted as
2006- 8-7-06 97th Avenue in the plats of Deerhaven Estates, Noble Office Park, Woodland
1062         Elementary Addition, Saint Gerards Addition, Saint Gerards Manor, Oxbow
             Commons, Target Park 2000, and platted as Liberty Parkway in the plats of
             Liberty Oaks and Park Place Promenade shall be renamed Oak Grove Parkway.
2009-        That roadway commonly referred to as Brookdale Court North with an address
1105  9-8-09 range of 2701 to 2745 serving the plat of Parkhaven Villas between Xerxes
             Avenue and Newton Avenue North shall be renamed Parkhaven Court North.
APPENDIX: FEE RESOLUTION
RESOLUTION 2025-25
CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK
COUNTY OF HENNEPIN
STATE OF MINNESOTA
 
A RESOLUTION AMENDING FEE RESOLUTION NO. 2000-202 ADOPTING A SCHEDULE OF FEES
AND CHARGES FOR
VARIOUS SERVICES, LICENSES AND PERMITS FOR THE CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK, MINNESOTA
Now Therefore, the City Council of the City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota,
resolves:
TABLE OF CONTENTS BY TITLE OF TABLE
Title of Table Reference
Title of Table                          Reference
Abatement Fees                          —
Administrative Fee Schedule             §
                                        90.23
Administrative Penalty Schedule         —
                                        See §§
Animal Licensing Fees                   92.12 through
                                        92.56
                                        §
Business License and Permit Fees        110.37. References to specific sections
                                        are contained in the body of the table.
Building Permit Administrative Fee for  §
Residential Contractors                 103.01(C)(2)
                                        §§
Building Permit Fees                    103.01(C) and
                                        103.02
City Services and Supplies              —
Communications                          —
Community Engagement                    —
Demolition and Moving of Buildings      §
                                        103.02
                                        §§
Fire Hydrants                           100.59 and
                                        100.64
Fire Protection and Prevention Service  § 93.09
Fees
Fire Suppression Systems/Alarm Systems  §§ 93.09 and
Fees                                    103.02
Gas Fees                                §
                                        103.02
Hearing Officer Fee Schedule            —
Mechanical Permit Fees                  §
                                        103.02
Plumbing Fees                           §
                                        103.02
Police Department                       —
Police Contract Overtime Rate           —
                                        §§
Private Sewer System Permit Fees        99.81 and
                                        99.82
Recreation and Park Fees                —
Recycling Service Charges               §
                                        98.39
                                        §§
Sanitary Sewer Rates and Charges        99.75 to
                                        99.80,
                                        103.02
Services and Supplies                   M.S. § 13.03
Storm Sewer Rates and Charges           §
                                        108.04
Street/Signal Lighting Rates and        §
Changes                                 109.03
Subdivision and Zoning Fees and Charges §
                                        151.041
Water Access Charges                    §
                                        100.63
                                        §§
Water Rates and Charges                 100.55(A) through (D),
                                        100.57,
                                        100.58
Water Maintenance and Fire Protection   §
Charges                                 100.55(E)
                                        §§
Water Meters                            100.60 and
                                        100.61
TABLE OF CONTENTS BY CODE SECTION
Section(s) of Code Title of Table
Section(s) of Code  Title of Table
§                  Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Traffic Rule)
71.49
§                  Administrative Fee (All Vehicle Impounds)
90.23
§§
92.37 and           Animal Licensing Fees
92.38
§ 93.09            Fire Protection and Prevention Service Fees Fire Suppression Systems/
                    Alarm System Fees
§ 93.13            Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Health and Safety)
§                  Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Annual Consumer Permits)
93.25
§§                Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Fire Protection and Prevention)
93.25 et seq.
§                  Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Streets and Sidewalks)
96.43
§§
98.06 and           Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Garbage and Refuse)
98.15
§                  Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Sewers)
99.66
§§
99.75 to            Sanitary Sewer Rates and Charges
99.80
§§
99.81 and           Private Sewer System Permit Fees
99.82
§§
100.55(A) through
(D),                Water Rates and Charges
100.57,
100.58
§                  Water Maintenance and Fire Protection Charges
100.55(E)
§§
100.60 and          Water Meters
100.61
§§
100.59 and          Fire Hydrants
100.64
§                  Water Access Charges
100.63
§§
103.01(C) and       Building Permit Administrative Fees
103.02
                    Plumbing Fees    Table 1-C
                    Plumbing Permit Fees
                    Gas Fees   Table 1-B
§                  Mechanical Permit Fees
103.02              Demolition and Moving of Buildings Mechanical Permit Fees    Table 1-B
                    Mechanical Permit Fees Fire Suppression Systems/Alarm Systems Fees
                    Building Permit Fees   Table 1-A
                    Building Permit Fee Schedule
§§ 93.34, 93.36,
103.02,             Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Building Code)
103.04, and
110.37
Ch. 105             Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Swimming Pools)
§                  Pool License Fees
105.02
§                  Business License and Permit Fee Schedule
110.37
Ch. 111             Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Adult Oriented Businesses)
§§
112.036,
112.059,            Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Alcoholic Beverages and
112.061,            Establishments)
112.062,
112.097
113.43              Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Amusements and Theatrical
                    Entertainment)
§§
114.04 and          Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Food Establishments)
114.05
117.30,             Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Lodging and Housing
117.40 and          Establishments) (Rental Establishment Fees)
117.45
§                  Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Building Code)
117.52
§                  Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Excavations and Earth Moving)
118.04
§§                Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Pawnbrokers and Peddlers)
119.30 et seq.
§                  Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Sauna)
120.03
Ch. 122             Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Tobacco Regulations)
Ch. 125             Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Businesses in the Public Right-
                    of-Way)
Ch. 126             Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (THC Regulations)
Ch. 127             Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Cannabis Businesses)
Ch. 150             Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Signs)
§                  Subdivision and Zoning Fees and Charges
151.041
 
FEE RESOLUTION
Section 1. All fees and charges in effect as of the date of the adoption of the
city code for the city shall remain in effect unless otherwise modified by the
provisions of this resolution. All citations below are to various sections of
the city code unless otherwise indicated.
Section 2. The following are the fees and charges for the permits, licenses and
services listed below which are referenced to the section of the city code
which authorizes their establishment:
ABATEMENT FEES
 
Abatement Costs                      Fee
$0 - $999                            $150
$1,000 - $4,999                      $400
$5,000 - $9,999                      $750
$10,000 - $14,999                    $1,250
$15,000 or more                      $1,500
Abatement of Inoperable/Junk Vehicle $150
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE SCHEDULE
 
Violation                               Fee
Administrative costs incurred by city   $15 when notification letter is mailed
for certification of delinquent charges $35 when certified to county
Lawful gambling investigation fee       $250
All vehicle impounds                    $10
Easement vacation                       $200
 
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY SCHEDULE
Violation Description Administrative Penalty Amount
Violation Description                             Administrative Penalty Amount
1  All violations of parking codes, except as     $55
   otherwise noted
2  Management of garbage and refuse for storage   $55
   and collection (i.e. trash can in view)
3  No visible address numbers on the house        $55
4  Snow and ice removal (i.e. sidewalk shoveling) $55
5  All violations of animal control regulations,  $200
   except otherwise noted
6  Parking on unapproved surfaces, overweight     $200
   vehicles, ext. storage, firewood
7  Parking within 10 feet of a hydrant            $200
8  Fencing setbacks and maintenance               $200
9  Telecommunication permit                       $200
10 Earth material storage and excavations         $200
11 Excavations within public right-of-way         $200
12 Zoning Code violations                         $200
13 Weight restrictions/transportation permits     $200
14 Junk vehicles                                  $200
15 Snow removal restrictions, parking             $200
   restrictions
16 Sign ordinance violations                      $200
17 Nuisance - junk and debris violations          $200
 
Violation Description Administrative Penalty Amount
Violation Description                    Administrative Penalty Amount
18 Failure to obtain a rental license    $200
19 Any violation not specifically        $200
   described herein
20 Animals without current rabies        $200
   vaccination
21 Animal at large                       $200
22 Failure to obtain required license    $200
   (i.e. food)
23 Accessory structures                  $200
24 Lodging violations                    $200
25 Home occupation                       $200
26 Non-critical property maintenance     $200
27 Non-critical swimming pool violations $200
28 Priority foundation 3 food inspection $200
   violations
29 Long grass                            $200
30 Critical unsafe conditions            $500
31 Abandonment/failure to redeem animals $500
   from pound
32 Critical property maintenance         $500
33 Priority foundation 1 and 2 food      $500
   inspection violations
34 Critical swimming pool violations     $500
                                         Double the amount of the scheduled
35 Repeat violations within 24 months    fine for the previous violation, up to
                                         a maximum of $2,000
                                         A fine for that can be imposed by the
36 Continuing violations                 hearing officer for each day the
                                         violation continues.
37 Liquor code violations                Refer to Chapter 112 Violations and
                                         Penalty
38 Tobacco code violations               Refer to Chapter 122 Violations and
                                         Penalty
39 THC code violations                   Refer to Chapter 126 Violations and
                                         Penalty
 
ANIMAL LICENSING FEES
(See §§
92.37 and
92.38 of the Code)
Licenses Fees
Licenses                                                      Fees
Apiary registration                                           $75
Impounding fee **                                             $50
Registration of dangerous dog                                 $200
Registration of potentially dangerous dog                     $50
Appeal of dangerous dog/potentially dangerous dog designation $50
Warning sign                                                  $15
Warning tag                                                   $5
** All impound and board fees shall be paid in cash or credit. Personal checks
will not be accepted.
 
BUSINESS LICENSE AND PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
Business License and Permit Fee Schedule
Code Section Type of License Conditions and Terms Amount
Adult Oriented Businesses
Business License and Permit Fee Schedule
Code Section Type of License  Conditions and Terms                 Amount
Adult Oriented Businesses
             Adult only
Ch. 111      entertainment    Annual license                       $5,000
             business
Alcoholic Beverages and Establishments
                              On sale, annual                      $300
112.061      Beer             Off sale, annual                     $100
112.062                       Club, limited one week               $20
                              Club, annual                         $200
112.015      Liquor (see also Bottle club, annual                  $300
             beer)
                              Off-sale, annual                     $300
                              On-sale, Class A annual              $8,000
112.036      Liquor (see also On-sale, Class B annual              $8,000
             beer)            Sunday sale, annual                  $200
                              Club, on-sale (M.S.A. 340:11-7)      $200
                              annual
                              On-sale to bona fide clubs requires
112.059      Liquor           a payment to the general fund of the $10
                              city
112.097      On-sale wine     On-sale, annual
                              2024                                 $2,000
112.201      Brewer taproom   On-sale, annual                      $300
112.210      Brewpub          On-sale, annual                      $300
112.401      Cocktail room    On-sale, annual                      $300
Amusements and Theatrical Entertainment
                              Indoor theater                       $225
             Motion picture   Outdoor theater                      $450
113.43       establishments   Payable in advance on or before July
                              1 of each year, all licenses to
                              expire June 30 of each year
                              Per year                             $225
Annual Consumer Permits
             Annual retail    Fireworks only vendors               $350
93.25        fireworks        All other vendors                    $100
             permits
93.25        Indoor fireworks Per event                            $150
             permit
Body Art Establishments
123.13A      License fee      Annual license, establishment only   $250
                                                                   50% license
123.13B      Late fee         One to 15 days late                  fee
                              Sixteen to 30 days late              100% license
                                                                   fee
123.13A      Plan review      100% of license fee                  $250
Building Code
103.04       Parking lot      Permit fee                           $125
             permits
             Permit for the
             installation,
             alteration,                                           Table 1-
93.34        maintaining,                                          A Building
103.02       repairing or     Permit fee                           Permit Fee
             removal of                                            Schedule
             underground
             liquid storage
             systems
             Installation,
             alteration,
             maintaining,
93.36        repairing or     Annual license                       $100
110.37       removal of
             underground
             liquid storage
             systems
Businesses in the Public Right-of-Way
Ch. 125      Micromobility    Annual fee per mode                  $1,000
             vehicles
                              Fee per bike or scooter              $50
             Micromobility                                         $150 plus
Ch. 125      impound fee      Fee per automobile                   towing
                                                                   company
                                                                   charge
Ch. 125      Courtesy benches Fee per bench (two-year license)     $100
Cannabis Businesses
                                                                   $500 or half
             Cannabis                                              of state
Ch. 127      retailer         Initial retail registration fee      license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
                                                                   $1,000 or
                                                                   half of
                              Renewal retail registration fee      state
                                                                   license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
                                                                   $500 or half
             Cannabis                                              of state
Ch. 127      microbusiness    Initial retail registration fee      license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
                                                                   $1,000 or
                                                                   half of
                              Renewal retail registration fee      state
                                                                   license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
                                                                   $500 or half
             Cannabis                                              of state
Ch. 127      mezzobusiness    Initial retail registration fee      license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
                                                                   $1,000 or
                                                                   half of
                              Renewal retail registration fee      state
                                                                   license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
                                                                   $500 or half
             Cannabis medical                                      of state
Ch. 127      with retail      Initial retail registration fee      license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
                                                                   $1,000 or
                                                                   half of
                              Renewal retail registration fee      state
                                                                   license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
                                                                   $500 or half
             Low-potency                                           of state
Ch. 127      edibles          Initial retail registration fee      license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
                                                                   $1,000 or
                                                                   half of
                              Renewal retail registration fee      state
                                                                   license fee,
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
Excavations and Earth Moving
             Land             Permit fee
118.04       reclamation,
             excavation,      0-1,000 cubic yards                  $250
             storage
Fire Protection and Prevention
93.25 et     Hood cleaning    Includes one inspection              $60
seq.         permit
93.25 et     Open burning     Per burn day - not to exceed 14 days $60
seq.         permit
Food Establishments
             Food Type I -
             High level of
             food
             preparation,
             diverse menus,   Full service/sit down restaurants,
             large amounts of full menu cafeterias, buffet
114.05       potentially      restaurants, catering kitchens, and  $710
             hazardous foods, similar.
             holding foods
             for long periods
             of time, or
             complex food
             processing.
             Food Type II -
             Moderate level
             of food
             preparation,     Fast food, take out, pizza delivery,
             moderate menu,   delis, drive-ins, ice cream shops,
114.05       limited          donut shops, limited or catered      $595
             potentially      cafeterias, bakeries, and similar.
             hazardous foods,
             or foods held
             and served for a
             limited time.
             Food Type III -
             Limited food
             preparation,
             simple menus,    Coffee carts and coffee-only shops,
             little or no     bars, concession stands, snack
114.05       potentially      stands, continental breakfasts, and  $425
             hazardous foods, similar.
             or foods only
             served for a
             short period of
             time.
                              Large Grocery - Larger grocery       $1,015
             Food Grocery -   store.
             Pre-packaged     Small Grocery - Smaller grocery
             foods or the     stores, convenience stores, markets, $355
114.05       sale of foods to and similar.
             be consumed off- Limited Pre-packaged - Gift shops,   $95
             site.            candy racks, and similar.
                              Vending Machines.                    $25
                              Nuts Only.                           $10
             Food Institution
             - Churches, day  Full Operation - Full kitchen.       $455
             cares, and
             preschools.
114.05       [Note: No charge Limited Operation - Catered or       $240
             for places of    limited preparation.
             worship and non-
             profit           Pre-Packaged.                        $125
             organizations.]
             Food Institution Full Operation - Full kitchen.       $505
114.05       - Schools        Limited Operation - Catered or       $255
                              snacks only.
             Additional Food
             Facility - A
             separate area of
             food or beverage
             preparation. May Per additional Type I, Type II or
             include bars,    Large Grocery facility.              $200
             receiving areas,
             catering
             activities, or
114.05       additional food
             establishments.
             [The higher-rate
             facility is
             considered the
             main facility    Per additional Type III or Small     $100
             and each other   Grocery facility.
             type is an
             additional
             facility.]
             Seasonal Food -
             Establishment
             continuously     The fee will be one-half the regular ½ license
114.05       open for 6       license fee (minimum $85).           fee
             business months
             or less in a
             calendar year.
             Itinerant Food -
             Each stand,      First day.                           $75
             booth, cart, or
             table.
             [Note: No charge Prepackaged foods only.              $50
             for places of    Each additional day.                 $15
             worship and non-
114.05       profit
             organizations if
             complete         Additional stand(s) by the same
             application      owner at the same event.             $45
             materials
             submitted more
             than 7 days
             prior to event.]
             Mobile Food Unit Full operation - Food preparation,   $165
             - A self-        includes cooking facilities.
             contained food   Limited operation - Moderate food
             service          preparation, includes warming or     $120
             operation,       holding units.
             located in a     Pre-packaged - pre-packaged foods.   $100
             readily movable
             motorized
114.05       wheeled or towed
             vehicle, used to
             store, prepare,
             display or serve Additional vehicle.                  $75
             food intended
             for individual
             portion service
             that is readily
             movable without
             disassembling.
             Plan Review -    New.                                 150% of
             Fee collected                                         license fee
             for reviewing
114.06       construction
             documents for a  Remodeled.                           100% of
             new or remodeled                                      license fee
             food
             establishment.
114.05       Additional       More than one reinspection.          $125
             Inspection Fee 
Garbage and Refuse
             Garbage and      Per annum, first vehicle             $115
98.06        refuse           For each additional vehicle          $55
             collectors
98.15        Incinerators     Per annum                            $150
Health and Safety
             Fireworks        For each display                     $50
93.13        display          For annual inspection required for   $50
                              Fire Prevention Code
Itinerant Produce Merchant
             Itinerant        Per week                             $8
119.40       produce merchant Per month                            $20
                              Per season                           $75
Lodging and Housing Establishments
             Lodging - An     Base fee                             $160
             establishment
117.30       where sleeping
             accommodations   Per unit fee (maximum of $1,300)     $5
             are let out to
             the public
             Plan Review -    New                                  150% of
             Fee collected                                         license fee
             for reviewing
117.25 -     construction
117.30       documents for a                                       100% of
             new or remodeled Remodeled                            license fee
             bed and
             breakfast or
             lodging facility
            Home occupation                                      $40
Massage Therapy
124.06A      License fee      Massage enterprise license           $200
                              Massage therapist license            $100
                              One to 15 days late                  50% license
124.06A      Late fee                                              fee
                              Sixteen to 30 days late              100% license
                                                                   fee
124.07A      Background check Massage enterprise                   $200
                              Massage therapist                    $200
Rental Establishments
             Rental
             Establishment    Annual license and renewal
             Fees
                              (General housing unit)
                                 Single-family attached         $175
                                 Single-family detached         $175
                                 Double (one side)              $175
117.45                           Double (two side)              $175 per
                                                                   unit
                                 Condominium                    $175
                                 Townhome                       $175
                                 Triplex                        $175 per
                                                                   unit
                                 Small apartments (4 - 15 units)$200 plus
                                                                   $33 per unit
                              Large apartments (16+ units)         $33 per unit
                              Beginning July 1, 2008 a conversion
             Point of         fee of $750 will be charged for all
117.485      Conversion Fee   owner occupied single family, double $750
                              (one side) and double (two side,
                              each side) rental properties.
117.52(C)(4)                                                       $115 per
(a)          Reinspection Fee                                     failed unit
                                                                   per instance
Pawnbrokers and Peddlers/Solicitors
                              Background check                     $200
             Peddler/         30-day license                       $100
119.30       Solicitor        Six-month license                    $200
                              Annual license                       $300
                              Duplicate license                    $50
                              Annual                               $12,000
119.05       Pawnbroker       Investigation fee per applicant/     $1,500
                              manager
                              Transaction fee                      $1.50
Sauna
120.03       Sauna            Calendar year                        $10,000
Sewers
99.66        Scavengers       Dumping fees                         $2/1,000
                                                                   $5 min.
Signs
Ch. 150      Temporary - each                                     $75
             (limits apply)
             Nonresidential
             zoning districts
             Wall sign
             Free standing,                                        $90
             Monument
             Residential                                           $150
             zoning districts
             Wall sign                                             $90
             Free standing,                                        $150
             monument
             Sign storage/    Less than 5 sq. ft.                  $15
             retrieval fee    5 sq. ft. or more                    $40
             Failure to
            obtain sign                                          Fee doubled
             permit
                              Annual license for one year or any
150.10       Sign contractor  portion thereof ending December 31   $75
                              following the effective date of the
                              license
Streets and Sidewalks
96.43        Street           For each location as set forth in § $100
             excavation       650.12
Swimming Pools
             Public Pools -   First pool, indoor.                  $380
             Pools, hot tubs, First pool, outdoor.                 $290
Ch. 105      spas, wading     Additional pool in the same room or  $345
             pools, special   fenced area, indoor.
             purpose pools,   Additional pool in the same room or  $235
             and similar.     fenced area, outdoor.
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) Products
Ch. 126      THC              Annual fee                           $1,000
             THC background                                       $500
             check
Tobacco Regulations
Ch. 122      Tobacco          Annual fee                           $200
             Tobacco                                              $200
             background check
Traffic Rule
                              Special permits                      $15
71.49        Street use       Job                                  $36
                              Annual                               $120
                              Annual refuse compactor              $60
Miscellaneous
             Plats            See § 345:08
Basis of fees: (1) For the purpose of this computation, any period of seven
calendar days or less shall be considered one week; any period for more than
seven calendar days shall be treated as a year; (2) The annual fees herein
provided for shall be assessed on a calendar year basis and on and after July 1
the amount of the fee for such annual licenses shall be one-half the amount
stipulated for the remainder of the year; (3) All annual licenses issued under
the provisions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 in the year when
issued. Other than annual license shall expire on the date specified in the
license.
 
BUILDING PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEES
 
Reason for Charge                   Amount of Charge          Reference
Permit fee for residential work for                           §
administration and review of        $5 per permit             103.01(E)(1)
residential contractor licenses
Copies of permits and documents     As established by Council §
                                    resolution                103.02(B)
Building Permit Fees                As established by Council §
                                    resolution                103.01(C)
 
TABLE 1-A BUILDING PERMIT FEES CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK
Total Valuation Fee
Total Valuation            Fee
$1.00 to $1,200.00         $51.50
                           $51.50 for the first $1,200.00 plus $3.37 for each
$1,201.00 to $2,000.00     additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to and
                           including $2,000.00
                           $78.46 for the first $2,000.00 plus $15.86 for each
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00    additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and
                           including $25,000.00
                           $443.24 for the first $25,000.00 plus $11.44 for
$25,001.01 to $50,000.00   each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to
                           and including $50,000.00
                           $729.24 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.93 for each
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00  additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and
                           including $100,000.00
                           $1,125,74 for the first $100,000.00 plus $6.34 for
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to
                           and including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 to             $3,661.74 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.39 for
$1,000,000.00              each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to
                           and including $1,000,000.00
$1,000,001.00 and up       $6,356.74 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $4.14 for
                           each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof
Other Inspections and Fees:
1. Inspections outside of normal business hours        $75.00 per hour (minimum
                                                       charge-two hours)
2. Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of M.S.  $75.00 per hour
   § 326B.153
3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically        $75.00 per hour (minimum
   indicated                                           charge-one hour)
   When submittal documents are required by Section    The plan review fee
4. 1300.0130, a plan review fee must be paid           shall be 65% of the
                                                       building permit fee
5. Additional plan review required by changes,         $75.00 per hour
   additions or revisions to plan                      (deferred submittals)
6. Shell only buildings                                80% of valuations
 
 
Maintenance Permits Fee Based on Valuation or Fixed Fee
Roofing/tear off    $3,000 valuation
Re-side             $3,000 valuation
Replacement windows $3,000 valuation
Annual permit       Determined by Building Official
 
Construction, Additions, Accessory Fee Based on Valuation or Fixed Fee
Structures, or Miscellaneous
Construction, Additions, Accessory          Fee Based on Valuation or Fixed Fee
Structures, or Miscellaneous
*New Construction of Single family, two     $130 per square foot
family, or townhouse
*Addition with foundation walls (with heat) $130 per square foot
Addition on posts (with heat)               $92 per square foot
*Three season porch, Screen porch, or       $51 per square foot
Sunroom (no heat)
*Garage                                     $51 per square foot
*Sheds                                      $51 per square foot
*Carports                                   $51 per square foot
Residential decks                           $20 per square foot
*Basement Finish                            $23 per square foot
Bathroom Remodel                            $2,500 valuation
Drain Tile and Foundation anchors           $2,500 valuation
Egress Window Installation                  $2,500 valuation
Fence - Wood (with plan review fee)         $3,400 valuation
Fence - Chain Link (with no plan review     $3,400 valuation
fee)
Insulation (with no plan review fee)        $2,500 valuation
Pools                                       $3,000 valuation
Solar Panel                                 $3,000 valuation
Steel storage racking (commercial)          $10,000 valuation
* Values based on the ICC Building Valuation Data February 2021
 
Miscellaneous Fee
Miscellaneous                       Fee
                                    Initial issuance/$100
Temporary certificate of occupancy  First 30-day extension/$300
                                    Second 30-day extension/$600
                                    Third and final 30-day extension/$1,200
Expired permit renewal              Each re-opened permit/$75.00
Expedited permit and phased permits Twice the building permit fee*
Mechanical contractor license       $100/year
Reinspection fee                    $75 per hour (minimum one hour)
Investigation fee                   Twice the building permit fee
* When an applicant demonstrates the existence of extraordinary circumstances
or other unique factors relating to the proposed development the Building
Official may authorize expediting or phasing of the permit and/or submittal
documents.
 
 
Fees Fixed By State Statute               Fee
   Minnesota Rule 1300.0160 similar plaMaximum 25% plan review
 
 
Utility Taps   Fee
Sanitary sewer $200
Water main     $200
Storm sewer    $200
 
 
Street Permits Fee
Street cut     $100
Curb Cut       $100
 
 
Small Utility Permits                   Fee
Administration fee                      $250
Excavation in the boulevard             $50
Excavation in the street                $100
Underground trenching of lines (per LF) $0.75
Overhead placement of lines (per LF)    $0.40
 
 
Grading/Excavating           Fee
200 - 1,000 cubic yards      $200
1,001 - 10,000 cubic yards   $350
10,001 - 100,000 cubic yards $750
100,001+ cubic yards         $1,200
 
 
Fee Refunds
   The Building Official may authorize refunding not more than 80% of the permit
fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the
code.
   The Building Official may authorize refunding not more than 80% of the plan
review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review has been
paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review is done.
   A state surcharge will be applied based on valuation or fixed fee permits.
 
 
Stormwater Review Fee
153.07 Administration Fee $200
 
CITY SERVICES AND SUPPLIES
Services and Supplies Fee
Services and Supplies                         Fee
Accident report                               $.25 per page
Aerial maps                                   $2
Audited financial reports                     $15
Booking fees for outside agencies includes    $100
first day of cell
Breathalyzer test to other departments        $25
Canned printout                               $20 plus $.25 per first 100 pages
Certified photocopies                         $1
City Charter                                  $.25 per page
City Code of 1972                             $70
City maps, large                              $4
City maps, small                              $2
Color booking photos                          $5
Comprehensive plan                            $10
Comprehensive plan map                        $4
Copies of the reports                         $10
EDC Brochure                                  $.50
Environmental assessment                      —
Fingerprinting                                $10
Holding cell, each additional day or fraction $20
Notary services                               $5
Ozalid printing                               $1.50
Photocopies                                   $.25 per page
Photographs                                   $10 per request plus actual cost
Police reports                                $.25 per page
Returned check charge (for whatever reason)   $30
Special assessment search                     $12 plus actual reprint costs
Topo maps                                     $25/acre
Utility maps                                  $3
Video tapes                                   $25
Wage assignment recording                     $5
Waste dumping charge                          $1.25 per 1,000 gallons
Zoning maps, large                            $10
Zoning maps, small                            $5
Zoning Ordinance                              $10
Database requests:
Set up charge - covers cost of staff time for
initial conference, layout, approvals and
phone contracts, plus, per record charge -
covers cost of computer time, output,
operator time, and other output costs
necessary to generate the report plus,        $50
development charge - covers costs to create   $.05 first 100 parcels
report program, execute search, and/or manual
search time by staff to assemble report.
Costs include salaries, benefits, supervision
and overhead
Note: Fees not to exceed labor costs (wages/
salary plus benefits) of the lowest-paid
employee who could complete the task.
 
COMMUNICATIONS
 
Item/Activity               Rate
Advertisement in Park Pages Actual cost as charged by the printer
 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
 
Item                                   Rate
Citywide garage sales registration fee $10 per registration
Fee for additional garage sale signs   $5 per sign
 
DEMOLITION AND MOVING OF BUILDINGS FEES
Reason for Fee Amount of Fee Reference
Reason for Fee                                          Amount of Fee Reference
Demolition of any accessory structure                   $50           §
                                                                      103.02(B)
Demolition of any building not classified as an         $150          § 
accessory structure                                                   103.02(B)
For holding up, raising or moving any building or       $50           § 
structure on the same lot                                             103.02(B)
For moving any minor building as defined herein to a    $50           §
different lot within the city over city streets                       103.02(B)
For moving a manufactured home as defined by State
Building Code Chapter 1350 Manufactured Homes, to a lot $75           §
within the city or from outside of the city to a lot                  103.02(B)
within the city
For moving any building or structure non-stop through                 §
the city upon city streets (see exception - Section     $75           103.02(B)
446:15(e), County Roads and State Highways Exempt)
For moving any building or structure out of the city    $75           §
                                                                      103.02(B)
For moving any building or structure, except any minor  $250          §
building, from one lot to another lot within the city                 103.02(B)
For moving any building or structure, including any                   §
minor building, from outside of the city to a lot       $250          103.02(B)
within the city
FIRE HYDRANTS
 
Reason For Charge            Amount of Fee                           Reference
Annual maintenance fee:                                              §
                                                                     100.59
one to three hydrants        $75 per hydrant
each additional hydrant      $50 per hydrant
                             Deposit of $1,500 and a $10 per day
Meter deposit and rental fee charge for rental during the first 30   §
                             days and $15 per day thereafter, with a 100.64
                             minimum rental of $70
 
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION SERVICE FEES
Reason for Fee Amount of Fee Reference
Reason for Fee               Amount of Fee               Reference
Daycare license fire         $50                         § 245A.15
inspection
Fire modification fines      $250 first offense
                             $500 second offense
                             $1,000 third offense
Gas line encroachment        $1,000 per response         §§ 366.011 and 415.01
                                                         § 93.09
                             $300 per engine (each)      §§ 366.011 and 415.01
Hazardous materials and      $400 per aerial/ladder      § 93.09
Other responses              (each)
                             Firefighters @$30 per hour
                             (each)
Apparatus rates are for two  Senior Chief officers @$50
hours; After two hours,      per hour (each)
rates are per hour
                             Inspectors @$50 per hour
                             (each)
                             Disposables @cost + 10%
                             (each)
Tent inspection fee          $75                         § 245A.15
Permit for the installation
and/or alteration of all
fire suppression systems
and/or alarm systems and all
associated components        Table 1-A Building Permit   §
thereof, including           Fee Schedule                103.02(B)
standpipes, water supply
pipes, pumps, special
suppression systems and dip
tanks
General fire/safety          Initial Inspection   $0  § 93.09
inspections
                             1st follow-up      $0
                             2nd follow-up      $100
                             3rd follow-up      $150
                             4th follow-up      $200
                             Initial inspection and two
Public school inspections    follow-up inspections       § 299F.47
                             $0.014/building sq. ft.
                             Third or more follow-up
                             inspections, each $0.005/   § 93.09
                             building sq. ft.
                             Inspections are every three
                             years.
Charter school inspections   Initial inspection and two  § 299F.47
                             follow-up inspections $100
                             Third or more follow-up     § 93.09
                             inspections, each $ 50
                             Inspections are every three
                             years.
                             Initial inspection and one
Hotel/motel inspections      follow-up inspection $435   § 299F.46
                             each facility, plus:
                             A per room charge:          § 93.09
                             1-18 rooms Exempt
                             19-35 rooms $6 each room
                             36-100 rooms $7 each room
                             Over 100 rooms $8 each room
                             Second or more follow-up
                             inspections, each $225
                             Inspections are every three
                             years.
 
GAS FEES
 
Reason for Fee             Amount of Fee             Reference
Gas Piping
Installation of gas piping As established by Council §
                           resolution                103.02(A) and (B)
 
HEARING OFFICER FEE SCHEDULE
 
Hearing Officer Fee Schedule
Per session (4 hour max.)                                                 $150
Each time they are required to act upon a request for a subpoena or other $10
such action involved in the process
 
TABLE 1-B MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES
CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK
Total Valuation Fee
Total Valuation                    Fee
New single-family home heating and $200.00
cooling
Single-family home replacement of  $100.00
heating, cooling, or boiler
Fireplace                          $79.00
$1.00 to $2,500.00                 $50.00
$2,501.00 to $50,000.00            2% of valuation
$50,001.00 and up                  $1,000 plus 1% of valuation in excess of
                                   $50,000.00
Other Inspections and Fees:
1. Inspections outside of normal business hours   $75.00 per hour (minimum
                                                  charge-two hours)
2. Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of  $75.00 per hour
   M.S. § 326B.153
3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically   $75.00 per hour (minimum
   indicated                                      charge-one hour)
   When submittal documents are required by       The plan review fee shall be
4. Section 1300.0130, a plan review fee must be   10% of the mechanical permit
   paid                                           fee.
5. Additional plan review required by changes,    $75.00 per hour (deferred
   additions or revision to plan                  submittals)
 
MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES
 
Value of Work Fee           Reference
Per Table 1-B Per Table 1-B §
                            103.02(A) and (B)
 
PLUMBING FEES
 
Reason for Fee                    Amount of Fee             Reference
For installation of plumbing work As established by Council §
                                  resolution                103.02(A) and (B)
Water Service, Supply and Distribution System 
Permit and inspection fee made at                           §§
the time of applying for water    $75                       100.57 and
services                                                    103.02
Making taps for all service pipes $100                      §
                                                            100.58
 
TABLE 1-C PLUMBING PERMIT FEES
CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK
Total Valuation Fee
Total Valuation            Fee
New single-family plumbing $200.00
Residential lawn           $25.00
irrigation
Commercial law irrigation  $25.00
Residential water heater   $50.00
Residential water softener $50.00
$1.00 to $2,500.00         $50.00
$2,501.00 to $50,000.00    2% of valuation
$50,001.00 and up          $1,000 plus 1% of valuation in excess of $50,000.00
Other Inspections and Fees:
                                                        $75.00 per hour
1. Inspections outside of normal business hours         (minimum charge-two
                                                        hours)
2. Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of M.S. §$75.00 per hour
   326B.153
   Inspections for which no fee is specifically         $50.00 per hour
3. indicated                                            (minimum charge-one
                                                        hour)
   When submittal documents are required by Section     The plan review fee
4. 1300.0130, a plan review fee must be paid            shall be 10% of the
                                                        plumbing permit fee.
5. Additional plan review required by changes,          $75.00 per hour
   additions or revision to plan                        (deferred submittals)
 
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
                                  Rate
Animal impound daily boarding fee $35/day
Good Conduct Letter               $5
 
POLICE CONTRACT OVERTIME RATE
 
Contract overtime rate $103 per hour
Holiday rate           Contract rate times 1.5
 
PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM PERMIT FEES
 
Type of Work                                                    Fee  Reference
New installation                                                $75  §
                                                                     99.81
Pumping                                                         $15  §
                                                                     99.81
Abandonment or removal                                          $15  §
                                                                     99.81
Repair or modification                                          $75  §
                                                                     99.81
System inspection (i.e. review for mortgage, and the like)      $75  §
                                                                     99.81
Reinspection for private sewer systems and sump pumps and other § 30§
clean water discharge devices                                        99.81
 
RECREATION AND PARK FEES
Recreation and Parks Fees Rate
Recreation and Parks Fees               Rate
Park Activity Buildings
                                        $100 + tax resident
50 person capacity                      $135 + tax non-resident
                                        Refundable damage deposit $300
                                        $50 + tax resident
20 person capacity                      $90 + tax non-resident
                                        Refundable damage deposit $100
Athletic Fields:
                                        $40/game, $125/day - local youth
Soccer/Lacrosse Field                   athletic association
                                        $70/game, $240/day + tax- other groups
                                        $55/game + tax - local youth athletic
Soccer/Lacrosse Field (Noble 1 and 2)   association
                                        $80/game + tax - other groups
                                        $55/game + tax - local youth athletic
Baseball Field (Noble 1)                association
                                        $80/game + tax - other groups
                                        $35/game, $100/day - local youth
Softball/Baseball Field Events          athletic association
                                        $70 game, $240/day + tax - other groups
CAC Event & Meeting space: Gardenview   $400 + tax resident
Room                                    $450 + tax non-resident
(Monday - Thursday)                     Damage Deposits:
250 person capacity                     For events with food - $600
CAC Event & Meeting space:              $950 + tax resident
Gardenview Room                         $1,200 + tax non-resident
(Fri - Sun. - 10:00 a.m. - 12:30 a.m.)  Damage Deposits:
250 person capacity                     For events with food - $600
CAC Event & Meeting space: Grand Room   $650 + tax resident
(3 rooms)                               $750 + tax non-resident
(Monday - Thursday)                     Damage Deposits:
375 person capacity                     For events with food - $600
CAC Grand Rooms (3 rooms)               $1,050 + tax resident
(Fri - Sat - 10:00 a.m. - 12:30 a.m.)   $1,300 + tax non-resident
375 person capacity                     Damage Deposits:
                                        For events with food - $600
CAC Event & Meeting space: Grand Room 1 $150/hr + tax
and 2 (2 rooms)                         $210/hr + tax non-resident
250 person capacity                     Damage Deposits:
                                        For events with food - $400
CAC Event & Meeting space: Grand Room 1 $70/hr + tax resident
(1 room)                                $90/hr + tax non-resident
120 person capacity                     Damage Deposits:
                                        Catered event - $200
CAC Meeting space: Conference Room      $30/hr + tax resident
                                        $40/hr + tax non-resident
12 person capacity
CAC Meeting space: Arena 1 Meeting Room $30/hr + tax resident
                                        $40/hr + tax non-resident
26 person capacity
CAC Unity Room:                         $200/hr + tax resident
Friday - Sunday                         $225/hr + tax non-resident
CAC Unity Room:                         $100/hr + tax resident
Monday - Thursday                       $125/hr + tax non-resident
Recreation and Parks Fees  Rate
Recreation and Parks Fees               Rate
Zanewood Meeting & Event Space
Multi-purpose room                      $50/hr + tax resident
(Monday - Friday rates)                $65/hr + tax non-resident
75 person capacity with round tables/   $100 refundable damage deposit
chairs
                                        Resident rate:
Zanewood Meeting & Event Space             $36/hour + Tax
Teen lounge                            Non-resident rate:
(30 person capacity per side)              $42/hour + tax
                                        $100 refundable damage deposit
Gazebo                                 $325 + tax resident
                                        $400 + tax non- resident
Athletic Association                     
   Facility use fee                  
      Resident                    $5 per person
      Non-resident                $8 per person
                                        $4 adults
Admission fees: Open skate             $3 children & seniors
                                        $11 family
Non-resident recreation program fee    20% added to class fee if under $99 and
                                        $20 added to class fee if over $100
Garden Plots                           $55 per plot
Cell Tower Administrative Fees         $360
 
RECREATION AND PARK FEES -- FACILITY USER DEFINITIONS
 
                     Any person who maintains a residential address in the City
RESIDENT             of Brooklyn Park. An address to a Brooklyn Park post
                     office box number only is not applicable to obtain
                     resident stature.
NON-RESIDENT         Any person who maintains a residential address outside the
                     Brooklyn Park city limits.
                     Includes civic organization, charitable groups and
                     character building organization devoted to the betterment
CIVIC GROUP          of the community by offering community oriented social,
                     educational, recreational and/or cultural enrichment
                     opportunities.
                     Includes any group/organization that legally qualifies for
                     a not-for-profit status and files as such with the
NON-PROFIT GROUP     Internal Revenue Service. Proof of status may be required
                     upon processing a reservation. Includes churches,
                     political parties, elected officials and others listed
                     within the Community Center policies.
COMMERCIAL/ BUSINESS Includes groups that operate for profit or the purpose of
                     promotion or advertisement.
PRIVATE              An individual or group using the facility for personal
                     non-public or private purpose.
 
Edinburgh USA
Rounds  Rate
Edinburgh USA
Rounds                     Rate
Patron card holder        $47 + tax
Resident                  $52 + tax
Non-resident              $60 + tax
Junior rate               $30 + tax
Senior rate               $54 + tax
9-hole league             $27 + tax
Twilight rate             $44 + tax
Daily Specials             
Monday - Thursday  Walking $55 + tax
                  Riding  $70 + tax
Friday - Sunday    Walking $60 + tax
                  Riding  $80 + tax
Player's Card Rate        $99+tax
                            
                           $2,790 (90 rounds)
                           $2,475 (75 rounds)
SAC Season Pass           $1,750 (50 rounds)
(St Andrews Club)          $1,480 (40 rounds)
                           $1,170 (30 rounds)
                           $820 (20 rounds)
                           $430 (10 rounds)
Cart Fee                  $20 + tax
Twilight Cart Fee         $15 + tax
Patron Card               $100 + tax
Range Token               $6.50 + tax
Range Key                 $160 + tax
 
 
Brooklyn Park Sports Dome
                                   Rate
Prime rental rate (full field)     $330 + tax per hour
Non-prime rental rate (full field) $220 + tax per hour
Prime rental rate (half field)     $205 + tax per hour
Non-prime rental rate (half field) $130 + tax per hour
 
Brookland Golf Course
 Rate
Brookland Golf Course
                         Rate
Footgolf rate            $11.00 (tax included)
Adult Rate               $18.00 (tax included)
Senior Rate              $16.00 (tax included)
Adult Patron Round Rate  $11.00 (tax included)
Senior Patron Round Rate $10.00 (tax included)
Membership Rate          $500.00 (tax included)
Second Person Membership $275.00 (tax included)
Patron Card Rate         $80.00 (tax included)
Twilight Rate            $15.00 (tax included)
Super Twilight Rate      $14.00 (tax included)
 
 
Ice Arena
                      Rate
Prime rental rate     $265/hour, effective 09/01/2025
Non-prime rental rate $195/hour, effective 09/01/2023
 
 
Zanewood Recreation Center
                                                    Rate
Classroom A - resident rate (Sunday - Saturday)     $15/hour + tax
Classroom A - non-resident rate (Sunday - Saturday) $17/hour + tax
 
 
Park Building Rentals
                                  Rate
20-person capacity (resident)     $60 + tax
20-person capacity (non-resident) $110 + tax
50-person capacity (resident)     $120 + tax
50-person capacity (non-resident) $160 + tax
 
Picnic Pavilion Rentals
 Rate
Picnic Pavilion Rentals
                                   Rate
20-person capacity (resident)      $30 + tax
20-person capacity (non-resident)  $70 + tax
40-person capacity (resident)      $50 + tax
40-person capacity (non-resident)  $90 + tax
50-person capacity (resident)      $60 + tax
50-person capacity (non-resident)  $100 + tax
60-person capacity (resident)      $110 + tax
60-person capacity (non-resident)  $150 + tax
150-person capacity (resident)     $225 + tax
150-person capacity (non-resident) $265 + tax
Shelter Kitchen rental             $75 + tax
 
RECYCLING SERVICE CHARGES
 
Quarterly Recycling Service Charges
Year          Single-Family through Eight Multi-Family Units         Reference
              Residential Unit
April 1, 2025 $25.20 per unit per quarter $9.45 per unit per quarter §
                                                                     98.39
 
SANITARY SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
Sanitary Sewer Rates and Charges
QUARTERLY SANITARY SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
     Multi-Family,          Residential            Residential (Not
Year Commercial, Industrial (Individually Metered) Metered)         Reference
     and Institutional
Sanitary Sewer Rates and Charges
QUARTERLY SANITARY SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
                Multi-Family,     Residential
Year            Commercial,       (Individually    Residential (Not   Reference
                Industrial and    Metered)         Metered)
                Institutional
                $7.75 per " meter $7.75 per meter
January 1, 2023 equivalent plus   plus $4.35 per   $59.50 per quarter § 99.75
                $4.35 per 1,000   1,000 gallons
                gallons used      used
                $7.75 per 5/8"    $7.75 per meter
                meter equivalent  plus $4.35 per
January 1, 2023 plus $4.35 per    1,000 gallons    $59.50 per quarter § 99.75
                1,000 gallons     used
                used
                $8.50 per 5/8"    $8.50 per meter
                meter equivalent  plus $4.80 per
January 1, 2024 plus $4.80 per    1,000 gallons    $65.50 per quarter § 99.75
                1,000 gallons     used
                used
                $9.35 per 5/8"    $9.35 per meter
                meter equivalent  plus $5.30 per
January 1, 2025 plus $5.30 per    1,000 gallons    $72.00 per quarter § 99.75
                1,000 gallons     used
                used
                $10.30 per 5/8"   $10.30 per meter
                meter equivalent  plus $5.80 per
January 1, 2026 plus $5.80 per    1,000 gallons    $79.00 per quarter § 99.75
                1,000 gallons     used
                used
                $11.30 per 5/8"   $11.30 per meter
                meter equivalent  plus $6.40 per
January 1, 2027 plus $6.40 per    1,000 gallons    $87.00 per quarter § 99.75
                1,000 gallons     used
                used
Meter equivalents shall be as defined by Water Rates (AWWA No. M1) as published
by American Water Works Association.
 
Sanitary Sewer Rates and Charges
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Type of Work Fee Reference
Sanitary Sewer Rates and Charges
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Type of Work                   Fee                          Reference
Installation of water meters
on non-metered residential     $50                          § 99.75
properties
Surcharge for property owners
who are not in compliance with
regulations or who have        $ 100 per month              § 99.75
refused to allow their
property to be inspected
Sewer connection charge        $215                         § 99.76
Sewer connection permit and    $75 for residential
inspection fee                 $125 for commercial or       §§ 99.77 and 103.02
                              industrial
Late charge for sewer billings 10% of unpaid
not paid within 20 days after  balance or a                 § 99.79
the billing date               minimum of $1
 
Administrative costs incurred  $15 when notification letter
by city for certification of   is mailed                    § 99.80
delinquent charges             $35 when certified to county
 
SERVICES AND SUPPLIES
 
Data Requests
The City of Brooklyn Park charges members of the public for copies of government
data. These charges are authorized under M.S. § 13.03, Subd. 3(c).
For less than 100 copies of black and white, letter or legal-size paper:
   •   25¢ for a one-sided copy
   •   or 50¢ for a two-sided copy
The charge for most other types of copies, when a charge is not set by statute or
rule, is the actual cost of searching for and retrieving the data, and making the
copies or electronically transmitting the data (ie., send the data by email).
•   In determining the actual costs of making copies, we factor in employee time,
the cost of the materials onto which we are copying the data (paper, CD, DVD, etc.)
and mailing costs (if any).
•   The cost of employee time to search the data, retrieve data, and make copies is
$22.39* per hour.
•   If, based on your request, we find it necessary for a higher-paid employee to
search for and retrieve the data, we will calculate search and retrieval charges at
the higher salary/wage.
* Note: Fees not to exceed labor costs (wages/salary plus benefits) of the lowest-
paid employee who could complete the task.
 
STORM SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
Storm Sewer Rates and Charges
QUARTERLY STORM SEWER RATES
Year Land Use Class Quarterly Charge Reference
Storm Sewer Rates and Charges
QUARTERLY STORM SEWER RATES
Year            Land Use Class                   Quarterly Charge Reference
January 1, 2024 Single Family Residential        $21.76 per unit  §
                                                                  108.04
                Townhouse/Two Family Residential $12.76 per unit  §
                                                                  108.04
                Multiple Family Residential      $6.78 per unit   §
                                                                  108.04
                Business                         $84.94 per acre  §
                                                                  108.04
                Industrial                       $96.73 per acre  §
                                                                  108.04
                School/Church                    $40.29 per acre  §
                                                                  108.04
January 1, 2025 Single Family Residential        $23.93 per unit  §
                                                                  108.04
                Townhouse/Two Family Residential $14.04 per unit  §
                                                                  108.04
                Multiple Family Residential      $7.45 per unit   §
                                                                  108.04
                Business                         $93.44 per acre  §
                                                                  108.04
                Industrial                       $106.41 per acre §
                                                                  108.04
                School/Church                    $44.32 per acre  §
                                                                  108.04
January 1, 2026 Single Family Residential        $26.33 per unit  §
                                                                  108.04
                Townhouse/Two Family Residential $15.44 per unit  §
                                                                  108.04
                Multiple Family Residential      $8.20 per unit   §
                                                                  108.04
                Business                         $102.78 per acre §
                                                                  108.04
                Industrial                       $117.05 per acre §
                                                                  108.04
                School/Church                    $48.75 per acre  §
                                                                  108.04
January 1, 2027 Single Family Residential        $28.96 per unit  §
                                                                  108.04
                Townhouse/Two Family Residential $16.98 per unit  §
                                                                  108.04
                Multiple Family Residential      $9.02 per unit   §
                                                                  108.04
                Business                         $113.06 per acre §
                                                                  108.04
                Industrial                       $128.75 per acre §
                                                                  108.04
                School/Church                    $53.63 per acre  §
                                                                  108.04
 
STREET/SIGNAL LIGHTING RATES AND CHARGES
Street/Signal Lighting Rates and Charges
QUARTERLY STREET/SIGNAL LIGHTING RATES AND CHARGES
Year Land Use Class Quarterly Charge Reference
Street/Signal Lighting Rates and Charges
QUARTERLY STREET/SIGNAL LIGHTING RATES AND CHARGES
Year            Land Use Class              Quarterly Charge       Reference
January 1, 2023 Single Family Residential   $12.65 per unit        §
                                                                   109.03
               Townhouse/Two Family        $9.13 per unit         §
                Residential                                        109.03
               Multiple Family Residential $4.45 per unit         §
                                                                   109.03
               Business/Industrial/School/ $0.29 per street front §
                Chu rch                     lineal foot            109.03
January 1, 2024 Single Family Residential   $12.92 per unit        §
                                                                   109.03
               Townhouse/Two Family        $9.31 per unit         §
                Residential                                        109.03
               Multiple Family Residential $4.54 per unit         §
                                                                   109.03
               Business/Industrial/School/ $0.30 per street front §
                Chu rch                     lineal foot            109.03
January 1, 2025 Single Family Residential   $13.19 per unit        §
                                                                   109.03
               Townhouse/Two Family        $9.49 per unit         §
                Residential                                        109.03
               Multiple Family Residential $4.63 per unit         §
                                                                   109.03
               Business/Industrial/School/ $0.31 per street front §
                Chu rch                     lineal foot            109.03
January 1, 2026 Single Family Residential   $13.46 per unit        §
                                                                   109.03
               Townhouse/Two Family        $9.67 per unit         §
                Residential                                        109.03
               Multiple Family Residential $4.72 per unit         §
                                                                   109.03
               Business/Industrial/School/ $0.32 per street front §
                Chu rch                     lineal foot            109.03
January 1, 2027 Single Family Residential   $13.73 per unit        §
                                                                   109.03
               Townhouse/Two Family        $9.85 per unit         §
                Residential                                        109.03
               Multiple Family Residential $4.81 per unit         §
                                                                   109.03
               Business/Industrial/School/ $0.33 per street front §
                Chu rch                     lineal foot            109.03
                1.   Decorative street lights increase quarterly charge by
                50 percent for single family and townhouse residential.
                2.   Private street lights (not parking lot lights) decrease
                quarterly charge by 50 percent for single family and
               townhouse residential.
                3.   Standard street lights are cobra head fixture type with
                fiberglass or wood poles.
                4.   Minimum charge for Business/Industrial to be not less
                than Single Family Residential rate.
 
SUBDIVISION AND ZONING FEES AND CHARGES
                       Total Due
Application Fee Escrow Upon
                       Application
                                                    Total Due
Application                 Fee              Escrow Upon
                                                    Application
Park dedication fees:                               Paid with recording of
                                                    plat
   Residential (10% land
dedication)
      Low Density     $4,600 per unit  $0     $4,600 per unit
Residential
      Medium Density  $4,600 per unit  $0     $4,600 per unit
Residential
      High Density    10% average land $0
Residential                 valuation
   Commercial (5% land   $8,000 per acre  $0     $8,000 per acre
dedication)
   Industrial (5% land   $8,000 per acre  $0     $8,000 per acre
dedication)
Rezoning or Zoning          $500             $2,000 $2,500
Ordinance Text Amendment
Subdivision                 $500             $2,000 $2,500
Variance to Subdivision     $350             $500   $850
Ordinance (Waiver)
Waiver of Platting (Duplex  $100             $350   $450
Split)
 
WATER ACCESS CHARGES
 
Year         Amount of Unit Charge Reference
June 1, 2024 $2,750                §
                                   100.63
June 1, 2025 $2,875                §
                                   100.63
WAC total charge is calculated utilizing the same unit charge multiplier as
per the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES) Sewer Availability
Charge (SAC) Procedure Manual.
 
WATER RATES AND CHARGES
 
Water Rates and Charges
QUARTERLY WATER RATES AND CHARGES
                Multi-family,    Residential       Irrigation
Year            Commercial,      (Individually     (Separately        Reference
                Industrial and   Metered)          Metered)
                Institutional
                                 $7.60 per 5/8"
                                 Meter Equivalent
                                 plus $2.60 per
                                 1,000 gallons
                $7.60 per 5/8"   used for the
                Meter Equivalent first 40,000      $7.85 per 5/8"
January 1, 2024 plus $2.60 per   gallons and $3.70 Meter Equivalent   §
                1,000 gallons    for each 1,000    plus $4.60 per     100.55
                used             gallons used in   1,000 gallons used
                                 excess of 40,000
                                 and $4.60 for
                                 each 1,000
                                 gallons used in
                                 excess of 80,000
                                 $7.95 per 5/8"
                                 Meter Equivalent
                                 plus $2.70 per
                                 1,000 gallons
                $7.95 per 5/8"   used for the
                Meter Equivalent first 40,000      $8.20 per 5/8"
January 1, 2025 plus $2.70 per   gallons and $3.85 Meter Equivalent   §
                1,000 gallons    for each 1,000    plus $4.80 per     100.55
                used             gallons used in   1,000 gallons used
                                 excess of 40,000
                                 and $4.80 for
                                 each 1,000
                                 gallons used in
                                 excess of 80,000
Meter equivalents are as defined by Water Rates (AWWA No. M1) as published by
American Water Works Association.
 
Water Rates and Charges
MISCELLANEOUS RATES AND CHARGES
Reason for Charge Amount of Charge Reference
Water Rates and Charges
MISCELLANEOUS RATES AND CHARGES
Reason for Charge                  Amount of Charge                   Reference
Late charge for water billings not 10% of the unpaid balance or a     §
paid within 20 days after the      minimum of $1                      100.55
billing date
Administrative costs incurred by   $15 when notification letter is    §
city for certification of          mailed                             100.55
delinquent charges                 $35 when certified to county
Reinstating water service after    $40                                §
turn-off for delinquency                                              100.55
Service charge imposed if payment                                     §
is not received by the shut-off    $25                                100.55
deadline for payments
Minnesota Department of Health     Annual testing fee per year: $9.72
 
WATER MAINTENANCE AND FIRE PROTECTION CHARGES
Quarterly Charges Against Properties Not Connected Amount of Charge Reference
to the Municipal Water System
Quarterly Charges Against Properties Not Connected  Amount of Charge Reference
to the Municipal Water System
Single and double residences (each unit)            $10              §
                                                                     100.55 (E)
Service stations                                    $15              §
                                                                     100.55 (E)
Restaurants, cafes and churches                     $20              §
                                                                     100.55 (E)
Commercial properties having a floor area of less   $15              §
than 1,000 square feet                                               100.55 (E)
Commercial properties having a floor area of from   $30              §
1,000 to 5,000 square feet                                           100.55 (E)
Commercial properties having a floor area of over   $50              §
5,000 square feet                                                    100.55 (E)
Multiple residences - three or more units (each     $10              §
unit)                                                                100.55 (E)
Schools - elementary, each                          $60              §
                                                                     100.55 (E)
Schools - junior and senior high, each              $100             §
                                                                     100.55 (E)
Charges against such properties not connected to the municipal water systems
and not listed above are made on the basis of the meter size which would be
needed if the property were to be connected to the municipal water system;
based upon sizes of meters installed on similar properties elsewhere in the
city.
Deposit for disconnecting, testing and repair of a  $150             §
meter                                                                100.60
Fee for disconnecting a water meter or connecting a $50              §
meter                                                                100.61
 
WATER METERS
Reason for Charge Amount of Charge Reference
Reason for Charge             Amount of Charge             Reference
Deposit for disconnecting,       5/8" to 1" meters   §
testing and repair of a meter    1½" to 2" meters   100.60
                                 3" to 8" meters    $600
Deposit for a temporary meter    $350                   §
                                                           100.65
                              5/8" disc residential        $500
                              5/8" ultrasonic residential  $500
                              3/4" disc                    $550
                              1 inch disc                  $675
                              1 inch ultrasonic            $675
                              1.5 inch disc                $1,200
                              1.5 inch ultrasonic          $1,200
                             2 inch disc                  $1,300
Water meter furnish and       2 inch ultrasonic            $1,500
install fee                   2 inch compound              $2,950
§                            2 inch turbine               $1,475
100.62                        3 inch turbine               $2,600
                              3 inch compound              $4,200
                              3 inch ultrasonic            $4,400
                              4 inch turbine               $2,950
                              4 inch compound              $5,300
                              4 inch ultrasonic            $5,300
                              Frozen meter charge          $150 plus meter cost
                              Replace due to damage        Listed meter price
                              Repairs due to damage        Parts and labor
Fee for disconnecting a water $75                          §
meter or connecting a meter                                100.61
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Minnesota Rules
References to 1972 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Section Code Section
M.S. Section                   Code Section
3.9224                         127.04
3.9228                         127.04
10A.14                         112.300
Chapter 12                     36.01
13.01 et seq.                  41.03
13.03                          Appendix
13.03, Subd. 3(c)              Appendix
15.73                          102.22
15.99                          152.800
16B.665                        Appendix
17.04                          114.02
18.011 - 18.024                97.03
18.75 - 18.88                  97.03
18.77, Subd. 8                 97.02,
                               97.03
18.771(e)                      97.02
Chapter 18K                    152.105
Chapter 28A                    114.01,
                               114.02
29.21                          114.02
29.23                          114.02
29.235                         114.02
29.237                         114.02
29.24                          114.02
29.25                          114.02
29.26                          114.02
29.27                          114.02
30.39                          114.02
Ch. 34A                        114.02
40A.301, Subd. 6b              152.105
69.01                          98.30
                               73.30,
84.81 - 84.88                  73.40,
                               73.99
84.415                         152.802
84C                            152.802
86B.115                        152.802
Chapter 89                     97.03
89.63(B)                       97.30
89.001                         97.01
97A.041                        92.36
97B.091                        73.39,
                               73.40
Chapter 103B                   152.802
Chapter 103F                   152.801
Chapter 103G                   152.801
103G.005                       152.105
103G.005, Subd. 14             152.801
103G.005, Subd. 15             153.06
103G.221 et seq.               153.06
103G.222 - .2373               153.03
103G.245                       152.801,
                               152.802
115A.03, Subd. 11              98.30
115A.03 Subd. 12               98.30
115A.46                        98.30
116.07                         90.25
116.491 Subd. (1)              93A.11
Chapter 116G                   151.026,
                               152.802
116G.15, Subd. 4               152.802
120A.05                        152.105
120A.24                        152.105
144G.02, Subd. 2               134.05
Chapter 144.05                 111.02
144.391                        122.01
144.1222                       105.06
144.1222, Subd. 1, 1a          105.06
144.4167                       122.11
Chapter 145A                   94.06,
                               114.01
Chapter 146B                   123.02,
                               152.105
149A.95                        152.904
151.72                         126.01,
                               126.07
151.72, Subd. 3                126.06
152.01, Subd. 5                135.08
152.01 et seq.                 112.003,
                               117.49
152.02                         135.01
152.02, Sched. I - V           94.01
152.22, Subd. 6                126.02
                               105.06,
Chapter 157                    114.02,
                               117.25
157.15, Subd. 9                114.03,
                               152.105
157.15, Subd. 12.a, 13, and 14 114.03
                               105.06,
157.16                         114.02,
                               117.25
157.16, Subd. 2(a)             114.02
                               117.28,
157.17                         161.45,
                               102.22,
                               102.43
Chapter 168                    152.903
Chapters 168 - 171             73.30
Chapter 168A                   153.343,
                               152.903
Chapter 168B                   90.15,
                               90.18
168B.07                        90.18
168B.08                        90.18
168B.09, Subd. 2               90.15
Chapter 168C                   73.16
                               71.01,
Chapter 169                    95.07,
                               125.13
169.01                         90.16,
                               152.105
169.041                        90.16,
                               90.18
169.06                         151.086
169.345, Subd. 3               72.17
169.345, Subd. 2.              72.17
177.41 - 177.44                43.02,
                               43.05
177.42, Subd. 6                43.02
211B.045                       150.06
216B.02                        102.22
216B.02, Subd. 4               102.22
216B.02, Subd. 6               102.22
216B.36                        102.43
Chapter 216D                   102.25
216D.01 et seq.                102.35,
                               102.45
216D.04, Subd. 3               102.22
Chapter 216E                   152.802
Chapter 216F                   152.802
Chapter 216G                   152.802
221.81                         103.02
222.37                         102.43
237.16                         102.20
                               102.20,
237.162                        102.22,
                               102.43
237.162, Subd. 4               102.22
                               102.20,
237.163                        102.22,
                               102.43
237.163, Subd. 2(b)            102.21
237.163, Subd. 3               102.22
237.163, Subd. 4(c)            102.38
237.163, Subd. 6               102.50
237.163, Subd. 6(b)(4)         102.28
237.79                         102.20
237.81                         102.20
238.02, Subd. 3                102.22
238.084                        102.43
238.086                        102.20
243.166                        117.49
243.167                        137.04
244.052                        137.02
244.052, Subd. 4a              137.01
Chapter 260B                   112.003
260C. et seq.                  117.49
260.185                        132.99
Chapter 278                    126.05
299C.66 - 299C.71              117.52
300.03                         102.43
303.06                         119.07
Chapter 308A                   102.22
Chapter 325F                   152.802,
                               152.903
325J.04, Subd. 2               119.11
Chapter 326B                   103.75
326.46, Subd. 2                103.79
326B.082                       103.01
326B.101 - 326B.16             103.01
326B.101 - 326B.194            106.02
326N.103, Subd. 11             103.11
326B.103, Subd. 13             103.11
326B.148                       103.01
326B.151                       103.01
326B.153                       Appendix
326B.805                       103.01
327.10 - 327.131               117.25
327.70 - 327.76                117.25
333.01                         119.07
340:11-7                       Appendix
340A.22                        152.105
340A.101, Subd. 9              152.105
340A.101, Subd. 16             152.105
340A.301, Subd. 6b             152.105
                               112.003,
Chapter 340A                   112.041 ,
                               127.09
                               112.400,
340A.22                        112.401,
                               112.403
340A.101                       112.041,
                               112.059
340A.101, Subd. 9              152.105
340A.101, Subd. 16             152.105
340A.301, Subd. 6b             152.105
340A.301, Subd. 6(c), (i), (j) 112.202
340A.301, Subd. 7              112.210
340A.409                       112.001,
                               112.300
340A.409, Subd. 1 - 3a         112.300
340A.409, Subd. 4              112.001
340A.412, Subd. 10             112.041,
                               112.064
340A.419                       112.049
340A.503                       34.04
340A.504, Subd. 3(d)           112.300
340A.504, Subd. 4              112.210
340A.701                       117.49
340A.702                       117.49
340A.703                       117.49
                               127.01,
Chapter 342                    127.02,
                               152.105
342.01                         127.02,
                               133.25
342.09, Subd. 1(6)             95.03
342.13                         127.03,
                               127.04
342.22                         127.02
342.22, Subd. 4(b)             127.06
342.22, Subd. 5(e)             127.04
342.24                         127.06
343.20 - 343.36                92.15
344.02, Subd. 1(a) - (d)       152.801
Chapter 346                    92.01
346.37                         92.15
347.31 - 347.40                92.15
347.50                         92.04,
                               92.25
347.50, Subd,1                 92.26
347.51                         92.26
347.51, Subd. 2                92.26
347.51, Subd. 5                92.25
347.52                         92.04,
                               92.16
347.542                        92.28
347.56                         117.49
Chapter 349                    112.041
                               113.61,
349.11 through 349.22          113.62,
                               113.63,
                               113.64
349.11 through 349.23          113.60
349.213                        113.60,
                               113.63
Chapter 360                    152.800
360.063                        152.800
360.063, Subd. 6               152.800
360.063, Subd. 6.a.            152.800
360.067                        152.800
360.072                        152.800
360.073                        152.800
360.81 - 360.91                152.800
364.01 et seq.                 41.03
364.03                         119.33
                               119.07,
364.03, Subd. 2                124.08,
                               124.11
364.03, Subd. 3                124.08,
                               124.11
394.36                         152.204
412.231 and 609.034            10.99
415.02                         Adopting Ordinance
415.021                        Adopting Ordinance
                               94.05,
                               94.15,
                               98.38,
Chapter 429                    102.44,
                               106.02,
                               109.01,
                               111.02 
429.081                        153.08
429.101                        106.02
429.101, Subd. 1               106.02,
                               111.02
444.075                        108.01
444.075, Subd. 3               99.80,
                               100.55
Chapter 453                    102.22
Chapter 453A                   102.22
461.12                         122.99
                               102.44,
Chapter 462                    152.801,
                               152.802
462.351 through 462.364        152.101
462.352, Subd. 12              151.003
462.357                        152.204,
                               152.802
462.357, Subd. 1e              152.802
462.357, Subd. 6               150.08,
                               152.307
462.358                        151.001
462.358, Subd. 2A              151.085
462.358, Subd. 4b              151.011
462.3593                       152.305,
                               152.902
462.3595                       152.305,
                               152.802
462C.16                        34.45
462C.16, Subd. 3               34.47
462C.16, Subd. 4               34.46
Chapter 463                    94.15
463.15 through 463.261         103.61
463.17, Subd. 2                111.02
471.195                        90.01
471.62                         10.19
                               99.30,
Chapter 473                    99.35,
                               152.802
Chapter 473C                   99.83
473.851 - 473.868              151.002
477A.018                       34.35
505.02                         151.043
505.02                         151.043,
                               151.086
                               151.044,
505.03, Subd. 1                151.045,
                               151.058
505.08, Subd. 1                151.040
515A.1-106                     152.1003
Chapter 606                    112.003
609.02, Subd. 6                95.01,
                               95.03
609.18 through 609.215         112.003
609.226                        117.49
609.229                        112.003,
                               117.49
609.26, Subd. 1(8)             117.49
609.281 through 609.284        112.003
609.29 through 609.352         111.02
609.321, Subd. 9               112.003,
                               117.49
609.324                        112.003,
                               117.49
609.33                         117.49
609.342 through 609.3451       1121.003
609.415                        37.05
609.50                         112.003,
                               117.49
609.66 et seq.                 112.003,
                               117.49
609.71                         112.003,
                               117.49
609.713                        112.003,
                               117.49
609.715                        112.003,
                               117.49
609.72                         112.003,
                               117.49
609.75 through 609.76          112.003,
                               117.49
609.78                         112.003,
                               117.49
609.903                        112.003,
                               117.49
617.23 through 617.229         111.02
617.298, Subd. 2               113.46
624.20                         152.905
624.714                        136.06,
                               136.10
624.715                        136.06,
                               136.10
Ch. 1505                       97.45
                               
 
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA RULES
Minn. Rules Code Section
Minn. Rules                     Code Section
1300.0130                       Appendix
1300.0160                       Appendix
Ch. 1341                        152.802
1520                            114.02
1545                            114.02
1550                            114.02
1556                            114.02
1720.1560                       92.15
Ch. 4625                        117.25
Ch. 4626                        114.03
4626                            114.09
4626, Subp. G through O         114.02
4626.0033                       114.02
4626.1720B                      114.02
4626.1760                       114.02
Ch. 4714                        103.10
4717.0150 - 4717.3970           105.06
4720.51000, Subp. 13            153.07
Ch. 4725.4350                   152.801
5200.1000 - 5200.1120           43.02
6106.0010 - 6106.0180           152.802
6106.0070, Subp. 3, Items B - I 152.802
6106.0100, Subp. 9, Item C      152.802
Ch. 6115                        152.802
6115.0210                       152.802
6115.0215, Subp. 4, Item E      152.802
6115.0216, Subp. 2              152.802
Ch. 6120                        152.105
                                152.204,
6120.5000 - 6120.6200           152.801,
                                152.802
6280.0250                       152.802
Ch. 7020                        152.802
Ch. 7030                        152.802
Ch. 7035                        90.15
Ch. 7080.2270                   152.801
7400.0100 - 7400.6000           152.903
7515.1100                       112.211
Chapter 7560                    102.37
7560.0150, Subp. 2              102.44
7819.0050 et seq.               102.20
7819.1000, Subp. 3              102.28
                                102.22,
7819.1100                       102.32,
                                102.37
7819.1250                       102.26,
                                102.48
7819.3000                       102.32
7819.3100                       102.44
7819.3200                       102.47
7819.3300                       102.49
7819.4000                       102.42
7819.4100                       102.42
7819.5000                       102.37,
                                102.44
7819.5100                       102.37,
                                102.44
7819.5100, Subd. 2              102.44
7819.9900 - 7819.9950           102.22
Ch. 8410                        152.802
Ch. 8420                        152.802
8800.1100                       152.802
Ch. 44110                       152.304
                                
 
REFERENCES TO 1972 CODE OF ORDINANCES
1972 Code Section 2000 Code Section
1972 Code Section 2000 Code Section
100:00            30.15
100:03            30.16
100:09            30.17
100:12            30.18
100:15            30.19
100:21            30.20
100:24            30.21
100:30            30.22
100:33            30.23
100:42            30.24
100:51            30.25
100:54            30.26
100:57            30.27
100:69            30.28
100:72            30.29
100:78            30.30
100:81            30.31
110:00            35.01
110:05            35.02
115:00            30.01
120:00            38.15
120:05            38.16
120:10            38.17
120:15            38.18
120:20            38.19
120:25            38.20
120:30            38.21
120:35            38.22
130:00            34.01
130:05            34.02
130:10            34.03
130:15            34.05
130:25            34.06
130:30            34.07
130:35            34.08
130:40            34.09
205:00            31.15
205:05            31.16
205:10            31.17
205:15            31.18
205:20            31.19
215:00            36.01
215:05            36.02
215:10            36.03
215:15            36.04
215:20            36.05
215:25            36.06
220:10            38.01
225:00            32.01
225:05            32.02
225:10            32.03
225:15            32.04
225:20            32.05
225:25            32.06
225:30            32.07
225:40            32.08
225:45            32.09
225:46            32.10
225:47            32.11
225:50            32.12
225:55            32.13
230:00            31.30
230:05            31.30
230:10            31.31
230:15            31.32
240:00            31.01
240:05            31.02
245:00            31.45
245:05            31.46
245:10            31.47
245:15            31.48
245:20            31.49
250:00            31.60
250:10            31.61
250:15            31.62
265:00            33.02
265:05            33.03
270:00            33.15
270:05            33.16
270:10            33.17
270:15            33.18
270:20            33.19
270:25            33.20
270:30            33.21
285:00            34.21,
                  34.22
285:00            34.20
285:10            34.23
285:15            34.24
285:20            34.25
285:25            34.26
285:30            34.27
285:35            34.28
285:40            34.29
285:45            34.30
285:50            34.31
285:55            34.32
285:60            34.33
285:65            34.34
285:70            34.35
285:75            34.36
290:00            31.75
290:05            31.76
290:10            31.77
290:15            31.78
290:20            31.79
315:00            103.01
315.60            103.03
315.75            103.04
315.80            103.05
323:00            103.75
323:10            103.76
323:15            103.77
323:20            103.78
323:25            103.79
340:00            118.01
340:05            118.02
340:10            118.03
340:15            118.04
340:20            118.05
340:25            118.06
340:30            118.07
340:35            118.08
340:40            118.09
345:00            151.001
345:02            151.002
345:04            151.003
345:06            151.004
345:08            151.005
345:10            151.006
345:11            151.007
345:13            151.025
345:16            151.026
345:20            151.027
345:22            151.040
345:25            151.041
345:28            151.042
345:31            151.043
345:34            151.044
345:37            151.045
345:40            151.046
345:43            151.055
345:46            151.056
345:49            151.057
345:52            151.058
345:55            151.059
345:58            151.060
345:59            151.061
345:61            151.070
345:61            151.071
345:64            151.085
345:64            151.086
345:67            151.087
345:68            151.088
345:70            151.089
345:73            151.090
345:76            151.091
345:79            151.092
345:82            151.008
345:85            151.100
345:86            151.101
345:87            151.102
345:88            151.009
345:91            151.010
345:92            151.011
345:93            151.012
345:94            151.013
356:00            150.01
356:05            150.02
356:10 - 356:15   150.03
356:20            150.04
356:25            150.05
356:40            150.07
356.30            150.27
356.30            150.26
356.30            150.28
356.30            150.29
356.30            150.30
356.30            150.25
356.35            150.06
356.45            150.08
356.50            150.09
356.55            150.10
356.60            150.11
356.65            150.12
356.70            150.13
356.75            150.14
356.76            150.15
400:00            110.01
400:03            110.02
400:06            110.03
400:09            110.03
400:12            110.03
400:15            110.03
400:18            110.04
400:21            110.05
400:24            110.06
400:27            110.07
400:30            110.08
400:33            110.09
400:36            110.10
400:39            110.11
400:42            110.12
400:45            110.13
400:48            110.14
400:51            110.15
400:54            110.16
400:57            110.17
400:60            110.18
405:01            73.15
405:40            73.16
405:45            73.17
405:50            73.18
415:00            92.01
415:03            92.35
415:18            92.03
415:21            92.04
415:23            92.05
415:24            92.06
415:25            92.08
415:26            92.09
415:27            92.10
415:28            92.11
415:30            92.12
415:33            92.13
415:36            92.14
415:38            92.16
415:39            92.17
415:42            92.18
415:45            92.19
415:48            92.20
415:54            92.21
415:57            92.22
415:75            92.23
415:76            92.24
415:245           92.07
422:00            111.01
422:05            111.02
422:10            111.03
422:15            111.04
422:20            111.05
422:25            111.06
422:30            111.07
422:35            111.08
422:40            111.09
426:00            113.40
426:05            113.41
426:10            113.42
426:15            113.43
426:20            113.44
426:25            113.45
426:30            113.46
426:35            113.47
426:40            113.48
426:45            113.49
426:50            113.50
432:00            105.01
432:02            105.02
432:05            105.03
432:10            105.04
435:00            98.01
435:05            98.02
435:10            98.03
435:15            98.04
435:25            98.05
435:30, 435:40    98.06
435:45            98.07
435:46            98.08
435:47            98.09
435:50            98.10
435:55            98.11
435:60            98.12
435:65            98.13
435:70            98.14
435:75            98.15
435:80            98.16
435:85            98.17
437:00            98.30
437:05            98.31
437:10            98.32
437:15            98.33
                  98.34,
                  98.35,
437:20            98.36,
                  98.37,
                  98.99
437:25            98.38
437:30 - 437:65   98.39
455:00            117.40
455:05            117.41
455:10            117.42
455:15            117.43
455:16            117.44
455:17            117.45
455:26            117.46
455:36            117.47
455:40            117.48
455:50            117.49
455:70            117.50
455:75            117.51
455:78            117.52
456:05            117.26
456:10            117.27
456:15            117.28
456:20            117.29
456:25            117.30
468:00            119.01
468:05            119.02
468:10            119.03
468:15            119.04
468:20            119.05
468:25            119.06
468:30            119.07
468:35            119.08
468:40            119.09
468:45            119.10
468:50            119.11
468:55            119.12
468:60            119.13
468:65            119.14
468:70            119.15
468:75            119.16
468:80            119.17
468:85            119.18
468:90            119.19
468:95            119.20
468:100           119.21
470:00            99.60
470:05            99.61
470:10            99.62
470:15            99.63
470:20            99.64
470:25            99.65
470:30            99.66
485:00            120.02
485:00            120.01
485:05            120.03
485:10            120.04
485:15            120.05
485:20            120.06
485:25            120.07
491:00            113.60
491:05            113.61
491:10            113.62
491:15            113.63
491:20            113.64
500:00            110.35
500:05            110.36
500:10            110.37
500:15            110.38
500:20            110.39
505:00            103.02
505:10            103.02
510:00            99.75
510:05            99.76
510:10            99.77
510:11            99.78
510:15            99.79
510:16            99.80
510:20            99.81
510:25            99.82
510:30            99.83
515:00            100.55
515:04            100.56
515:05            100.57
515:10            100.58
515:12            100.59
515:15            100.60
515:20            100.61
515:25            100.62
515:30            100.63
515:35            100.64
520:00            151.014
600:00            99.01
600:05            99.02
600:10            99.03
600:15            99.04
600:25            99.05
605:20            99.06
610:00            99.15
610:15            99.16
610:30            99.17
615:00            99.30
615:33            99.31
615:36            99.32
615:42            99.33
615:44            99.34
615:46            99.35
615:48 - 615:54   99.36
615:57            99.37
615:60            99.38
615:63            99.39
615:66            99.40
615:77            99.41
615:80            99.42
615:85            99.43
615:90            99.44
615:95            99.45
616:00            99.46
616:05            99.47
616:10            99.48
620:01            101.01
620:06            101.02
620:11            101.03
620:16            101.04
620:21            101.05
650:00            96.40
650:02            96.41
650:04            96.42
650:08            96.43
650:10            96.44
650:12            96.45
650:14            96.01
650:17            96.02
650:18 - 650:24   96.03
650:26            96.04
650:28            96.05
650:30            96.06
650:32            96.07
650:34            96.08
650:36            96.09
650:38            96.10
650:40            96.11
650:42            96.12
650:48            96.13
650:52            96.14
650:54            96.15
650:56            96.16
650:58            96.17
650:60            96.18
650:62            96.19
650:64            96.20
650:66            96.21
650:68            96.22
650:70            96.23
650:72            96.24
650:74            96.25
650:76            96.26
650:78            96.27
655:00            96.28
675:00            100.01
675:02            100.02
675:03            100.03
675:04            100.04
675:07            100.05
675:09            100.06
677:05            100.15
678:00            100.16
678:15            100.17
678:20            100.18
682:00            100.30
682:05            100.31
682:10            100.32
682:15            100.33
682:20            100.34
682:25            100.35
682:30            100.36
682:35            100.37
682:40            100.38
682:45            100.39
682:50            100.40
682:55            100.41
682:60            100.42
700:00            71.01
705:00            71.15
705:05            71.16
710:00            73.50
710:05            73.51
715:00            73.01
715:05            73.02
715:10            73.03
720:00 - 720:05   71.02
725:00            72.01
725:03            72.02
725:15            72.03
725:18            72.04
725:21            72.05
725:24            72.06
725:27            72.07
725:30            72.08
725:31            72.09
725:32            72.10
725:33            72.11
725:36            72.12
725:39            72.13
725:42            72.14
725:45            72.15
725:48            72.16
725:50            72.17
725:51            72.18
725:54            72.19
725:57            72.20
725:60            72.21
730:00            73.30
730:05            73.31
730:10            73.32
730:40 - 730:65   73.38
730:70            73.39
730:75            73.40
735:00            71.40
735:05            71.41
735:10            71.42
735:15            71.43
735:20            71.44
735:25            71.45
735:30            71.46
735:35            71.47
735:40            71.48
735:45            71.49
735:50            71.50
740:00            71.25
740:05            71.26
740:10            71.27
740:15            71.28
740:20            71.29
740:25            71.30
805:00            112.030
805:05            112.031
805:10            112.032
805:20            112.033
805:25            112.034
805:30            112.035
805:40            112.036
805:45            112.037
805:50            112.038
805:55            112.039
805:60            112.040
805:65            112.041
805:70            112.042
805:75            112.043
805:80            112.044
805:85            112.045
805:90            112.046
805:95            112.047
810:00            112.055
810:05            112.056
810:10            112.057
810:15            112.058
810:20            112.059
810:25            112.060
810:30            112.061
810:35            112.062
810:40            112.063
810:45            112.064
810:50            112.002
810:55            112.065
810:60            112.066
810:65            112.067
810:70            112.068
810:75            112.069
820:00            112.095
820:05            112.096
820:10            112.097
820:15            112.098
820:20            112.099
820:25            112.100
825:00            112.001
903:10            37.01
903:20            37.02
903:40            37.03
903:50            37.04
903:60            37.05
903:70            37.06
903:80            37.07
903:90            37.08
903:100           37.09
903:110           37.10
910:00            134.30
910:05            134.31
910:10            134.32
910:20            134.33
910:20            134.34
910:25            134.35
912:00            133.01
912:05            133.02
912:10            133.03
912:15            133.04
912:20            133.05
914:00            130.01
920:00            134.15
920:05            134.16
920:10            134.17
920:15            134.18
920:20            134.19
922:00            134.02
935:00            133.15
935:05            133.16
935:10            133.17
940:00            131.01
940:05            131.02
940:10            131.03
940:11            131.04
940:15            131.05
950:00            136.01
950:05            136.02
950:10            136.03
950:15            136.04
950:20            136.05
950:25            136.06
950:30            136.07
950:35            136.08
950:45            136.09
950:50            136.10
950:55            136.11
961:00            135.01
961:05            135.02
961:10            135.03
961:15            135.04
961:20            135.05
961:25            135.06
961:30            135.07
961:35            135.08
965:00            134.03
980:00            130.02
985:00            130.03
1000:01           94.01
1000:06           94.02
1000:11           94.03
1000:16           94.04
1000:21           94.05
1000:26           94.06
1000:31           94.99
1000:60           94.07
1005:00           103.60
1005:10           103.61
1005:15           103.62
1020:00           97.01
1020:00           97.02
1020:00           97.20
1020:05           97.25
1025:00           91.01
1025:05           91.02
1025:10           91.03
1025:15           91.99
1105:00           70.02
1105:00           70.01
1110:00           70.03
1110:00           110.20
1200:00           10.05
1400:00           10.04
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section
1971-31(A)  11-8-71     71.01
1972-106    5-8-72      105.01
1972-115    7-10-72     105.04
1972-117(A) 8-14-72     73.38
1972-120(A) 8-28-72     32.02
1972-121(A) 8-28-72     38.01
1972-122(A) 8-28-72     112.032,
                        112.036
1972-123(A) 8-28-72     151.101
1973-136    2-12-73     99.83
1973-138(A) 2-26-73     92.32
1973-142(A) 5-14-73     131.04
1973-147(A) 6-11-73     151.010
1973-154(A) 10-9-73     31.60
1973-156(A) 11-12-73    92.14
1973-159(A) 12-17-73    96.28
1974-161(A) 2-11-74     103.03
1974-169(A) 6-24-74     112.059
1974-170(A) 7-22-74     151.010
1974-176(A) 12-9-74     151.071
1975-181(A) 1-27-75     110.38
1975-210(A) 10-27-75    72.01,
                        72.18
1975-215(A) 12-8-75     151.005
1976-225(A) 8-9-76      112.030,
                        112.055
1976-230(A) - -         117.26 -
                        117.30
1977-233(A) 1-10-77     151.061,
                        T.S.O. II
1977-237(A) 2-28-77     103.02
1977-238(A) 2-28-77     72.17
1977-240(A) 2-28-77     99.77,
                        100.58
1977-243(A) 4-11-77     151.071
1977-248(A) 8-22-77     151.006
                        92.01,
1977-251(A) 10-11-77    92.08,
                        92.09
1977-254(A) 12-12-77    151.102
1978-256(A) 1-9-78      130.03
1978-259(A) 3-17-78     10.99
1978-262(A) 4-24-78     99.15-
                        99.17
1978-265(A) 5-22-78     30.15
1978-266(A) 6-12-78     151.060
1978-274(A) 8-28-78     134.02
1979-283(A) 2-26-79     T.S.O. II
1979-285(A) 3-12-79     73.15 -
                        73.17
1979-295(A) 7-9-79      112.047
1979-296(A) 7-23-79     113.40 -
                        113.50
1979-301(A) 10-9-79     99.75
1979-303(A) 11-13-79    151.071
1980-316(A) 3-10-80     113.01 -
                        113.15
1980-317(A) 3-24-80     98.03 -
                        98.06
1980-320(A) 4-28-80     72.04
1980-330(A) 7-14-80     98.04
1980-334(A) 8-11-80     113.25 -
                        113.31
1980-337(A) 10-14-80    T.S.O. II
1980-342(A) 10-27-80    T.S.O. II
                        99.80 -
1980-346(A) 12-8-80     99.81,
                        103.02
1980-348(A) 12-15-80    T.S.O. II
1981-351(A) 1-26-81     103.02
1981-355(A) 3-23-81     118.09
1981-356(A) 3-23-81     98.01
1981-369(A) 11-9-81     T.S.O. II
                        112.032,
1981-371(A) 12-14-81    112.033,
                        112.039,
                        112.040
1981-372(A) 12-14-81    118.07,
                        118.09
1981-374(A) 12-14-81    151.014
1981-375(A) 12-14-81    99.75,
                        99.80
1982-377(A) 1-25-82     T.S.O. II
1982-378(A) 1-25-82     T.S.O. II
1982-383(A) 3-22-82     T.S.O. I
1982-384(A) 3-22-82     112.068
1982-386(A) 4-12-82     71.46 -
                        71.47
1982-390(A) 5-24-82     134.35
                        32.02,
1982-395(A) 7-26-82     32.05,
                        32.10,
                        32.13
1983-420(A) 5-9-83      112.001
1983-421(A) 5-9-83      117.41 -
                        117.51
1983-424(A) 5-23-83     72.08,
                        72.09
1983-439(A) 10-24-83    97.03
1983-440(A) 11-21-83    73.40
1983-442(A) 11-21-83    10.99
1984-444(A) 1-9-84      71.25 -
                        71.30
1984-445(A) 2-27-84     131.04
1984-447    4-9-84      Ch. 151
1984-449(A) 4-23-84     98.06
1984-452(A) 5-29-84     T.S.O. II
1984-454(A) 6-4-84      T.S.O. II
1984-455(A) 6-11-84     92.05
1984-457(A) 6-11-84     136.01
1984-458(A) 6-11-84     Ch. 135
1984-466(A) 9-24-84     112.065
1984-467(A) 10-8-84     72.04
1984-470(A) 11-13-84    98.07
1984-473(A) 12-17-84    101.01 -
                        101.05
                        99.60,
1984-474(A) 12-17-84    99.61,
                        99.63,
                        99.65
1985-477(A) 2-11-85     100.60 -
                        100.61
1985-480(A) 3-18-85     151.090
1985-482(A) 4-22-85     92.20
                        99.81,
                        99.82,
1985-487(A) 8-26-85     100.57,
                        100.58,
                        100.60
1985-493(A) 9-23-85     T.S.O. II
1985-496(A) 9-23-85     105.04
1985-501(R) - -         151.086
1985-504(A) 12-2-85     36.01 -
                        36.06
                        32.03,
                        32.04,
1985-505(A) 12-2-85     32.08,
                        32.09,
                        32.10
1986-511(A) 1-27-86     99.76
1986-517(A) 2-10-86     112.033
1986-528(A) 5-27-86     151.012
1986-531(A) 6-9-86      73.18
1986-535(A) 7-28-86     112.001
1986-536(A) 7-28-86     34.20 et seq.
                        99.66,
                        99.81,
1986-540(A) 8-18-86     99.82,
                        110.38,
                        151.014
1986-541(A) 8-18-86     71.49
1986-543(A) 9-22-86     T.S.O. II
                        112.030,
1986-544(A) 9-22-86     112.055,
                        112.064
1986-552(A) 12-8-86     136.10
1987-563(A) 6-8-87      112.030
1987-570(A) 8-24-87     33.03
1987-578(A) 10-12-87    136.09
1988-587(A) 1-25-88     99.06
1988-588(A) 1-25-88     30.15
1988-591(A) 2-22-88     71.43
1988-596(A) 7-11-88     151.043
1988-597(A) 7- -88      113.60 -
                        113.64
1988-602(A) 8-22-88     Ch. 150
1989-623(A) 3-6-89      110.39
                        92.01,
                        92.04,
                        92.11,
                        92.13,
1989-626(A) 6-26-89     92.14,
                        92.18,
                        92.21,
                        92.24,
                        92.32
1989-627(A) 6-26-89     94.01 -
                        94.06
                        112.031,
1989-628(A) 6-26-89     112.042,
                        112.055,
                        112.056
1989-630(A) 8-28-89     103.02
                        98.01,
                        98.04,
1989-633(A) 9-25-89     98.06,
                        98.08,
                        98.09,
                        98.10
1989-634(A) 9-25-89     98.30 et seq.,
                        98.99
1989-639(A) 11-20-89    112.033
1989-640(A) 12-18-89    94.06
                        112.042,
1989-641(A) 12-18-89    112.064,
                        112.066,
                        112.098
1990-644(A) 2-26-90     113.63
1990-645(A) 2-26-90     136.11
1990-654(A) 6-25-90     92.05
1990-655(A) 7-9-90      112.042
1990-657(A) 8-27-90     150.06
1990-660(A) 10-8-90     103.02,
                        151.014
1990-664(A) 11-26-90    112.032
1990-667(A) 12-17-90    117.40,
                        117.48
1991-671(A) 2-11-91     151.090
1991-677(A) 8-12-91     36.01 et seq.
1991-685(A) 11-25-91    34.01 et seq.
1991-686(A) 12-23-91    135.01,
                        135.02
1992-689    3-23-92     111.01 et seq.
1992-69     - -         150.26
1992-694    5-11-92     150.03 -
                        150.07
1992-696    5-11-92     110.13
1992-697    5-26-92     112.030
1992-700    8-24-92     112.041
                        151.002,
                        151.006,
                        151.007,
1992-705    9-14-92     151.056,
                        151.061,
                        151.086,
                        151.088
1992-710    10-12-92    117.49
1993-713    1-11-93     92.07
1993-714    2-8-93      71.40,
                        71.50
1993-715    2-22-93     112.041
1993-720    5-24-93     72.02,
                        72.10
1993-726    7-12-93     31.75 et seq.
1993-727    7-12-93     133.01 -
                        133.05
1993-728    7-12-93     112.039
1993-733    9-27-93     130.01
1993-741    11-22-93    94.01,
                        94.03
                        99.76,
                        99.77,
1993-744    11-22-93    99.80,
                        99.82,
                        103.01,
                        103.02
1993-746    12-13-93    151.007
1993-748    12-20-93    100.55 et seq.
1994-699    - -         113.63
                        91.01 -
1994-752    1-10-94     91.03,
                        91.99
1994-755    4-11-94     100.57
                        151.005,
1994-756    5-9-94      151.089,
                        151.090
1994-762    5-23-94     134.19
1994-763    6-13-94     30.01
1994-765    7-25-94     113.63
                        115.05,
1994-766    9-12-94     150.05,
                        150.29
                        99.36,
1995-774    2-13-95     99.75,
                        99.78
                        Ch. 96,
                        Ch. 98,
                        99.01 -
                        99.48,
                        100.01 -
                        100.56,
1995-779    4-24-95     Ch. 101,
                        103.01,
                        103.03 -
                        103.05,
                        103.75 et seq.,
                        105.01 -
                        105.03
1995-784    7-10-95     32.01 et seq.
1996-795    1-22-96     117.41 et seq.
1996-800    3-25-96     100.63,
                        100.64
1996-801    3-25-96     151.060,
                        151.061
1996-818    5-28-96     100.55
1996-830    12-16-96    103.01,
                        105.04
                        112.001,
                        112.039,
                        112.041,
                        112.047,
1997-841    3-24-97     112.055 -
                        112.059,
                        112.061,
                        112.064,
                        112.065,
                        112.069
1997-843    3-24-97     110.37,
                        Ch. 119
1997-845    4-28-97     110.37
1997-846    5-12-97     36.01 et seq.
                        150.06,
1997-848    6-9-97      150.13,
                        150.14
                        92.01,
                        92.06 -
                        92.08,
                        92.12,
1997-861    10-27-97    92.14,
                        92.16 -
                        92.23,
                        92.32,
                        94.04
1997-863    11-24-97    31.01,
                        31.02
1998-870    3-23-98     31.76
1998-871    4-13-98     Ch. 97
1998-873    4-13-98     110.37,
                        Ch. 122
1998-878    4-13-98     30.15,
                        30.18
1998-880    5-11-98     30.01
1998-881    5-26-98     Ch. 37
1998-887    8-10-98     151.061
                        99.04,
                        99.06,
                        99.07,
                        99.30,
                        99.34 -
                        99.36,
                        99.40 -
                        99.42,
                        99.46,
                        99.47,
                        99.75 -
                        99.80,
                        99.82,
1998-890    12-14-98    99.83,
                        100.04,
                        100.06,
                        100.30 -
                        100.32,
                        100.34 -
                        100.36,
                        100.40,
                        100.41,
                        100.55,
                        100.57 -
                        100.63,
                        101.03 -
                        101.05
1998-891    12-14-98    103.01
1999-894    2-22-99     32.02
1999-895    3-22-99     113.63
1999-900    5-24-99     150.05
1999-901    6-28-99     34.01 et seq.
1999-905    10-11-99    151.061
                        73.32,
1999-912    10-25-99    73.38 -
                        73.40
1999-914    11-08-99    150.03,
                        150.29
2000-923    4-10-00     30.01
2000-927    6-26-00     113.63
2000-930B   8-28-00     Adopting Ordinance
2000-931    9-5-00      71.03
2000-932    9-11-00     30.39
2000-933    10-9-00     150.06
2000-934    11-13-00    119.40 -
                        119.52
                        150.03,
2000-935    11-13-00    150.06,
                        150.25 -
                        150.30
2000-937    11-13-00    Appendix
2000-939    11-13-00    150.03,
                        150.04
2001-944    1-8-01      92.01,
                        92.03
2001-945    1-8-01      39.01,
                        39.02
2001-946    1-8-01      40.01,
                        40.02
                        90.01,
2001-948    2-12-01     90.15 -
                        90.18
2001-954    7-9-01      92.40
2001-955    8-13-01     106.01,
                        106.02
                        117.42 -
                        117.44,
2001-956    8-13-01     117.46,
                        117.52,
                        117.53
2001-958    10-22-01    114.01 -
                        114.10
2001-959    11-13-01    73.32,
                        73.38
2001-960    11-26-01    112.039
                        151.026,
                        151.055,
                        151.056,
2001-961    11-26-01    151.061,
                        151.086,
                        151.088,
                        151.090
2002-963    2-11-02     113.62
2002-964    2-25-02     39.01,
                        39.02
2002-969    5-13-02     95.01 -
                        95.08
                        112.036,
2002-971    5-13-02     112.062,
                        112.097
                        107.01 -
2002-972    5-13-02     107.06,
                        107.99
2002-973    5-28-02     97.01 -
                        97.55
                        117.40,
                        117.42 -
2002-975    6-10-02     117.44,
                        117.46,
                        117.48 -
                        117.52
2002-976    6-10-02     30.01
2002-981    11-25-02    108.01 -
                        108.05
2002-983    11-25-02    109.01 -
                        109.03
2002-985    11-25-02    151.026
2002-987    12-16-02    117.42,
                        117.44
2003-988    2-3-03      30.15
                        Established moratorium extension that with the adoption
2003-990    2-18-03     of Ord. 2003-991, the temporary moratorium imposed by
                        Ord. 2002-986 and the extension imposed by Ord. 2003-
                        990 is terminated.
2003-992    3-17-03     31.90 -
                        31.93
2003-994    3-24-03     10.20
2003-996    4-14-03     91.02
                        103.01,
2003-999    6-2-03      103.02,
                        103.75,
                        103.77
                        150.03,
2003-1002   8-25-03     150.25 -
                        150.28
2003-1003   9-22-03     T.S.O. II
2003-1005   10-20-03    102.20 -
                        102.50
2003-1006   10-27-03    T.S.O. I
                        117.481,
2003-1007   10-27-03    117.485,
                        117.52
2003-1008   11-3-03     72.10
2003-1009   11-17-03    T.S.O. II
                        110.13,
                        111.02,
                        111.08,
                        112.033,
2004-1013   5-10-04     112.035,
                        112.041,
                        113.44,
                        119.07,
                        119.18,
                        Repealed 110.19
2004-1014   5-10-04     110.05
                        117.42,
                        117.43,
2004-1021   11-15-04    117.44,
                        117.46,
                        117.485,
                        Repealed 117.462 and 117.463, 117.481, 117.52
2004-1023   12-6-04     112.101
2004-1026   12-13-04    150.03,
                        150.06
                        94.01,
2005-1030   1-10-05     94.08 -
                        94.15,
                        94.99
2005-1031   1-18-05     30.15
                        117.42,
2005-1036   5-23-05     117.44,
                        117.52,
                        Repealed 117.461
2005-1040   6-6-05      151.061
2005-1045   7-18-05     112.041
2005-1047   8-22-05     90.01
2005-1052   11-28-05    112.001
2006-1054   1-23-06     30.01
2006-1061   7-24-06     151.061
2006-1062   8-7-06      T.S.O. II
                        92.01,
                        92.12,
                        92.14,
2006-1067   11-27-06    92.15,
                        92.18,
                        92.25,
                        92.26
2007-1068   2-20-07     117.42 -
                        117.45
2007-1075   8-20-07     103.01
                        99.46,
                        99.78,
                        100.35,
2007-1076   8-20-07     100.40,
                        100.41,
                        100.55,
                        100.63,
                        100.65
2007-1078   10-15-07    31.75,
                        31.79
2007-1082   12-3-07     T.S.O. I
                        136.01 -
2008-1084   2-4-08      136.06,
                        136.10,
                        136.11
                        31.45,
2008-1086   4-7-08      31.60,
                        31.76,
                        31.92
2008-1087   5-27-08     117.485
2008-1089   6-23-08     98.04,
                        98.14
                        117.40,
                        117.41,
                        117.43,
                        117.46,
2008-1090   7-7-08      117.48,
                        117.483,
                        117.49,
                        117.491,
                        117.52
2008-1092   8-25-08     151.089,
                        151.090
2008-1093   8-25-08     117.485
                        92.01,
                        92.04,
                        92.12,
                        92.14,
2009-1096   2-23-09     92.16,
                        92.17,
                        92.20,
                        92.25 -
                        92.31
2009-1097   4-6-09      112.003,
                        112.044
2009-1100   5-26-09     72.10
2009-1103   9-8-09      37.08,
                        117.521
2009-1104   9-8-09      106.01,
                        106.02
2009-1105   9-8-09      T.S.O. II
                        39.02,
2009-1106   10-5-09     40.01,
                        40.02
2010-1110   1-4-10      98.14
2010-1112   4-5-10      97.20
                        92.01,
                        92.03,
2010-1114   4-26-10     95.01,
                        95.02,
                        95.04
2010-1115   6-7-10      41.01 -
                        41.04
2010-1116   7-6-10      72.10
2010-1117   9-7-10      150.29
2010-1121   12-6-10     150.05
                        123.01 -
2011-1123   1-3-11      123.13,
                        123.99
2011-1125   4-4-11      134.04
2012-1133   3-5-12      Repealed 153.326
                        105.02,
                        105.05,
2012-1135   3-26-12     105.06,
                        114.02,
                        Repealed 117.01 - 117.16, 117.25, 117.26, 117.28
2012-1136   3-26-12     37.04,
                        37.05
2012-1137   4-2-12      10.20
                        112.030,
                        112.032,
                        112.045,
                        112.048,
                        112.049,
                        112.200 -
2012-1140   4-16-12     112.202,
                        112.210,
                        112.211,
                        112.300,
                        112.998,
                        112.999,
                        Repealed 112.015 - 112.018 and 112.080 - 112.084
2012-1147   8-20-12     150.06
                        98.01,
2012-1148   9-4-12      98.02,
                        98.07
                        92.01,
2012-1149   9-4-12      92.04,
                        92.15,
                        94.04
2012-1152   10-22-12    150.03,
                        150.06
2013-1154   3-4-13      124.01 -
                        124.14
2013-1157   6-10-13     Repealed 106.03
2013-1160   8-19-13     112.033
                        150.03,
2014-1165   2-3-14      150.04,
                        150.06
2014-1166   2-3-14      Repealed 113.01 - 113.31, 115.01 - 115.05, 116.01 -
                        116.07, 116.20 - 116.28
                        97.01 -
                        97.03,
                        97.20,
                        97.25,
2014-1170   5-27-14     97.30,
                        97.35,
                        97.40,
                        97.45,
                        97.50,
                        97.55
2014-1171   6-16-14     Appendix Fee Schedule
2014-1177   7-7-14      114.03,
                        119.30
2014-1183   10-6-14     112.400 -
                        112.403
                        150.03,
2014-1186   12-15-14    150.27 -
                        150.30
2015-1187   2-17-15     30.15
2015-1191   5-18-15     92.50 -
                        92.58
                        122.01 -
                        122.03,
                        122.05,
2015-1192   5-26-15     122.06,
                        122.09,
                        122.11,
                        122.99 
                        112.041,
2015-1196   9-14-15     112.300,
                        112.400 -
                        112.403
2015-1197   9-28-15     99.76,
                        100.63
2015-1200   11-23-15    T.S.O. I
2015-1201   11-23-15    T.S.O. I
2016-1203   3-14-16     112.202,
                        112.403
2016-1207   9-12-16     106.01,
                        106.02
                        117.49,
2016-1208   9-29-16     117.491,
                        117.52
                        104.01 -
                        104.19,
2017-1217   7-10-17     153.01 -
                        153.08,
                        153.99
                        93A.01 -
2017-1219   8-28-17     93A.12,
                        93A.99
                        Repealed Chapter 93
2017-1223   10-23-17    112.032,
                        112.041
2017-1224   11-27-17    30.32
2017-1225   12-4-17     102.20 -
                        102.50
2017-1227   12-4-17     150.05
                        30.23,
                        30.39,
2018-1228   2-5-18      31.45,
                        31.75,
                        31.78,
                        31.92
2018-1230   4-23-18     92.21
2018-1233   7-9-18      30.01
2018-1234   7-23-18     72.11
                        119.30 -
2018-1235   8-27-18     119.34,
                        119.36,
                        119.37
                        114.01,
2019-1237   2-25-19     114.02,
                        114.04,
                        114.09
2019-1245   10-28-19    117.486
                        92.12,
                        92.13,
                        92.19,
2019-1246   11-12-19    92.25,
                        92.26,
                        92.35 
                        Repealed 92.02, 92.32, 92.36, 92.37, 92.38
2020-1250   2-10-20     134.05
                        93A.02,
                        93A.03,
2020-1255   6-22-20     93A.04,
                        93A.07,
                        93A.09,
                        93A.10
                        122.01,
                        122.02,
                        122.03,
                        122.05,
                        122.06,
2020-1259   11-20-20    122.09,
                        122.10,
                        122.11,
                        122.12,
                        122.99
                        Repealed 122.07, 122.08
                        94.01,
                        94.03,
                        98.01 -
                        98.09,
                        98.11 -
                        98.15,
2021-1262   5-10-21     98.17,
                        98.30 -
                        98.33,
                        98.38,
                        98.39,
                        98.99
                        Repealed 98.16
                        102.25,
                        125.01,
                        125.10 -
                        125.20,
2021-1263   5-10-21     125.30 -
                        125.38,
                        125.50,
                        125.51
                        Repealed Chapter 121
                        103.01,
                        103.02,
2021-1267   11-22-21    103.61,
                        103.75,
                        103.79
                        31.45,
                        31.60,
2021-1268   12-6-21     31.75,
                        31.76,
                        31.90 -
                        31.92
                        92.03,
2022-1269   1-10-22     95.01 -
                        95.07
2022-1271   1-24-22     30.15
2022-1273   3-28-22     10.20
                        105.06,
2022-1277   7-25-22     114.02,
                        117.28
2022-1278   7-25-22     104.02,
                        104.20
2022-1281   8-22-22     133.04
2022-1283   10-24-22    30.01
                        103.01,
                        103.02,
2022-1285   11-14-22    103.78,
                        103.79,
                        105.04
                        126.01 -
2022-1286   12-5-22     126.10,
                        126.99
2023-1289   6-12-23     117.52,
                        117.54
2023-1292   9-25-23     72.08
2023-1297   11-13-23    150.31
2024-1300   4-22-24     34.45 -
                        34.48
                        43.01 -
2024-1301   5-13-24     43.08,
                        43.99
                        95.03,
2024-1302   6-24-24     133.25,
                        133.26,
                        133.99
                        95.03,
2024-1303   6-24-24     95.04,
                        126.99
                        150.01 -
                        150.06,
                        150.08 -
                        150.11,
                        150.13,
                        150.14,
                        150.25,
                        150.26,
2024-1304   7-29-24     150.29 -
                        150.31,
                        151.001,
                        151.011,
                        151.026,
                        151.060,
                        Chapter 152,
                        153.05 -
                        153.08
                        127.01 -
                        127.09,
                        127.99,
2024-1307   12-9-24     152.105,
                        152.609,
                        152.707,
                        152.903,
                        152.905
2025-1308   2-10-25     T.S.O. I
                        92.12,
2025-1309   3-10-25     92.19,
                        92.21,
                        92.32
                        152.105,
                        152.303,
                        152.706,
2025-1310   3-24-25     152.1004,
                        152.1013,
                        152.1018,
                        152.1019
2025-1311   4-14-25     112.032
2025-1312   5-2-25      103.10 -
                        103.12
2025-1313   6-9-25      106.01,
                        106.02
                        137.01 -
2025-1315   7-14-25     137.05,
                        137.99
2025-1317   9-8-25      152.901,
                        152.1008
                        127.02 -
2025-1318   10-13-25    127.04,
                        127.09,
                        127.99
                       
 
