BYRON, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-13 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-11, passed 9-9-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 0401
CITY OF BYRON
COUNTY OF OLMSTED
STATE OF MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF BYRON, MINNESOTA,
AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 412.021 authorize the city to
cause its ordinances to be codified and printed in a book,
NOW THEREFORE,  the City Council of the City of Byron, Minnesota ordains:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the City as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for the
violation of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Byron.” This Code of
Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statutes and administrative rules
of the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.
Section 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles:
   I:   General Provisions
   III:   Administration
   V:   Public Works
   VII:   Traffic Code
   IX:   General Regulations
   XI:   Business Regulations
   XIII:   General Offenses
   XV:   Land Usage
Section 3. All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in the Code
of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in part
in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchise, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land
to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code of Ordinances. All fees established in prior ordinances codified in this
Code shall remain in effect unless amended in this code or until an ordinance
adopting a fee schedule is adopted or amended.
Section 4. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a sufficient
publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously in the published
in the City’s official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause a
substantial quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general
distribution to the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the Code
of Ordinances to the County Law Library or its designated depository. The
official copy of this Code of Ordinances shall be marked and kept in the office
of the City Clerk.
Section 5. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of the
law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.
Section 6. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in the
City’s newspaper.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF  BYRON , MINNESOTA THIS
24TH  DAY OF  MARCH , 2004.
APPROVED:
Gregory H. Brandt \s\ , MAYOR
ATTEST:
Mary K. Blair-Hoeft \s\ , CITY CLERK
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
"city code," for which designation "code of ordinances," "codified ordinances"
or "code" may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code." Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the number, such as "§
10.01." Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance:
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or," whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Byron, Minnesota. The term CITY when used in this code
may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
      COUNTY. Olmsted County, Minnesota.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway right-of-
ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk
for public inspection. The Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable
charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this Minnesota
Basic Code, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
31.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
32.   CITY POLICIES
      
33.   CIVIL DEFENSE
CHAPTER 30: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
City Administrator
   
30.01   Position established
   
30.02   Appointment
   
30.03   Qualifications
   
30.04   Duties
Clerk-Treasurer
   
30.20   Combination of offices
   
30.21   Appointment
   
30.22   Qualifications
   
30.23   Duties
Mayor and Council Members
   
30.35   Salaries
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
§ 30.01 POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   The Byron City Council has determined for the proper management and
operation of city affairs to appoint a municipal officer to perform the duties
previously performed by the Administrator/EDA Coordinator and such other duties
as may be assigned by the City Council or otherwise required by Minnesota
Statute. The municipal officer is entitled “City Administrator.”
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-10-22)
§ 30.02 APPOINTMENT.
   The City Administrator is appointed by a majority of the City Council for an
indefinite term, removable only by a majority vote of the Council. The
compensation of the City Administrator shall be fixed by the City Council as
negotiated in the employment contract.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-10-22)
§ 30.03 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The person to be appointed City Administrator shall have the following
education experience and knowledge:
   (A)   Graduation from an accredited four-year college or university with a
degree in public administration, political science, urban studies, business
management or a closely related field and more than five years experience in
municipal government functions, including management or administrative
experience.
   (B)   More than five years experience in city government functions. Previous
experience in city administration is very essential.
   (C)   Demonstrate ability to integrate municipal planning with economic
growth and development.
   (D)   Proven ability to work effectively with staff, elected officials,
contractors/vendors and constituents.
   (E)   Demonstrated leadership skills by building successful partnerships and
fostering teamwork when working with the public and other city agencies in
planning, developing and completing projects.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-10-22)
§ 30.04 DUTIES.
   The duties of the City Administrator shall include, but are not limited to
carrying out the directives of the City Council by coordinating the operations
of the city departments.(Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-10-22)
CLERK-TREASURER
§ 30.20 COMBINATION OF OFFICES.
   The office of Clerk-Administrator and Treasurer shall be combined into a new
office entitled “Clerk- Treasurer.”
(Ord. 98-18, passed 12-10-98)
§ 30.21 APPOINTMENT.
   The Clerk-Treasurer is appointed by a majority of the Council for an
indefinite term, removable only by a majority vote of the Council. This
position is considered a department head position and will report directly to
the Administrator position. The compensation of the Clerk-Treasurer shall be
fixed by the City Council.
(Ord. 98-18, passed 12-10-98)
§ 30.22 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The person to be appointed Clerk-Treasurer shall have the following
education, experience or knowledge:
   (A)   Three years of accounting and/or bookkeeping experience;
   (B)   Ability to adhere to procedures which are in conformance with the city
policies and state and federal regulations;
   (C)   Proven ability to work effectively with staff, elected officials,
general public, news media, schools, civic groups and other organizations;
   (D)   Demonstrate the ability to collect information and analyze it for
reporting and to conduct and implement studies or procedures, operations and
organization.
(Ord. 98-18, passed 12-10-98)
§ 30.23 DUTIES.
   (A)   The duties of the Clerk-Treasurer of the city shall include the duties
now performed by the Clerk-Administrator and Treasurer.
   (B)   The duties include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Keep records of all Council proceedings, handle all correspondence
on behalf of the Council, draw up agendas and execute any assignments given by
the Council and act as executive officer;
      (2)   Required to give notice of each regular and special election,
record the proceedings thereof, notify officials of their election or
appointment to office, certify to the County Auditor all appointments and the
result of all city elections, as required by law;
      (3)   Perform payroll functions, including quarterly and annual
reporting;
      (4)   Maintain all personnel records;
      (5)   Supervise additional office staff employed by the city. This would
include administering an annual performance appraisal;
      (6)   Attend and participate in City Council meetings as requested.
Prepare Council agendas. Record the proceedings and maintain in an official
minute book;
      (7)   Coordinate the annual city audit;
      (8)   Perform duties of notary public, official signer, with the Mayor on
checks, contracts and other official documents. Prepare and certify copies of
the minutes, ordinances and resolutions;
      (9)   Record all financial transactions. Code, post and reconcile
accounts payable and accounts receivable. Reconcile bank statements;
      (10)   Maintain investments. Prepare monthly and annual financial
statements and annual reports as required by county and/or state;
      (11)   Prepare annual budget, in accordance with Truth in Taxation
requirements. Prepare other financial reports, at the request of the Council.
Work with Bond Consultant, when required.
(Ord. 98-18, passed 12-10-98)
MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS
§ 30.35 SALARIES.
   Salaries of Mayor and Council Members. Salaries of the Mayor and Council
Members, per State Statute § 415.11, are hereby fixed as follows, which amounts
are determined reasonable:   
   (A)   The Mayor shall be paid a salary of $5,000 per year for regular City
Council meeting attendance.
   (B)   The Council Member shall be paid a salary of $4,000 per year for
regular City Council meeting attendance.
      (1)   The Mayor and Council Members shall be reimbursed $40 for each
special meeting they attend as Council representatives.
      (2)   Special meeting shall be defined as when a Council person attends a
special Council meeting that is not regularly scheduled or attends a meeting as
a Council liaison for which they were appointed by on the annual appointment
resolution.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-24-22)
CHAPTER 31: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Park Board
   
31.01   Board created
   
31.02   Terms
   
31.03   Duties and powers
PARK BOARD
§ 31.01 BOARD CREATED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 412.501, as amended from time to time,
there is established for the City of Byron a Park Board consisting of five
members appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council.
(Ord. 70-3, passed 12-9-70; Am. Ord. 76-05, passed 12-22-76)
Cross-reference:
   Parks, see
Ch. 90
§ 31.02 TERMS.
   One member of the original Board shall serve for a term ending December 31,
1971, one for a term ending December 31, 1972 and one for a term ending
December 31, 1973. Thereafter each member shall be appointed for a term of
three years.
(Ord. 70-3, passed 12-9-70)
§ 31.03 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The duties, power and function of the Park Board shall be those granted by
statute as the same now exist or may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 70-3, passed 12-9-70)
CHAPTER 32: CITY POLICIES
Section
   
32.01   City elections
   
32.02   City Hall designated as smoke free
§ 32.01 CITY ELECTIONS.
   Commencing with the 1960 city election, the regular city election of the
City of Byron shall be held bi-annually on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November of each election year.
(Ord. 10A, passed 12-18-96)
§ 32.02 CITY HALL DESIGNATED AS SMOKE FREE.
   (A)   In accordance with M.S. §§ 144.411 through 144.417, as amended from
time to time, no person shall smoke in City Hall at public meetings or at any
such time as the office is open to the public. Appropriate signs will be
posted.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 87-01, passed 4-22-87) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 33: CIVIL DEFENSE
Section
   
33.01   Policy and purpose
   
33.02   Coordination of functions
   
33.03   Definitions
   
33.04   Civil defense organization
   
33.05   Represent the city
   
33.06   Studies and surveys
   
33.07   Comprehensive plan
   
33.08   Training programs
   
33.09   Use of existing facilities and the like
   
33.10   Personnel
   
33.11   Emergency medical aids
   
33.12   Directions of the Governor
   
33.13   Coordination with state civil defense
   
33.14   Control center
   
33.15   Emergency authority
   
33.16   Loyalty requirement
   
33.17   Volunteer use and compensation
   
33.18   Insignia
   
33.19   Firearms restricted
   
33.20   City personnel procedures
   
33.21   Proclamation by Mayor
   
33.22   Proclamation procedures
   
33.23   Proclamation term
   
33.24   Emergency authority
   
33.25   Civil defense fund
   
33.26   Annual report
   
33.27   Cooperation
   
33.28   Governmental function
   
33.29   Prohibited activity
   
33.30   Joining with county civil defense
§ 33.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of
disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from enemy
attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from fire, flood, earthquake or
other natural causes, and in order to insure that preparations of this city
will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally, to provide for the
common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to
preserve the lives and property of the people of this city, it is found and
declared to be necessary:
   (A)   To establish a local civil defense agency;
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during civil defense
emergencies; and
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other
political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the
carrying out of civil defense functions.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.02 COORDINATION OF FUNCTIONS.
   It is further the purpose and policy of the city that all civil defense
functions of this city be coordinated to the maximum extent practicable with
the comparable functions of the federal government, of this state, and of other
states and localities, and of private agencies of every type, to the end that
the most effective preparations and use may be made of the nation’s manpower,
resources and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL DEFENSE. The preparations for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from
disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other enemy hostile action, or
from fire, flood, earthquake, or other natural causes. These functions include,
without limitation, firefighting services, law enforcement services, medical
and health services, rescue, engineering, communications, evacuation of persons
from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation,
existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary
restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian
protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to
preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.
   CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCY. An emergency declared by the Governor under M.S. §
12.31.
   CIVIL DEFENSE FORCES. Any personnel employed by the city and any other
volunteers or paid members of the local civil defense organization engaged in
carrying on civil defense functions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or thereunder.
   LOCAL CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCY. Any pending or imminent event affecting the
city involving fire, flood, earthquake, tornado, drought or other natural cause
for which civil defense preparations and functions are required.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.04 CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION.
   There shall be within the city government an office of civil defense which
shall be under the supervision and control of a director of civil defense,
called the Emergency Management Director. The Emergency Management Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor for an indefinite term and may be removed by
him/her at any time. The Emergency Management Director shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the civil
defense agency, subject to the direction and control of the council. The civil
defense organization shall be organized into such divisions and bureaus,
consistent with state and local civil defense plans, as the Emergency
Management Director deems necessary to provide for the efficient performance of
local civil defense functions during a civil defense emergency. The civil
defense agency shall perform civil defense functions within the city and in
addition shall conduct such functions outside the city as may be required
pursuant to the provisions of the M.S. Ch. 12, as amended, or this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.05 REPRESENT THE CITY.
   (A)   The Emergency Management Director shall represent the city on any
regional or state organization for civil defense.
   (B)   The Emergency Management Director:
      (1)   Shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions within or outside the state for reciprocal civil defense aid and
assistance in a civil defense emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted;
and
      (2)   Shall present such agreements to the council for its action. Such
arrangements shall be consistent with the state civil defense plan and during a
civil defense emergency, it shall be the duty of
the civil defense agency and civil defense forces to render assistance in
accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements. Any mutual aid
arrangement with a political subdivision of another state shall be subject to
the approval of the Governor.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.06 STUDIES AND SURVEYS.
   The Emergency Management Director shall make such studies and surveys of the
manpower, industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary
to determine their adequacy for civil defense and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of a civil defense emergency.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.07 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Emergency Management Director shall prepare a comprehensive general plan
for the civil defense of the city and shall present such plan to the council
for its approval. When the council has approved the plan by resolution, it
shall be the duty of all city departments and agencies and all civil defense
forces of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as
approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The
Emergency Management Director shall coordinate the civil defense activities of
the city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the
civil defense plan of the federal government and the state and correlated with
the civil defense plans of other political subdivisions within the state.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.08 TRAINING PROGRAMS.
   In accordance with the state and city civil defense plan, the Emergency
Management Director shall institute such training programs and public
information programs and shall take all other preparatory steps, including the
partial or full mobilization of civil defense forces in advance of actual
disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the
civil defense plan in time of a civil defense emergency. The Emergency
Management Director may, from time to time, conduct civil defense exercises as
deemed necessary.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.09 USE OF EXISTING FACILITIES AND THE LIKE.
   The Emergency Management Director shall utilize the personnel, services,
equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the
city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all such
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend such services and facilities to the local civil defense agency
and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department and agency or the
head of combined departments and agencies, in cooperation with and under the
direction of the Emergency Management Director, shall be responsible for the
planning and programming of such civil defense activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of his or her department or agency.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.10 PERSONNEL.
   The Emergency Management Director shall, in cooperation with existing city
departments and agencies affected, organize, recruit, and train personnel that
may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the civil defense plans of
the city and the state. To the extent that such emergency personnel are
recruited to augment a regular or combined city department or agency for civil
defense emergencies they shall be assigned to such department or agency for
purposes of administration and command. The Emergency Management Director is
authorized to combine, for civil defense purposes, the facilities and personnel
of city departments or agencies performing the same or similar functions and to
designate the head of such combined unit. The Emergency Management Director may
dismiss any civil defense volunteer at any time and require him to surrender
any equipment and identification furnished by the city.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.11 EMERGENCY MEDICAL AIDS.
   Consistent with the civil defense plan and public funds appropriated
therefore, the Emergency Management Director shall equip emergency medical aid
stations, to comply with the City of Byron First Responders policies and
procedures, during a local civil defense emergency.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.12 DIRECTIONS OF THE GOVERNOR.
   The Emergency Management Director shall carry out all orders, rules and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to civil defense.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.13 COORDINATION WITH STATE CIVIL DEFENSE.
   The Emergency Management Director shall direct and coordinate the general
operations of all local civil defense forces during a civil defense emergency
in conformity with controlling regulations and instructions of state civil
defense authorities. The heads of departments and agencies, combined or
otherwise, shall be governed by his or her orders in respect thereto.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.14 CONTROL CENTER.
   Consistent with the civil defense plan and public funds appropriated
therefor, the Emergency Management Director shall provide and equip at some
suitable place a control center and, if required by the state civil defense
plan, an auxiliary control center to be used during a civil defense emergency
as headquarters for direction and coordination of civil defense forces. The
Emergency Management Director shall arrange for representation at the control
center by city departments and agencies, public utilities and other agencies
authorized by federal or state authority to carry on civil defense activities
during a civil defense emergency. The Emergency Management Director shall
arrange for the installation at the control center of necessary facilities for
communication with and between heads of civil defense divisions, the stations
and operating units of municipal services and other agencies concerned with
civil defense and for communication with other communities and control centers,
within the surrounding area and with the federal and state agencies concerned.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.15 EMERGENCY AUTHORITY.
   During the first 30 days of a civil defense emergency, if the legislature is
in session or the Governor has coupled declaration of the emergency with a call
for a special session of the legislature, the Emergency Management Director
may, when necessary to save life or property, require any person, except
members of the federal or state military forces and officers of the state or
any other political subdivision, to perform services for civil defense
purposes, and may commandeer, for the time being, any motor vehicle, tools,
appliances or any other property, subject to the owner’s right to just
compensation as provided by law.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.16 LOYALTY REQUIREMENT.
   No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the civil
defense agency who advocates or has advocated a change by force or violence in
the constitutional form of government of the United States or in this state or
the overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence, or
who has been convicted of or is under indictment for information charging any
subversive act against the United States. Each person who is appointed to serve
in the civil defense agency shall, before assuming duties, take an oath in
writing before a person authorized to administer oaths in the state, or before
any officer of the state department of civil defense or the Emergency
Management Director. The oath shall be substantially in the form prescribed by
M.S. § 12.43.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.17 VOLUNTEER USE AND COMPENSATION.
   Civil defense volunteers shall be called into service only in case of a
civil defense emergency or a natural disaster for which the regular municipal
forces are inadequate or for necessary training and preparation for such
emergencies. All volunteers shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.18 INSIGNIA.
   Each civil defense volunteer shall be provided with such suitable insignia
or other identification as may be required by the Emergency Management
Director. Such identification shall be in a form and style approved by the
federal government. No volunteer shall exercise any authority over the persons
or property of others without his or her identification. No person except an
authorized volunteer shall use the identification of a volunteer or otherwise
represent himself or herself to be an authorized volunteer.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.19 FIREARMS RESTRICTED.
   No civil defense volunteer shall carry any firearm while on duty except on
written order of the Sheriff of Olmsted County.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 33.20 CITY PERSONNEL PROCEDURES.
   Personnel procedures of the city applicable to regular employees shall not
apply to volunteer civil defense workers but shall apply to paid employees of
the civil defense agency. No volunteer civil defense worker shall acquire any
status or rights under any civil service or merit system of employment in force
in the city.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.21 PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR.
   (A)   Whenever necessary to meet a civil defense emergency, to prepare for
an imminent civil defense emergency for which adequate regulations have not
been adopted by the Governor or the council, or to meet a local civil defense
emergency the Mayor may by proclamation promulgate regulations, consistent with
applicable federal or state laws, regulations or city ordinances respecting:
      (1)   The conduct of persons and the use of property;
      (2)   The repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
service;
      (3)   Emergency health, fire, and safety regulations, trial drills or
practice periods required for preliminary training;
      (4)   The maintenance, protection or restoration of public utility
services; and
      (5)   All other matters which are required to protect public safety,
health and welfare in civil defense emergencies.
   (B)   No regulation governing observation of enemy aircraft, air attack,
alarms, or illumination during air attacks shall be adopted or take effect
unless approved by the state director of civil defense.
   (C)   No person shall violate any provision of the mayoral proclamation
provided for by this section. Any violation shall be prosecuted as a
misdemeanor offense.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.22 PROCLAMATION PROCEDURES.
   Every proclamation of emergency regulations shall be in writing and signed
by the Mayor, shall be dated, shall refer to the particular civil defense
emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the
offices of the city clerk, where a copy shall be kept posted and available for
public inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of such
regulation and its availability for inspection at the city clerk’s office shall
be conspicuously posted in the city hall or other headquarters of the city and
at such other places in the affected area as the Mayor shall designate in the
proclamation. Thereupon the regulation shall take effect immediately or at such
later time as may be specified in the proclamation. By like proclamation the
Mayor may modify or rescind any such regulation.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.23 PROCLAMATION TERM.
   The council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any time. If
not sooner rescinded, every such regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days
after its effective date or at the end of the civil defense emergency to which
it relates, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.24 EMERGENCY AUTHORITY.
   Any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation inconsistent with an emergency
regulation promulgated by the Mayor shall be suspended during the period of
time and to the extent that such conflict exists. During a civil defense
emergency the city is, notwithstanding any statutory or charter provision to
the contrary, empowered to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary
to combat such disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and
property, and by providing emergency assistance to the victims of such
disaster. The city may exercise such powers in the light of the exigencies of
the disaster without compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities
prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into
contracts, incurring of obligations, employment of temporary workers, rental of
equipment, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and
the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, for example, but not limited
to, publication of ordinances and resolutions, publication of calls forbids,
provisions of civil service or merit system laws and rules, provisions relating
to low bids, and requirements for budgets.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.25 CIVIL DEFENSE FUND.
   There is established a special fund to be known as the civil defense fund.
Into this fund shall be placed the proceeds of taxes levied for civil defense,
money transferred from other funds, gifts and other revenues of the civil
defense agency. From it shall be made expenditures for the operation and
maintenance of the office of civil defense and other expenditures for civil
defense. Regular accounting, disbursement, purchasing and other financial
procedures of the city shall apply to the civil defense fund insofar as
practicable. Budgeting requirements of the city shall apply except in any case
when their application will prevent compliance with terms and conditions of a
federal or state grant of money or property for civil defense purposes or
prevent the taking of adequate measures to meet a declared civil defense
emergency.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.26 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Emergency Management Director shall, as soon as possible after the end
of each calendar year, prepare and present to the council for the information
of said body and the public, a comprehensive report of the activities of the
civil defense agency during the year.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.27 COOPERATION.
   Every officer and agency of the city shall cooperate with federal and state
authorities and with authorized agencies engaged in civil defense and emergency
measures to the fullest possible extent consistent with the performance of
their other duties. The provisions of this chapter and of all regulations made
thereunder shall be subject to all applicable and controlling provisions of
federal and state laws and of regulations and orders issued thereunder and
shall be deemed to be suspended and inoperative so far as there is any conflict
therewith.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.28 GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
   All functions and activities relating to civil defense are declared to be
governmental functions. The city, and except in cases of willful misconduct,
its officers, agents, employees, or representative engaged in any civil defense
activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with M.S. Ch. 12 as
amended or with this chapter or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder,
shall not be liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to
property as a result of such activity. The provisions of this section shall not
affect the right of any person to receive benefits or compensation to which
such person would otherwise be entitled under this chapter or state law or
under the workers’ compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of
any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of
congress.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.29 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   The office of civil defense shall not participate in any form of political
activity nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political
purposes, nor shall it be employed in a legitimate labor dispute.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
§ 33.30 JOINING WITH COUNTY CIVIL DEFENSE.
   To the end that the civil defense functions and responsibilities of this
city may be discharged in the most comprehensive, effective and economical
manner possible under law, and recognizing the artificiality of territorial
limits of municipalities and political subdivisions of this state in times of
civil defense emergencies, especially those created by hostile enemy action or
attack, the council acknowledges the desirability of joining with the County of
Olmsted. Minnesota, to form a common civil defense organization under the
provisions of M.S. § 12.25, subd. 5 and M.S. § 471.59. Such a common civil
defense organization may be officially established by the execution of an
agreement between the City of Byron and the County of Olmsted, approved by the
Governor of the State of Minnesota, setting forth in detail the form,
procedures, powers, duties and other matters necessary to the formation,
organization, operation, maintenance, regulation and dissolution of such common
civil defense organization. The extent that the provisions of this chapter are
consistent with the provisions of such agreement, they shall be deemed a part
thereof; but to the extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent
or in conflict with the provisions of such agreement shall be paramount and
shall govern.
(Ord. passed 3-11-09)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SEWER AND WATER SERVICE
      
51.   SEWER SERVICE AND REGULATIONS
      
52.   STORM WATER UTILITY AND ASSOCIATED FEES
      
53.   WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS
CHAPTER 50: SEWER AND WATER SERVICE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Application and owner-customer responsibility
   
50.03   General billing procedure and payment for water and sewer services
   
50.04   Shut-off for non-payment
   
50.05   Collection of delinquent water and sewer accounts
   
50.06   User rate schedule
Irrigation Policy
   
50.20   Second water meter for irrigation
   
50.21   Second meter user rate schedule
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTINUOUS DELINQUENCY. An account is not paid in full for two or more
months in a row.
   DELINQUENT. An account is considered delinquent if payment is not received
by the twentieth day of each month.
(Ord. 444, passed 5-25-00; Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 7-14-20)
§ 50.02 APPLICATION AND OWNER-CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Applications for service. Application for water service and
installation shall be made at City Hall. Every person on city water services
shall comply with all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city relating
to the municipal water system.
   (B)   Rental property.
      (1)   The tenant is allowed to receive the monthly bill along with the
property owners. It is the property owner that is ultimately responsible for
water supplied to the property and any water and sewer charges unpaid by the
rental customer.
      (2)   If the property has individual meters but only one shut-off to the
entire property (meaning the shut-off controls more than one unit), the
property owner(s)/landlord will be responsible for the water and sewer charges.
   (C)   Private wells. No well may be drilled in any location that the
municipal water system is reasonably and readily accessible, except by special
permit from the City Council. The special permit will be brought forward based
upon a recommendation of the City Engineer and the City Administrator.
(Ord. 444, passed 5-25-00; Am. Ord. passed 7-13-05; Am. Ord. passed 6-9-11; Am.
Ord. passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 7-14-20)
§ 50.03 GENERAL BILLING PROCEDURE AND PAYMENT FOR WATER AND SEWER SERVICES.
   (A)   Bills for water and sewer service shall be invoiced no later than the
fifth day of the month for water and sewer services consumed in the previous
billing cycle. Bills for water and sewer service shall be due and payable in
the office of City Hall on or before the twentieth day of each month. To each
bill not paid on or before the due date, there shall be added a penalty of 10%
of the amount of the overdue bill.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of non-payment of bills, only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's bill shall contain, in
addition to address and phone number of the official in charge of billing,
clearly visible and readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the twentieth;
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date; a notice will
be mailed containing a shutoff date;
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of their bill shall
have the right to a hearing at which time they may present orally or in writing
of their complaint and contentions to the City Council. The City Council has
final authority to adjust bills and/or finalize utility shut-off;
      (4)   Customers can enter into a reasonable payment agreement at any time
prior to the hearing at City Council and a shut-off direction from the Council.
Payment agreements that are not honored will be subject to disconnection
without notice;
      (5)   When an account has a returned check, the account will be charged
an NSF fee which is set by the City Council on the annual fee resolution. If
any account becomes delinquent due to a returned check, only cash or credit
card payment will be accepted for the outstanding balance;
      (6)   Any delinquent bills as of 4:00 p.m. the day prior to shut off will
be charged the reconnection fee as set by the City Council annual fee
resolution; and
      (7)   When it becomes necessary for the city to disconnect utility
services for non-payment of bills, service will be reinstated only after all
bills and reconnection fees have been paid.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 7-14-20)
§ 50.04 SHUT-OFF FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   (A)   Restrictions if disconnection is necessary.
      (1)   If the service of a residential customer must be involuntarily
disconnected, the disconnection must not occur on a Friday or on the day before
a holiday. Further, the disconnection must not occur until at least ten days
after the required notice has been mailed to the customer.
      (2)   If, prior to disconnection, a customer appeals the notice of
involuntary disconnection, as provided by the city's established appeal
procedure in division (E) below, the city staff must not disconnect until the
appeal is resolved.
   (B)   Shut-off for non-payment between April 15 and October 15. If a
customer's account becomes continually delinquent during the period between
April 15 and October 15, and satisfactory arrangements for payment have not
been made, the city may, after the procedural requirements of division (E)
below have been complied with, discontinue service to the delinquent customer
by shutting off the water at the curb stop. Service shall not be restored until
payment of all delinquent amounts and the reconnection fee has been made.
   (C)   Shut-off for non-payment between October 15 and April 15. City staff
shall not disconnect the utility service of a residential customer if the
disconnection affects the primary heat source for the residential unit as
stated in M.S. § 216B.097.
   (D)   Notification. The city shall notify all residential customers of the
provisions of this section. Additionally, all affected property owners shall be
notified if shut-off for non-payment is contemplated.
   (E)   Procedure. Water shall not be shut off under division (A) until notice
and an opportunity for a hearing has been given to the occupant of the premises
involved. The notice shall be mailed no less than ten days before the public
hearing, and shall state that if payment is not made before the date stated on
the notice, the water supply to the premises will be shut off. The notice shall
clearly inform the customer of the available opportunities to present to the
city their objections to the bill, and shall identify the telephone number,
address, and contact information for City Hall. The notice shall also state
that the occupant may appear at the next City Council meeting to dispute their
charges. In which case, the water supply will not be shut off until after the
meeting. If the City Council finds that the amount claimed to be owed is
actually due and unpaid and that there is no legal reason why the water supply
of the continuously delinquent customer may not be shut off in accordance with
this chapter, the city may shut off the supply.
   (F)   Reconnection. Reconnection may be scheduled once all applicable fees
and charges are brought current. At the time of reconnection by the city, a
designated representative of the unit must be present.
   (G)   Costs. Any and all costs incurred by digging to locate any curb stop
shall be borne by the property owner. All curb stops shall be kept readily
accessible for service by city staff. In the event that concrete or bituminous
surface must be removed to gain access to the shut-off valve, all accesses and
replacement costs shall be borne by the property owner.
(Ord. 444, passed 5-25-00; Am. Ord passed 7-13-05; Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 7-14-
20)
§ 50.05 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT WATER AND SEWER ACCOUNTS.
   All continuously delinquent accounts or accounts disconnected for ten days
will be notified of a public hearing to be held at a City Council meeting to
discuss assessing qualified past due accounts. Following the public hearing,
the property owner has 30 days to pay the account in full. All continuously
delinquent accounts after this time will be certified to the County Auditor for
collection with taxes for the following year.
(Ord. 445, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 7-13-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-10;
Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 7-14-20)
§ 50.06 USER RATE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Operating, maintenance and replacement charges for the operation of
the water service will be set by a City Council fee resolution.
   (B)   The consumer will be invoiced for all gallons that are pumped through
the water meter with no cap for water.
(Ord. 03-10, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. passed 7-13-05; Am. Ord. 20-03, passed
7-14-20)
IRRIGATION POLICY
§ 50.20 SECOND WATER METER FOR IRRIGATION.
   (A)   Owners may request from the city installation of a second meter to
meter non-sanitary sewer water usage pursuant to regulations established by the
city; however, a second meter will not be issued for an existing irrigation
system until a second meter permit is issued.
   (B)   The second meter shall be for metering water usage that is used for
non-essential services; i.e., watering the lawn or washing the car. Both meters
shall be installed by a professional plumber and are subject to all costs,
conditions, and inspections.
      (1)   In the event of a critical water deficiency, refer to the city's
Critical Water Deficiency Plan defined in Chapter 53.
      (2)   Homeowners are responsible for all costs associated with sprinkler
head maintenance repair and relocation. The city will not pay or reimburse
costs related to damaged sprinkler heads located in a right-of-way or easement.
   (C)   The city shall read both meters for billing purposes. Until the
inspection of the second meter is complete, the rates will include sewer.
(Ord. passed 2-10-10; Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 7-14-20)
§ 50.21 SECOND METER USER RATE SCHEDULE.
   Operating and maintenance charges for the operation of the water service
will be set by the City Council annual fee resolution.
(Ord. passed 2-10-10; Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 7-14-20)
CHAPTER 51: SEWER SERVICE AND REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Control by the Utilities Superintendent
   
51.03   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.04   User rate schedule of charges
Regulations
   
51.20   Use of public sewer required
   
51.21   Private wastewater disposal
   
51.22   Building sewers and connections
   
51.23   Use of public services
   
51.24   Tampering with wastewater facilities prohibited
Discharging into the Sanitary Sewer System
   
51.35   Purpose
   
51.36   Definition and method
   
51.37   Disconnection
   
51.38   Inspection
   
51.39   Future inspections
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASTM. The American Society for Testing Materials.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection.
   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Byron as
presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a
future time. The term CITY when used herein may also be used to refer to the
City Council and its authorized representatives.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm
sewer or as an industrial sewer and a storm sewer.
   DOMESTIC or SANITARY WASTE. Wastewater that is primarily produced by
residential users with BOD concentration less than 225 milligrams per liter as
distinct from industrial waste and the characteristics as stated in the
definition for WATERCOURSE. The wastewater does not include infiltration and/or
inflow, and it is composed of domestic wastewater.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. All wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
   INCOMPATIBLE WASTE. Waste that either singly or by interaction with other
wastes interferes with any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to
humans or animals, creates a public nuisance
or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
works.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS or INDUSTRIES.
      (1)   Entities that discharge into a publicly owned wastewater treatment
works, liquid wastes resulting from the process employed in industrial or
manufacturing processes or from the development of any natural resources are
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the following
divisions.
         (a)   Division A:   Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
         (b)   Division B:   Mining;
         (c)   Division D:   Manufacturing;
         (d)   Division E:   Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Sewers;
         (e)   Division I:   Services.
      (2)   For the purpose of this definition, domestic or sanitary waste
shall be considered to have the following characteristics: BOD5, less than 225
mg/l; suspended solids, less than 215 mg/l.
      (3)   Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by
interaction with other wastes to contaminate the sludge of any municipal
systems or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process or which
constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates
any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge
from the treatment facilities.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Wastewater discharged by industry that includes solid,
liquid or gaseous waste resulting from the industrial or manufacturing process,
trade or business or from the development, recovery or processing of natural
resources.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering the sanitary sewer system and service
connections from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. INFILTRATION does
not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW. The water discharged into the sanitary sewer system from such
sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains,
foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross connections to storm sewers, catch basins,
stormwaters, surface run-off, street wash waters or drainage. INFLOW does not
include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.
   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewaters
from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
   MAY. Permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
   NPDES PERMIT (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT). The
system for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of
pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone
and the oceans by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, Sections 402 and 405.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion
concentration of 10 (where = 7).
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by the city.
   RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USERS. All non-
industrial users.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or sanitary and
industrial wastewater from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants
and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface
waters that are not admitted intentionally.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SHALL. Mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer
than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows
during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or
performance of the water reclamation plant.
   STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed STORM SEWER). A drain or sewer intended to
carry storm waters, surface runoff, groundwater, sub-surface water, street wash
water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Utilities Superintendent or his or her authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater” and referred to as non-filterable residue.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater (infiltration/inflow) that are not
admitted intentionally.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and
structures for treatment of wastewater, industrial waste and sludge. Sometimes
used as synonymous for WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
   WPCF. The Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. 20-06, passed 10-13-20)
§ 51.02 CONTROL BY THE UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Utilities Superintendent shall have control and general supervision of
all public sewers and service connections in the city and shall be responsible
for administering the provisions of this chapter to the end that a proper and
efficient public sewer system is maintained.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96)
§ 51.03 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observations, measurements, sampling
and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. If entry to the property is refused, the
employee is authorized to obtain an administrative search warrant to enter the
property. Refusal to permit an employee to enter private property may result in
the immediate discontinuation of service sewer and water service.
   (B)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized
to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in
question might result in an advantage to competitors.
   (C)   While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and
the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by
city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the company to maintain safe conditions as required in §
51.23(H).
   (D)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities
lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96)
§ 51.04 USER RATE SCHEDULE OF CHARGES.
   Maximum sewer charge for single-family dwellings. The sewer charges are
calculated from the water measured by the water meter. The maximum amount
billed for sewer charges for any single-family dwelling will be 12,000 gallons
per month. Commercial, industrial, institutional and multi-family units do not
have a maximum charge for sewer. Multi-family units that are metered separately
are exceptions to this rule.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. 97-03, passed 5-8-97; Am. Ord. 03-09,
passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. passed 7-13-05)
REGULATIONS
§ 51.20 USE OF PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.21 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Before commencing construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as are deemed necessary by the city.
   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city
or its representative. The city or its representative shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant
for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final
inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the city.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with Minn. Rule, chapter 7080, as it may be
amended from time to time. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater
disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area
of the lot is less than 40,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this chapter and
within 5 days any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater
disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be broken to
permit drainage and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
   (F)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Department of
Health or the Pollution Control Agency of the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96)
§ 51.22 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No authorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (B)   Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or authorized
agent and the party employed to do the work and shall state the location, name
of owner, street number of building to be connected and how occupied. No person
shall extend any private drain beyond the limits of the building or property
for which the service connection permit has been given. Any person who desires
to construct, reconstruct, extend or alter a service connection shall, before
beginning work, file with the city a plan showing the whole course of the
service connection and all branches, traps and fixtures connected therewith. If
the city finds that the plan does not conform to the requirements of this
chapter, the city shall not issue a permit for such work.
   (C)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be paid by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the front
building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as
one building sewer. The city does not have and will not assume any obligation
or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single
connection aforementioned.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Superintendent or his or her
representative to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
State of Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications
of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the State of Minnesota Building and Plumbing
Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and
verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the city before installation.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his or her representative.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (L)   No person licensed under this chapter shall allow his or her name to
be used by any other person, either for the purpose of obtaining permits or
doing any work under his or her license; and every licensee shall record in the
City Clerk-Treasurer’s office his or her place of business, the name under
which the business is transacted and shall immediately notify the City Clerk-
Treasurer or agents of any change.
   (M)   Any new connections(s) to the sanitary sewer system shall be
prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream
facilities, including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD and suspended
solids.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. 20-06, passed 10-13-20)
§ 51.23 USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any water such
as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water
to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial
cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city, to
a storm sewer or natural outlet. Discharges to a storm sewer or natural outlet
may require a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
   (C)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any or the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to
humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater facilities and/or
wastewater treatment works;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mild, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the
like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   The following described substances, materials, water or waste shall be
limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either sewers, wastewater treatment works, treatment
processes or equipment will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. The Superintendent may set limitations lower than limitations
established in the regulations below if in his or her opinion such more severe
limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his or her
opinion as to the acceptability, the Superintendent will give consideration to
such factors as the quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the
wastewater treatment works, the city’s NPDES permits and other pertinent
factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated without approval of the Superintendent are as follows:
      (1)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° Fahrenheit (65°
Celsius);
      (2)   Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral oil origin;
      (3)   Wastewater from industrial plants and commercial establishments
containing floatable oils, fat or grease;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purposes of
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing lead, chromium, copper, zinc,
mercury, boron and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree
that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the Superintendent;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a slug,
as defined herein;
      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed;
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD or suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by
specific, written agreement with the city which agreement may provide for
special charges, payments or provisions of treating and testing equipment.
   (E)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in division (D) of this section and which in the
judgement of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city
may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Reference Federal Register, Volume 43, number 123, part IV, section
126, part 403, titled “General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New
Sources of Pollution,” as published by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, June 26, 1978, and Federal Guidelines pertaining to pretreatment.
         (a)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the city, in accordance with subsection (5)
below.
         (b)   The city will require payment to cover the added cost of
handling the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges subject to
the requirements of 40 CFR 403, in accordance with this section and Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.
      (5)   No provision contained in this chapter shall be construed to
prevent or prohibit a separate or special contract or agreement between the
city and any user whereby waste and material of unusual strength, character or
composition may be accented by the city for treatment, subject to additional
payment therefor by such user; provided, however, that such contract or
agreement shall have the prior approval of the Superintendent, and the payments
for such services meet the requirements of the city’s ordinances establishing
the sewer service charge system.
   (F)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in
division (D)(3), any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the Superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the
owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the Superintendent.
Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner(s)’
personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
   (G)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his or her expense.
   (H)   When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall
be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him
or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Superintendent.
Reference is made to 40 CFR 136, “Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures
for Analysis of Pollutants” dated October 16, 1973.
   (J)   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order or detrimental to the use of the public sewer or unfit for the
purpose of drainage, the owner or person having charge of the service
connection shall repair or cause such work to be done as the Superintendent may
direct. Each day after three days that a person neglects or fails to so act
shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and the Superintendent
may then cause the work to be done and recover from such owner or agent the
expense thereof, together with 10% damages, by an action in the name of the
city.
   (K)   No person having charge of any building or other premises which drains
into a public sewer shall permit any substance or matter which may form a
deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within ten days
after notice in writing from the city, a person shall install a suitable and
sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists, clean out,
repair or alter the same and perform such other work as the Superintendent may
deem necessary to prevent any substance or matter passing into the public sewer
which may cause a deposit or obstruction therein. In addition to any penalties
that may be imposed for violating this section, if a person refuses or neglects
to install a catch basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair or alter the
same, if one exists, for a period of five days, the Superintendent may cause
such work to be done as deemed necessary at the expense of the owner or person
having charge of the premises.
   (L)   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost of
repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result of
the discharge of prohibited wastes by such person and may collect such
assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in
any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.
   (M)   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing
facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times a
catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil,
dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
   (N)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate
compliance with this chapter and any special condition for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge. The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses
to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry
must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge
to assure that compliance with the federal, state and local standards are being
met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses
to the city at such times and in such manner as is prescribed by the city. The
owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting
required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the
right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 7-13-05)
§ 51.24 TAMPERING WITH WASTEWATER FACILITIES PROHIBITED.
   No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96) Penalty, see §
51.99
DISCHARGING INTO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
§ 51.35 PURPOSE.
   In adopting this subchapter, the City Council finds that the discharge of
water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool
or other natural precipitation into the city sanitary sewer collection system
will and has on numerous occasions in the past flooded and over-loaded the
sanitary sewer collection system to such an extent as to cause damage to
residential property and over-loaded the Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP).
Such damage is caused by the backup of sewage of the WWTP. The City Council,
therefore, finds it essential to the maintenance of health, minimization of
damage to property and to maintain the life and capacity of the WWTP that the
provisions of this subchapter be strictly enforced to avoid and minimize these
problems in the future.
(Ord. 429, passed 8-24-00; Am. Ord. passed 11-26-13)
§ 51.36 DEFINITION AND METHOD.
   (A)   No water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile,
swimming pool, defective laterals, or other natural precipitation shall be
discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system. Dwellings, including new
housing construction or houses under construction, and other buildings and
structures which require, because of the infiltration of water into basements,
crawl spaces and the like, a sump pump system to discharge water shall have a
permanently installed discharge line which shall not at any time discharge
water into the sanitary sewer collection system. Where a sump pit exists in any
such building, it shall have a pump installed; no empty pits shall be
permitted. A permanent installation shall be one which provides for a year-
round discharge connection to the city subdrain/storm sewer system. If there is
no subdrain available, the surface discharge point shall be located no closer
than four feet from the curb or as approved by the city. No discharge shall be
directed so as to impact neighboring properties or any city street, sidewalk or
right-of-way. The discharge connection shall consist of a rigid discharge line,
without valving or quick connections for altering the path of discharge and, if
connected to the city subdrain/storm sewer line, include a check valve. The
city may allow installation of a locked "winter/summer" valve in individual
circumstances to abate nuisance icing where no subdrain/storm sewer and other
reasonable alternative exists, only with review and express permission of the
city.
   (B)   A sump pump will be allowed to have a surface discharge line when city
subdrain is available if a gravity footing drain connection has been made. This
secondary sump pump connection is only allowed if a gravity footing connection
to the city's subdrain/storm sewer system has been made and approved by the
city. The secondary sump pump connection is only intended to serve as a back-up
to the city's subdrain/storm sewer system.
(Ord. 429, passed 8-24-00; Am. Ord. passed 11-26-13; Am. Ord. 20-06, passed 10-
13-20)
§ 51.37 DISCONNECTION.
   Any person, firm or corporation having a roof, surface, ground, sump pump,
footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into the
sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove the same. Any disconnects
or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in a manner as
approved by the City Engineer or his or her representative.
(Ord. 429, passed 8-24-00; Am. Ord. passed 11-26-13; Am. Ord. 20-06, passed 10-
13-20)
§ 51.38 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Every person owning improved real estate or contractors/builders who
are building a house within Byron that discharges into the city's sanitary
sewer system or on the ground shall allow an employee of the city or its
designated representative to inspect the building to confirm that there is no
sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   The owner of any such property may meet the requirements of this
section by contracting with a licensed plumber who is authorized to do business
in the city to perform such inspection. Such plumber shall inspect the owner's
property and shall complete, sign and return an inspection form to the city
documenting the results of the inspection. The inspection form shall be
furnished to the property owner or licensed plumber upon request. All costs
associated with an inspection by a licensed plumber retained by the property
owner under this section shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
   (C)   The property owner shall have a period of 30 days from the date the
city sends a written notice to the owner requesting admittance to the owner's
property for an inspection to either allow a city inspection of the property or
to contract with a licensed plumber to perform the inspection and notify the
city of the results thereof. Such inspection, whether performed by the city
inspector, or by the licensed plumber hired by the property owner, shall be
completed within said 30 day period. Upon completion of a city inspection of a
property, or upon the city's receipt of an inspection form from the licensed
plumber hired by the owner of the property, the city shall determine whether
any such property is improperly discharging stormwater into the city sanitary
sewer system; then the owner shall have a period of 90 days from the date the
city send such written notice to the owner to obtain a plumbing permit, to
disconnect the owner's sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the city
sanitary sewer system, and to request re-inspection, certifying that all work
necessary to disconnect the owner's sump pump or other prohibited discharge
from said property into the city sanitary sewer system has been completed. All
work that is necessary to comply with the provisions of this division which
requires the issuance of any plumbing, building, or other permit under this
Code shall be inspected by the city Inspection Services Division for compliance
with all applicable City Code requirements.
(Ord. 429, passed 8-24-00; Am. Ord. passed 11-26-13; Am. Ord. 20-06, passed 10-
13-20)
§ 51.39 FUTURE INSPECTIONS.
   At any future time, if the city has reason to suspect that an illegal
connection may exist in a premises, the owner, by written notice, shall comply
with the provisions of §
51.38.
(Ord. 429, passed 8-24-00; Am. Ord. passed 11-26-13)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of §§
51.01 et seq. or §§
51.20 et seq., except §
51.24, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection (1) of this division shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not
exceeding $100 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation occurs
shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
51.01 et seq. or §§
51.20 et seq. shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the city by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 144, passed 12-18-96)
   (C)   A surcharge of $100 per month is imposed by invoice and//or added to
every sewer billing mailed out on and after August 24, 2000 to property owners
or to the contractor/builder of a new house which are not in compliance with §§
51.35 et seq. The surcharge will be levied monthly against those properties
found not to be in compliance with §§
51.35 et seq. until the property has been certified by the City Engineer, his
or her representative or licensed plumber hired by the property owner that the
property is in compliance. The surcharge will be levied against the property
owner and/or contractor/builder of a new house on the thirty-first day after
notice of the violation has been provided to the owner/contractor/builder.
Should an individual who has been notified of noncompliance with §§
51.35 et seq. and has corrected that noncompliance be found that his or her
sump system is out of compliance with §§
51.35 et seq. a second time, he or she will be fined $100 a day commencing upon
the day he or she is found to be in noncompliance with §§
51.35 et seq. There shall be no grace period for bringing the system into
compliance.
(Ord. 429, passed 8-24-00; Am. Ord. passed 11-26-13; Am. Ord. 20-06, passed 10-
13-20)
CHAPTER 52: STORM WATER UTILITY AND ASSOCIATED FEES
Section
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Establishment of a storm water utility fee
   
52.03   Definitions
   
52.04   Rates and charges
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the storm water utility is to provide a funding mechanism for
the following services:
   (A)   The administration, planning, implementation, operations and
maintenance of the storm water best management practices (BMPs) to reduce the
maintenance and removal of sediment and other pollutants into local water
resources;
   (B)   The operation, maintenance and replacement of public drainage systems;
   (C)   Activities necessary to maintain compliance with the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit requirements established
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, including preparation,
implementation and management of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) to address the following control measures:
      (1)   Public education and outreach on storm water impacts;
      (2)   Public involvement and participation;
      (3)   Illicit discharge detection and elimination;
      (4)   Construction site storm water runoff control;
      (5)   Post-construction runoff control in new development and
redevelopment; and
      (6)   Pollution prevention for municipal operations;
   (D)   Other education, engineering, inspection, monitoring, testing and
enforcement activities as necessary to maintain compliance with local, state
and federal storm water requirements.
(Ord. 52, passed 10-8-08)
§ 52.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF A STORM WATER UTILITY FEE.
   There is established a public utility to be known as the Storm Water Utility
for the City of Byron. The storm water utility will be operated as a public
utility pursuant to the city code and applicable statutes. The revenues are
subject to provisions of this section and M.S. § 444.075. The storm water
utility is part of the Public Works Department and will be administered by the
Public Works Director. This chapter applies to the entire City of Byron.
(Ord. 52, passed 10-8-08)
§ 52.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY FACTOR (REF). The ratio of the volume of runoff
generated by a unit area of a particular land use to the volume of runoff
generated by a unit area of single-family residential property based on typical
surface conditions and average annual rainfall.
   UNIT AREA. For purpose of this chapter, the UNIT AREA (“UA”) of a given
parcel will be determined by the following formula:
      First, the maximum residential unit area of a residential lot in the city
is set at 10,890 square feet, then, this area is divided by 43,560 square feet
equaling .25. The maximum residential UNIT AREA value for any residential lot
parcel will be .25.
(Ord. 52, passed 10-8-08)
§ 52.04 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Calculation of utility charge. The charges to be made against a given
parcel of land will then be determined by multiplying the unit rate (UR) by the
parcel’s REF times the parcel’s unit area (UA) times the impervious rate. And,
the City Council may adopt changes to these rates by resolution during the year
by a majority vote of the City Council.
   (B)   Adjustments to charges. The City Council may adopt by policies
providing for the adjustment of charges for parcels or groups of parcels based
upon hydrologic data supplied by affected property owners, demonstrating an
actual hydrologic response substantially different from the REF being used for
the parcel or parcels. Such adjustment will be made only after receiving the
recommendation of the Public Works Director, and will not be made effective
retroactively. If the adjustment would have the effect of changing the REF for
all or substantially all of the land uses in a particular classification, such
adjustment will be accomplished by amending this chapter.
   (C)   Adjustment to area. The total parcel area as shown in the County
Assessor’s records will be used to calculate the parcel unit area (UA). It is
the responsibility of the owner or manager of any premises to provide the city
with necessary land surveys and other information as the city may reasonably
request to determine if a parcel, or a portion of a parcel, qualifies for an
exception or an area adjustment. Requests for exceptions and/or adjustments
will be reviewed after the receipt of all required information. Exceptions and/
or adjustments must be approved by the Director of Public Works with
discussions with City Engineer and City Administrator, and will become
effective at the beginning of the next billing cycle following approval.
   (D)   Exceptions. Accounts that are billed annually are exempted from any
fixed charge in place at this time (FC). The following land uses are exempt
from the storm water utility fees established herein:
      (1)   Public street right-of-way;
      (2)   Wetlands and public waters as defined by state law;
      (3)   Purposes up to the 100-year flood elevation;
      (4)   Undeveloped parcels;
      (5)   Publicly-owned park lands, natural areas, and recreational fields;
      (6)   Railroad right-of-way;
      (7)   Cemeteries,
      (8)   Unsewered parcels situated within the AG (Agricultural) zoning
districts of the city; and
      (9)   City-owned land. Golf courses are an exempt use except for the club
house/building/paved surface portions thereof. (Somerby)
   (E)   Falsification of information. Willful failure to provide information
that the city reasonably requests related to the use, development and area of a
premises, or falsification of such nformation, will constitute a violation of
this chapter.
   (F)   Estimated charges. If, for any reason, precise information related to
the use, development or area of a premises is not available, then storm water
utility charges for such premise will be estimated, and billed, based upon
information available to the city.
   (G)   Billing method. Storm water utility fees will be computed and
collected by the city together with other city utility fees, in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this code.
   (H)   Delinquent accounts. Storm water utility fees past due on October 1 of
any year may be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate
taxes during the following year or any year thereafter in the manner prescribed
in this code.
(Ord. 52, passed 10-8-08)
CHAPTER 53: WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS
Section
   
53.01   Purpose
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Application
   
53.04   Declaration of critical water deficiency
   
53.05   Mandatory emergency water conservation measures
   
53.06   Variances
   
53.07   Violation
 
   
53.99   Enforcement
§ 53.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter establishes water conservation restrictions; and the plan will
be in effect at any time the governor declares by executive order a critical
water deficiency, pursuant to M.S. § 103G.291.
(Ord. 53, passed 3-13-18)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms shall be defined as written unless context indicates or
requires a different meaning:
   CLERK. In statutory cities means the person assigned duties pursuant to M.S.
§ 412.151; or the City Manager pursuant to M.S. § 412.601 through 412.751 or in
charter cities as determined by city charter.
   DEPARTMENT. The City Water Department.
   EMERGENCY. The declaration of a critical water deficiency by the governor.
   IRRIGATION. The watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas, gardens,
lawns, or any other outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation utilized for
agricultural purposes.
   NOTIFICATION TO PUBLIC. Notification through local media, including
interviews and issuance of news releases.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. The city or other entity that owns, manages, or
operates a public water supply, as defined in M.S. § 144.382, subd. 4.
   RECLAIMED WATER. Water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or other
collection devices and all water utilized more than once before re-entering the
natural water cycle.
   WATER RECIRCULATION SYSTEM. Any system which enables a user to reuse water
at least once prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
(Ord. 53, passed 3-13-18)
§ 53.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This chapter applies to all customers of public water suppliers who
own or control water use on any premises.
   (B)   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received
from a public water supply for residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provision in
this chapter.
   (C)   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based
upon the declaration of a critical water emergency by the governor.
(Ord. 53, passed 3-13-18)
§ 53.04 DECLARATION OF CRITICAL WATER DEFICIENCY.
   Upon the declaration of a critical water deficiency by the governor, the
public water supplier shall immediately post notice of the emergency
declaration at the usual meeting place of the City Council, or the official
city bulletin board. The city shall provide notification to the public as
quickly as possible or through established water supply plans emergency
response plans or procedures.
(Ord. 53, passed 3-13-18)
§ 53.05 MANDATORY EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES.
   Upon declaration of a water emergency and notification to the public, the
following mandatory restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be enforced:
   (A)   Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands, and
other non-agricultural land, except for those areas irrigated with reclaimed
water, is prohibited.
   (B)   Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis
courts, patios, or other paved areas with water from any pressurized source,
including garden hoses, except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards,
is prohibited.
   (C)   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a
pressurized source is prohibited.
   (D)   Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited from
serving water to their customers, unless water is specifically requested by the
customer.
   (E)   Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is
prohibited.
   (F)   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other exterior
water features is prohibited.
   (G)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of
mobile equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water
recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing to protect
public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 53, passed 3-13-18)
§ 53.06 VARIANCES.
   The City Clerk/Administrator or their designee, is authorized to grant
variances to this ordinance where strict application of its provisions would
result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted only for
reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a
variance within five days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to the
City Clerk/Administrator. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next
City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.
(Ord. 53, passed 3-13-18)
§ 53.07 VIOLATION.
   (A)   Violations shall be determined and cited by the City Clerk/
Administrator or his/her designee. A violator may appeal the citation within
five days of its issuance by submitting a written appeal to the city. The City
Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of
the City Council is final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if
evidence is provided that equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A
letter from a qualified vendor or equipment invoice will be required to show
proof of equipment failure.
   (B)   Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued,
either personally or by mail, a warning letter that sets forth the violation
and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future violations.
   (C)   Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall be
issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the violation
and shall describe the remedy. Fines shall be added to the monthly water bill
of the owner or current occupant of the premises where the violation occurred.
The fines are the responsibility of the property owner. Failure to pay fines in
a timely manner may result in the fees being assessed. The imposition of the
fine shall in no way limit the right of the city to pursue other legal
remedies.
(Ord. 53, passed 3-13-18)
§ 53.99 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Clerk/Administrator or his/her designee is authorized to designate
city employees or law enforcement personnel to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 53, passed 3-13-18)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   TOY VEHICLES
      
74.   SNOWMOBILES
      
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
76.   GOLF CARTS AND ATVS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Through streets
   
70.02   Duties of drivers after accidents
   
70.03   Driver’s license; vehicle ownership
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 THROUGH STREETS.
   The Council, by resolution, may designate any street as a through street and
any intersection as a stop intersection where necessary to preserve the free
flow of traffic and to prevent accidents and shall post appropriate signs at
the entrance to such streets or intersections, but no trunk highway shall be
designated as a through street and no intersection on a trunk highway shall be
designated as a stop intersection unless the consent of the Commissioner of
Transportation to such designation is first secured. Every driver of a vehicle
shall bring his or her vehicle to a full stop before entering any stop street
or intersection properly designated and posted as such by the Commissioner of
Transportation or the Council.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14)
§ 70.02 DUTIES OF DRIVERS AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to
or death or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person
shall stop and give his or her name, address and the registration number of the
vehicle he or she is driving and shall, upon request, and if available, exhibit
his or her driver's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver
or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with. He or she shall
render reasonable assistance to any person injured in such accident.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle which collides with and damages any
unattended vehicle shall immediately stop and shall then and there either
locate and notify the driver or owner of the vehicle of the name and address of
the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, shall
report the same to a police officer or shall leave in a conspicuous place in
the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver
and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to
or death of any person shall, after compliance with the provisions of the state
law and division (A) of this section, give notice of such accident by the
quickest means of communication to local law enforcement.
   (D)   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to
or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $1,000
or more shall promptly forward a written report of the accident to the
Commissioner of Transportation. Such report shall be on the appropriate form
approved by the Commissioner of Transportation.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14)
§ 70.03 DRIVER’S LICENSE; VEHICLE OWNERSHIP.
   No person shall drive or operate a vehicle upon any street in the city
without having in his or her possession, as required by the laws of the State
of Minnesota, a valid driver's license or chauffeur's license. No person shall
drive a motor vehicle belonging to another without the owner's consent.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this title shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed
$1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed 90
days; but if a minimum fine or imprisonment is prescribed by the State Highway
Traffic Act for an offense, such penalty shall apply to a person convicted of
the same offense under this title.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Careless driving
   
71.02   Speed regulations
   
71.03   Operating and turning vehicles
   
71.04   Use of equipment
   
71.05   Emergency vehicles
   
71.06   Driving under influence of liquor or narcotics
   
71.07   Pedestrians
   
71.08   Glass or other injurious substance on highways
§ 71.01 CARELESS DRIVING.
   No person shall operate or halt any vehicle upon a street or highway within
the City of Byron, Minnesota, carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the
rights or safety of others or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to
endanger any person or property.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 SPEED REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person driving a vehicle within the city shall drive the same at a
speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having
regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event speed
shall be so restricted as may be necessary in order to avoid colliding with any
person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance
with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. No person
shall drive a vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and
reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe
operation or in compliance with law.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven thereon at a speed in excess of 30 miles
per hour on any street on which a different speed has not been established by
the Commissioner of Transportation under M.S. § 169.14, as amended from time to
time. On any street where a different speed zone has been established, and
signs have been posted calling attention to such zone, no vehicle shall be
driven in the city at a speed greater than that indicated on such signs.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 OPERATING AND TURNING VEHICLES.
   Upon all highways within the city of sufficient width, except upon one-way
streets, or except upon those with three traffic lanes established and plainly
marked thereon, the driver of a vehicle shall drive the same upon the right
half of the roadway and shall drive a slow moving vehicle as closely as
possible to the right-hand edge or the curb of such highway, unless it is
impracticable to travel on such side of the highway and except when overtaking
and passing another vehicle. No person shall stop or turn a vehicle or change
from one traffic lane to another unless the same can be done with safety and
without interfering with the normal flow of pedestrian and vehicle traffic, and
if any other vehicle may be affected, the intention to make such stop, change
of position or turn shall be indicated by the driver by extending his or her
left arm from and beyond the left side of the vehicle in the manner specified
by law or by using an approved and efficient device to give such warning and by
giving an audible warning by sounding the horn if necessary to warn
pedestrians.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14)
§ 71.04 USE OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
      ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE.
         (a)   Distinct and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys,
disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort and repose of any person or
precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property's value;
         (b)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.69, as amended
from time to time, which requires every motor vehicle to be equipped with a
muffler in good working order; or
         (c)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.693 and Minn.
Rules part 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as this statute and these rules may be
amended from time to time, which establish motor vehicle noise standards.
      ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE. A dynamic brake, jake brake, jacobs brake, c-
brake, paccar brake, transmission brake or other similar engine retarding brake
system which alters the normal compression of the engine and subsequently
releases that compression.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust or permit
the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through a muffler
that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies with all
applicable state laws and regulations.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to intentionally
use an engine retarding brake on any public highway, street, parking lot or
alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive noise from the engine
because of an illegally modified or defective system, except in an emergency.
   (D)   M.S. §§ 169.69 and 169.693 (motor vehicle noise limits) and Minn.
Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these statutes and rates may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.
   (E)   Sign stating "Vehicle Noise Laws Enforced" may be installed at
locations deemed appropriate by the City Council to advise motorists of the
prohibitions contained in this section, except that no sign stating "Vehicle
Noise Laws Enforced" shall be installed on a state highway without a permit
from the Minnesota Department of Transportation. The provisions of this section
are in full force and effect even if no signs are installed.
(Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14)
§ 71.05 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The speed limitation of this chapter shall not apply to vehicles when
operated with due regard for safety, under the direction of peace officers in
the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or persons charged with or
suspected of any such violation, to Fire Departments or fire patrol vehicles
when traveling in response to a fire alarm or to public ambulances in emergency
use or service. When a fire alarm shall be sounded or when the warning device
of any emergency vehicle shall be sounded, all vehicles upon the streets of the
city shall draw to the right side of the street and permit such vehicle to
pass. No vehicle of any kind shall precede fire apparatus to a fire using the
same street that it is using. No vehicle shall follow fire apparatus closer
than 500 feet or be parked within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in
answer to a fire alarm. No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of
a Fire Department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used
at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14)
§ 71.06 DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR OR NARCOTICS.
   No person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs or who is under the
influence of narcotics or liquors shall drive or operate a vehicle on any
street within the city, and no person shall consume liquor while an occupant of
a vehicle upon any street in the city.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 PEDESTRIANS.
   (A)   Obey traffic-control signals. Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-
control signals at intersections as heretofore declared in this chapter, but at
all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be
subject to the restrictions in this section and all other sections.
   (B)   Rights in absence of signals.
      (1)   Where traffic-control signals are not in place or in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall stop to yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within a marked crosswalk or within any crosswalk at an
intersection, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave the curb or other place of
safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield. This provision shall not apply under the
conditions as otherwise provided in this subdivision.
      (2)   When any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle through a
column of school children crossing a street or highway or past a member of a
school safety patrol or adult crossing guard, while the member of the school
safety patrol or adult crossing guard is directing the movement of children
across a street or highway and while the school safety patrol member or adult
crossing guard is holding an official signal in the stop position.
      (4)   A person who violates this division is guilty of a misdemeanor and
may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 90 days or to payment of a
fine of not more than $700 or both. A person who violates this division a
second or subsequent time within one year of a previous conviction under this
division is guilty of a gross misdemeanor and may be sentenced to imprisonment
for not more than one year or to payment of a fine of not more than $3,000 or
both.
   (C)   Crossing between intersections.
      (1)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within
a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
      (2)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian
tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
      (3)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are
in operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section every driver of
a vehicle shall:
         (a)   Exercise due care to avoid colliding with any bicycle or
pedestrian upon any roadway; and
         (b)   Give an audible signal when necessary and exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused or incapacitated
person upon a roadway.
   (D)   Use right half of crosswalks. Pedestrians shall move when practicable
upon the right half of crosswalks.
   (E)   Walk on left side or roadway. Pedestrians when walking or moving in a
wheelchair along a roadway shall, when practicable, walk or move on the left
side of the roadway or its shoulder giving way to oncoming traffic. Where
sidewalks are provided and are accessible and usable it shall be unlawful for
any pedestrian to walk or move in a wheelchair along and upon an adjacent
roadway.
   (F)   Hitchhiking; solicitation of business.
      (1)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall stand on a roadway for the purpose of soliciting
employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.08 GLASS OR OTHER INJURIOUS SUBSTANCE ON HIGHWAYS.
   No person shall throw or deposit glass, metal, garbage, tin cans or any
other similar substance upon any highway, and anyone who drops or throws or
permits to be dropped or thrown any such destructive or injurious substance
shall immediately cause the same to be removed. Any wrecked or damaged vehicle
on a street shall be removed therefrom without unreasonable delay and pending
removal shall be guarded during the period when lights are required on vehicles
with proper lights, equal in intensity to ordinary parking lights or by red
flares; and when removed, no glass or injurious substance shall be left upon
the street or roadway by the person removing the vehicle.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 6-10-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   General regulations
   
72.02   Commercial and user parking and delivery
   
72.03   Recreational vehicle parking
   
72.04   Special regulations in congested district
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Angle parking shall be allowed on the following streets: First Avenue
N.W., east side, abutting on all school property. Every vehicle which is angle
parked shall be parked with the front of such vehicle facing the curb or the
edge of the traveled portion of the street at an angle of approximately 60
degrees and facing between the painted or other markings on the curb or street
indicating the parking space. On all streets other than First Avenue N.W.,
parallel parking shall be required. On any such street with a curb, every
vehicle parked shall be parked parallel to the curb and with the right-hand
wheels of such vehicle within 12 inches of the curb. On any such street without
a curb, every vehicle parked shall be parked to the right of the main traveled
portion thereof and parallel thereto and in such a manner as not to interfere
with the free flow of traffic. The foregoing requirements shall not apply,
however, to any vehicle disabled upon any street, but any police officer/city
staff may require the person in charge thereof to move it to a place of safety;
and if such movement is not made or if any motor vehicle is left alone or
abandoned in any such position, the police officer/city staff may provide for
the removal of such vehicle to the nearest convenient garage or other place of
safekeeping.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk or blocking a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and,
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when properly sign posted;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway, except
as otherwise provided by ordinance;
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; and
      (15)   Within six feet of any mailbox.
   (C)   No person shall, for camping purposes, leave or park a motorhome on
any street or the right-of-way thereof.
   (D)   No person shall stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed to
proceed by any police officer/city staff with authority to direct traffic.
   (E)   A SNOW REMOVAL PERIOD shall be a period of time commencing at the
beginning of each snowfall or ice which is significant enough in depth that
there is a possibility of plows being dispatched or during an event defined as
a snow emergency. This may last for 48-hours after said snowfall/snow emergency
event. During a snow removal period it is unlawful to park or leave a vehicle
standing on any street or public alley. City staff will make every effort to
contact local media outlets regarding the declaration of a snow emergency and
the snow removal period.
   (F)   (1)   A SNOW EMERGENCY  is defined as:
         (a)   Continuous or intermittent snowfall that has accumulated to
three inches or more of snow;
         (b)   Drifting of snow that causes problems for travel;
         (c)   Icy conditions which seriously affect travel; and
         (d)   Time of snowfall in relationship to heavy use of street.
      (2)   The city may issue a citation for the parking violation. If four
hours after the first ticket, the vehicle hasn't been moved, a second citation
may be issued and the vehicle may be towed.
      (3)   Road clean up, including snow left on roadway from parked cars,
will occur during next plowing of that roadway. City crews will not be
dispatched for unscheduled road plowing.
   (G)   No person shall stop or park a vehicle, truck, trailer or semitrailer
which is being used for the display of advertising, or for informational
purposes on any street, alley or highway.
   (H)   No vehicle shall be parked on any street, alley or highway for a
period longer than 72 hours.
   (I)   In city-owned parking lots, the Council may limit the size and types
of vehicles to be parked, hours of parking and prescribed method of parking,
provided that such limitations and restrictions are marked or sign-posted. It
shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in any city-owned parking lot contrary to
the restrictions or limitations marked or sign-posted.
   (J)   It shall be unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or
disassemble a vehicle parked upon a street, alley or city-owned parking lot, or
attempt to do so, except to service such vehicle with gas or oil, or to provide
emergency repairs, but in no event for more than 24 hours.
   (K)   Parking of certain vehicles restricted. No person shall park any of
the following described vehicles on any residential street, alley or city owned
public parking lot for more than 12 hours.
      (1)   Trucks having a capacity of more than one ton, according to the
manufacturer's rating.
      (2)   Motor vehicle and trailer combinations having an over-all length of
more than 20 feet, or width at any point of more than eight feet.
      (3)   Dump trucks, tractors, truck-tractors, semi-trailers or heavy
machinery.
      (4)   This limited 12-hour restriction does not apply to overnight
parking related to:
         (a)   Emergencies,
         (b)   Public works projects,
         (c)   Construction projects, or
         (d)   Community events where such overnight parking is approved by the
Public Works Department and/or City Hall.
         (e)   Construction project parking shall not exceed 48 hours without
express authorization of the City Administrator or City Council.
   (L)   Removing marks. No person shall obliterate, erase or remove any mark
or sign placed on a vehicle by a police officer for the purpose of measuring
the length of time such vehicle has been parked.
   (M)   No parking to access school property. Where official signs are posted,
no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle to access school property.
   (N)   Residential permit parking; May 1 to Sept. 1, permit required.
      (1)   Where the official signs are placed, no person shall stop, stand,
or park a vehicle without a permit during these months.
      (2)   Application fee and annual permits may be applied for at City Hall;
proof of occupancy at current address and proof of vehicle registration,
license plate number and make, model and year of the
vehicle will be required. The cost of the permits shall be approved by
resolution on an annual basis.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 1-23-08; Am. Ord. passed 10-22-13;
Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 2019-04, passed 3-12-19; Am. Ord.
2025-08, passed 9-9-25) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 COMMERCIAL AND USER PARKING AND DELIVERY.
   (A)   Parking and delivery is prohibited on grassy areas and shall be
limited to hard-surfaced areas only. Vehicles illegally parked are subject to
tow at the owner's expense.
   (B)   No firm or corporation owning, driving or in charge of any bus, motor
truck, truck, tractor or commercial vehicle to cause or permit the same to be
parked or stand longer than 12 hours continuously on, in front of or beside any
property in any commercial district. For the purpose of this section, a bus is
a vehicle designed for carrying passengers and having a seating capacity of
more than nine persons and a motortruck, truck; tractor or commercial vehicle
is a vehicle having either a capacity of more than one ton or a weight of more
than 5,000 pounds, or both.
   (C)   The presence of a vehicle in or upon any public street, alley or
highway in the municipality stopped, standing or parked in violation of this
section shall be prima facie evidence that the person in whose name such
vehicle is registered as owner committed or authorized the commission of such
violation.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 1-23-08; Am. Ord. passed 10-22-13;
Am. Ord. 2025-08, passed 9-9-25)
§ 72.03 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING.
   (A)   Definition. The words RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall mean any of the
following:
      (1)   BOAT TRAILER. A vehicle without its own power, designed to
transport a recreational watercraft and which is eligible to be licensed or
registered and insured for highway use. A recreational watercraft, when mounted
upon a boat trailer, and its towing vehicle, when parked or stored shall be
considered one unit.
      (2)   CAMPING TRAILER. A folding structure mounted on wheels and designed
to be towed and used for travel, recreation or vacation use.
      (3)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel,
recreation or vacation and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled
vehicle.
      (4)   PICKUP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis
for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or vacation use.
      (5)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or
vacation use.
      (6)   UTILITY TRAILER. A vehicle, without its own power, designed or used
for the transportation of automobiles, motorcycles, snowmobiles, ice fishing
houses, horse or other livestock or all other types of motor vehicles, goods or
materials, and which trailer is eligible to be licensed or registered and
insured for highway use. Snowmobiles when mounted upon a snowmobile trailer,
and its towing vehicle, when parked or stored, shall be considered one unit.
   (B)   Minimum requirements.
      (1)   General. All recreational vehicles and including, but not limited
to, boats and other vehicles that are stored on trailers when parked, shall
meet the minimum requirements of this section.
      (2)   Residential districts.
         (a)   All recreational vehicles shall be required to be parked off of
any public right-of-way and no part of the recreational camping vehicle shall
extend into the public right-of-way without authorization from City
Administrator and not more than 12 hours for loading/unloading.
         (b)   Side-yard parking may be permitted where only one side yard is
used for recreational vehicle parking and where a vehicle is parked between the
side lot line and the principal building the vehicle shall be no closer than
three feet to the side line.
         (c)   Front-yard parking may be permitted where the vehicle is not
parked between the principal building and the front lot line.
         (d)   In Cluster Development and Planned Residential Developments,
there shall be provided a separate area to be used for parking, indoors or
outdoors, of the occupants' recreational vehicles. Such storage shall have the
parking spaces marked and be suitably landscaped so as to be harmonious with
the rest of the development.
         (e)   In Zero Lot Line Developments, parking in the side yard shall be
permitted only in an area that is a minimum of 15 feet from the side lot line
and the parking area shall be suitably landscaped so as to be harmonious with
the rest of the development.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 1-23-08; Am. Ord. passed 10-22-13;
Am. Ord. 2025-08, passed 9-9-25)
§ 72.04 SPECIAL REGULATIONS IN CONGESTED DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Council, by resolution, may establish a district to be known as
the congested district within which the rules set forth in this section shall
be in force.
   (B)   The Council, by resolution, may establish "No Truck Parking" zones in
the congested district and shall mark by appropriate signs any zone so
established. Such zones shall be established in the congested district where
heavy traffic by commercial vehicles or other traffic congestion makes parking
by commercial vehicles a hazard to the safety of vehicles or pedestrians. No
person shall park a commercial vehicle of more than one ton capacity between 8:
00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any week day upon any street in any "No Truck Parking"
zone, but parking of such vehicles for a period of not more than 30 minutes
shall be permitted in such zone for the purpose of having access to abutting
property when such access cannot conveniently be secured from an alley or from
a side street where truck parking is not so restricted.
   (C)   The Council, by resolution, may designate certain blocks within the
congested district as 30-minute, one-hour or two-hour limited parking zones and
shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so established. Such zones shall be
established in the congested district wherever necessary for the convenience of
the public or to minimize traffic hazards and to preserve a free flow of
traffic. No person shall park any vehicle in any limited parking zone between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any weekday for a longer period than is
specified on the signs marking such zone.
   (D)   The Council, by resolution, may establish in each block in the
congested districts one or more loading zones and shall mark by appropriate
signs any zone so established. Such zones shall be located at places most
convenient for the use of the public with regard to traffic conditions in the
block. No person shall, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any
weekday, park any vehicle in any loading zone, except for the purpose of
receiving or discharging passengers or freight and then only for a period no
longer than is necessary for the discharge or receipt of such passengers or
freight.
   (E)   No person shall turn a vehicle on any street in the congested district
so as to reverse its direction.
   (F)   The Council, by resolution, may, whenever necessary to preserve a free
flow of traffic or to prevent accidents, designate any intersection within the
congested district as one where the turning of vehicles to the left or to the
right, or both, is to be restricted and shall mark by appropriate signs any
intersection so designated; but no intersection on a trunk highway shall be so
designated until the consent of the State Commissioner of Public Safety to such
designation is obtained. No person shall turn a vehicle at any such
intersection contrary to the directions on such signs.
(Ord. 459, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. passed 10-22-13; Am. Ord. 2025-08, passed
9-9-25)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise indicated, any person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 10-22-13)
CHAPTER 73: TOY VEHICLES
Section
   
73.01   Purpose
   
73.02   Definitions
   
73.03   Observation of rules of the road
   
73.04   Future restrictions
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and safety
arising out of the use of skateboards, roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis and scooters within the city. The City Council finds that the operation
and use of skateboards, roller blades, roller slates, roller skis and scooters
creates an unnecessary potential danger to either the user of such devices or
the general public and that the use of said devices in an improper manner may
cause destruction of property.
(Ord. 169, passed 11-8-95)
§ 73.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ROLLER DEVICE. Any one of the following devices:
      (1)   ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLER BLADES means a shoe with wheels attached
or a device with wheels which is designed to be attached to a shoe;
      (2)   SKATEBOARD MEANS a wheeled self-propelled and manually propelled
device to transport a rider which device is not otherwise secured to the
rider’s feet or shoes;
      (3)   ROLLER SKIS means a pair of skis platformed with wheels attached
which is intended to simulate skiing;
      (4)   SCOOTER means a foot-operated vehicle consisting of a narrow board
mounted between two wheels, tandem, with an upright steering handle attached to
the front wheel;
      (5)   OPERATE means to ride or control the operation of a skateboard,
roller skates, roller blades, roller skis or scooter;
      (6)   OPERATOR means every person who operates or is in actual physical
control of a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, roller skis or scooter.
(Ord. 169, passed 11-8-95)
§ 73.03 OBSERVATION OF RULES OF THE ROAD.
   (A)   Any person who is using any roller device on any of the streets or
roadways within the city must observe the same rules of the road as required of
bicycles pursuant to M.S. § 169.222, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   No person operating a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, roller
skis or scooter shall attach the same or the person of the operator to any
vehicles upon a roadway.
   (C)   Every person operating a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades,
roller skis or scooter upon a roadway shall ride as close as possible to the
right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (D)   No person shall use a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, roller
skis or scooter upon a public street, sidewalk or other roadway after sunset
and before sunrise.
   (E)   No person shall ride or use a skateboard, roller skates, roller
blades, roller skis or scooter in any careless, reckless or negligent manner as
to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or property of
any other person.
   (F)   No person shall ride or use a skateboard, roller skates, roller
blades, roller skis or scooter on any public sidewalks, street or any public
parking lot situated in the downtown commercial area.
   (G)   No person shall ride or use a skateboard, roller skates, roller
blades, roller skis or scooter on private property of another without the
express permission to do so by the owner or occupant of said property.
(Ord. 169, passed 11-8-95) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 FUTURE RESTRICTIONS.
   The City Council may, in the future, by resolution, prohibit the use of
skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, roller skis or scooters in areas of
the city.
(Ord. 169, passed 11-8-95)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor as defined in M.S. § 609.02, subd. 02(4a), as may be amended
from time to time. Any peace officer who observes any person violating any
provisions of this chapter is authorized to seize the offender’s skateboard,
roller skates, roller blades, roller skis or scooter and to hold the same at
Olmsted County Law Enforcement. If an adult, may secure the return of the
article seized after 24 hours have elapsed since the seizure. In the case of a
minor, the article seized shall be returned only to the parent or guardian of
such minor offender after 24 hours have elapsed since the seizure.
(Ord. 169, passed 11-8-95)
CHAPTER 74: SNOWMOBILES
Section
   
74.01   Definitions
   
74.02   Travel on city streets limited
   
74.03   Travel on city streets
   
74.04   Travel on county roads and county highways
   
74.05   Single file
   
74.06   Yield right-of-way at intersections
   
74.07   Speed limit
   
74.08   Prohibited operation
   
74.09   Operation by minors limited
 
   
74.99   Penalty
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY STREETS. A public thoroughfare, roadway or alley used for motor vehicle
travel which is not an interstate, trunk, county-state aid, or county highway.
   PUBLIC ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire right-of-way of a public road,
including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders, median and
boulevard of a road that is not privately owned.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway or street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for use on snow or ice steered
by skis or runners.
(Ord. 84, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-04)
§ 74.02 TRAVEL ON CITY STREETS LIMITED.
   Snowmobiles operating within the city shall travel from an operator’s place
of residence, out of the city, or from outside the city to the place of
residence of the operator, by traveling the shortest possible route.
(Ord. 84, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-04)
§ 74.03 TRAVEL ON CITY STREETS.
   Travel of snowmobiles is permitted only on the roadway portion of city
streets.
(Ord. passed 10-13-04)
§ 74.04 TRAVEL ON COUNTY ROADS AND COUNTY HIGHWAYS.
   Snowmobiles may be operated upon the ditch bottom or outside bank of trunk,
county-state aid, or county highways where such highway is configured.
Snowmobiles shall not operate on boulevards of county-state aid, or county
highways when the boulevard is 50 feet or closer to any residence or dwelling.
(Ord. passed 10-13-04)
§ 74.05 SINGLE FILE.
   All travel by snowmobile on city streets or other roads will be single file
on the right hand side of the road obeying all traffic signs.
(Ord. 84, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-04)
§ 74.06 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   No snowmobile shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way
to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the
intersection so as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(Ord. passed 10-13-04)
§ 74.07 SPEED LIMIT.
   Maximum speed limit for operation of snowmobiles within the limits of the
city is 15 miles per hour.
(Ord. 84, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-04)
§ 74.08 PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   Operation of snowmobiles is prohibited:
   (A)   In any city park or recreation area;
   (B)   On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel;
   (C)   On a public trail provided for pedestrian or bicycle travel;
   (D)   On school property, except with permission from a proper authority;
   (E)   On private property of another without permission of the owner or
person in control of the property; and
   (F)   Within 100 feet of any pedestrian, fisherman, skating rink, sliding or
ski area where the operation would conflict with the use or endanger other
persons.
(Ord. passed 10-13-04)
§ 74.09 OPERATION BY MINORS LIMITED.
   (A)   No person under 14 years of age shall operate a snowmobile within a
public road right-of-way within the city.
   (B)   No person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age,
shall operate a snowmobile within a public road right-of-way in the city unless
they have in their immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate
for operation of a snowmobile issued by the Commissioner of Natural Resources
for the State of Minnesota.
   (C)   No person under the age of 18 shall operate or ride upon a snowmobile
without wearing a protective helmet or headgear that complies with the
standards established by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Ord. 84, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-04)
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any section is a petty misdemeanor punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Ord. 84, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-04)
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Truck routes
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Truck travel restricted. No vehicle or tractor having a gross weight
on any axle in excess of 10,000 pounds shall be driven on any city street not
designated as a truck route. This provision shall not apply to emergency
vehicles. Vehicles engaged in the maintenance or construction of streets,
street improvement or street utilities shall be covered by a special permit
issued by the City Council permitting travel on streets not designated as truck
routes.
   (B)   Truck routes. The following lists the truck routes:
      (1)   Frontage Road;
      (2)   Byron Avenue;
      (3)   First Avenue Northwest north to Seventh Street;
      (4)   Fourth Street from Second Avenue Northwest to First Avenue
Northeast;
      (5)   First Avenue Northeast.
   (C)   Marking. The City Council shall cause appropriate signs to be erected
which shall designate either truck routes or truck travel restriction streets.
   (D)   Violations. Any law enforcement officer may require a person driving a
truck in a residential truck travel area to proceed to the nearest available
public or private scale for the purpose of weighing. Any violation is a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Ord. 168, passed 12-18-96)
CHAPTER 76: GOLF CARTS AND ATVS
Section
   
76.01   Definitions
   
76.02   Operation allowed with permit
   
76.03   Permit application
   
76.04   Rules of operation
   
76.05   Limitation of liability
   
76.06   Revocation of permit
 
   
76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV).
      (1)   A motorized vehicle with:
         (a)   Not less than three, but not more than six low pressure or non-
pneumatic tires;
         (b)   A total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less; and
         (c)   A total width from outside of tire rim to outside of tire rim
that is 65 inches or less.
      (2)   ALL TERRAIN VEHICLE includes a Class 1 all terrain vehicle and
Class 2 all terrain vehicle. ALL TERRAIN VEHICLE does not include a golf cart,
mini-truck, dune buggy, or go-cart or a vehicle designed and used specifically
for lawn maintenance, agriculture, logging, or mining purposes.
   INSURANCE. Motor vehicle insurance which complies with the requirements set
forth in M.S. § 65B.48, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
   MOTORIZED GOLF CART. A vehicle, usually three or four wheeled, which is self
propelled and designed to normally provide transportation on a golf course.
   PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON. Any person meeting the criteria set forth in
M.S. § 169.345, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time, that qualifies
for a certificate allowing the person to park in a handicapped parking space.
   SLOW MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM. A sign which complies with the requirements set
forth in M.S. § 169.522, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12; Am. Ord. 20-04, passed 7-28-20)
§ 76.02 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a permit to register an all terrain vehicle or motorized
golf cart shall submit an application to City Hall along with a fee established
by the City Council, which should include the following information:
   (A)   Application date;
   (B)   Applicant's name and address;
   (C)   Copy of applicant's valid driver's license;
   (D)   Proof of insurance company and policy number for operation of the all
terrain vehicle or motorized golf cart;
   (E)   If the applicant does not possess a valid driver's license, the
applicant must submit a certificate signed by a licensed physician that the
applicant is able to operate an all terrain vehicle or motorized golf cart; and
   (F)   Applicants must have proof of DNR registration for all terrain
vehicles.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12; Am. Ord. 20-04, passed 7-28-20)
§ 76.03 RULES OF OPERATION.
   (A)   All terrain vehicles or motorized golf carts are allowed to operate on
city streets if the owner obtains a permit under this chapter.
   (B)   All terrain vehicles or motorized golf carts may make a direct
crossing of a city street without obtaining a permit or displaying a slow
moving vehicle emblem.
   (C)   All terrain vehicles are not required to obtain a permit if they are
being utilized to clear snow from sidewalks and/or driveways from the operators
property or from a neighbor’s within 350 feet of operators property.
   (D)   All terrain vehicles are not required to obtain a permit if they are
being utilized to drag a ball field.
   (E)   Operators must be at least 16 years of age and have a valid driver's
license. All driver's license provisions and restrictions apply.
   (F)   The permit shall be affixed to the uppermost portion of the left
(operator's) side of the all terrain vehicle or motorized golf cart.
   (G)   No person shall operate an all terrain vehicle or motorized golf cart
in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired.
   (H)   Motorized golf carts shall display the slow moving vehicle emblem
provided for in M.S. § 169.522, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (I)   Operators of all terrain vehicles or motorized golf carts shall obey
all traffic laws when traveling on city streets. All terrain vehicles or golf
carts shall operate on the far right hand side of the road or shoulder.
   (J)   No towing of people is allowed.
   (K)   Permitted all terrain vehicles or motorized golf carts may only carry
the number of passengers for which the vehicle is designed.
   (L)   All terrain vehicles or motorized golf carts must be operated on the
extreme right hand side of the roadway and no faster than 20 mph.
   (M)   No person operating a motorized golf cart or ATV under this ordinance
shall cross Highway 14 or drive along 2nd Avenue NW or 7th Street NW and 7th
Street NE, those portions of 7th Street that are considered to be a County
Road.
   (N)   A person operating a motorized golf cart or all terrain vehicle under
this section shall not cross Highway 14 or drive along 2nd Avenue NW.
   (O)   All terrain vehicles or motorized golf carts are not permitted on
Byron's walking/bike trail system and/or sidewalks.
   (P)   All other rules and regulations governing operation of all terrain
vehicles apply per M.S. § 84.92.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12; Am. Ord. 20-04, passed 7-28-20) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.04 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an assumption of liability by
the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from the
operation of a motorized golf cart or ATV by a permit holder, granting of such
permit, or the failure by the city to revoke said permit.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12)
§ 76.05 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The city may revoke the permit to operate an all terrain vehicle or
motorized golf cart if a violation of this chapter occurs.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12)
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any section is a petty misdemeanor punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   PARKS
      
91.   TREES
      
92.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   ANIMALS
      
95.   ABANDONED, JUNK AND UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES
      
96.   NUISANCES
      
97.   REGULATION OF PUBLIC DANCES
      
98.   WEEDS
      
99.   OUTDOOR FURNACES
      
100.   EMERGENCY FIRE AND FIRST RESPONDERS' FEES
CHAPTER 90: PARKS
Section
   
90.01   Definition
   
90.02   Regulation of traffic
   
90.03   Speed limits
   
90.04   Snowmobiles and unlicensed vehicle use
   
90.05   Commercial and user parking and delivery
   
90.06   Restricted areas
   
90.07   Protection of trees, plants and structures
   
90.08   Protection of animals
   
90.09   Hours
   
90.10   Miscellaneous activities
   
90.11   Alcoholic beverages in parks
   
90.12   Dangerous games
   
90.13   Firearms and fireworks
   
90.14   Exclusive park use
   
90.15   Rubbish
   
90.16   Animals
   
90.17   Signs restricted
   
90.18   Parades restricted
   
90.19   Theatrical entertainment and the like
   
90.20   Veteran’s memorial
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Park Board, see §§
31.01 et seq.
§ 90.01 DEFINITION.
   The term PARK, when used in this chapter, shall be construed to include all
public ground maintained as pleasure grounds in the city.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96)
§ 90.02 REGULATION OF TRAFFIC.
   No horses or other animals used for riding or driving, or vehicle of any
description, will be allowed upon any part of the parks, nor will any vehicle
drawn by any animal or any automobile be allowed upon any footwalk, nor will
any vehicle used for driving or riding be allowed to stand or go upon any
drive, except at such places as the city shall designate for such purpose to
the obstruction of the way or inconvenience of persons riding or driving in the
parks; and no person shall solicit or invite passengers for hire in said park.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96)
§ 90.03 SPEED LIMITS.
   No person shall ride or drive a bicycle, automobile or other road machine or
vehicle within the parks faster than reasonable under the circumstances. The
city may, at its discretion, make such rules and regulations governing the
speed of the said vehicles while traveling upon any of the park roads or
pathways of said city and may impose such other conditions or rules governing
the use of such vehicles while traveling upon any of such park roads or park
pathways as may be deemed by the city necessary to the protection and safety of
the public.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96)
§ 90.04 SNOWMOBILES AND UNLICENSED VEHICLE USE.
   Snowmobiles, motorcycles, dirt bikes and all other all-terrain vehicles are
prohibited in city parks.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96)
§ 90.05 COMMERCIAL AND USER PARKING AND DELIVERY.
   Parking and delivery is prohibited on grassy areas and shall be limited to
hard-surfaced areas only. Vehicles illegally parked are subject to tow at the
owner’s expense.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96)
§ 90.06 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   The parks and every part thereof are for the use and enjoyment of the
public, subject to such restrictions as may be lawfully made for their orderly
government, and therefore all visitors are free to go upon the grass, lawn or
turf of any park except in any space indicated by visible lines of enclosures
on which is posted a sign or placard bearing the words, “Keep out of this
enclosure.”
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96)
§ 90.07 PROTECTION OF TREES, PLANTS AND STRUCTURES.
   No person shall climb any trees, pluck any flowers or fruit, whether wild or
cultivated, break, cut down or trample upon or remove or in any manner injure
or deface any statue, ornament, tree, plant, shrub, flower bed, curb or any of
the buildings, fences, bridges or other construction within city parks; nor
shall any person write on any building, structure, statue, fence, bench, rock
or stone within such parks.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 PROTECTION OF ANIMALS.
   No person shall send or throw any animal or thing in or upon the waters of
any park or kill, injure, molest or unnecessarily disturb any fish, any water
fowl or other birds or any animal properly within any park.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96; Am. Ord. 412, passed 2-11-04) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 HOURS.
   No person, except a law enforcement official and the employees and servants
of the city, shall be allowed in any park between the hours of one half hour
after sunset and one half hour before sunrise each day, except any Park Board
or Park Board Representative approved activities.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96; Am. Ord. 412, passed 2-11-04) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES.
   No person shall play any music, keep or offer for sale or post or display
any sign or placard, flag, target, transparency, advertisement or device of
business within any park, building or place under the jurisdiction of the city,
unless by the permission of the city and subject to such rules and regulations
as the city shall prescribe, and no person shall in any such park beg or
publicly solicit subscription, tell fortunes, play any game of cards or other
games of chance or any game with table or instruments of gaming, utter loud,
threatening or abusive or indecent language or any language tending to cause a
breach of the peace or be guilty of any indecent, obscene or disorderly
conduct. No person shall make any oration or harangue in such park without the
written permission of the city.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PARKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to bring upon or possess in a park a container
of an alcoholic beverage which contains or has a capacity of more than eight
gallons. This section shall not apply to a person licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages on park land, to an employee or agent acting on behalf of such
licensee, nor to a person delivering an alcoholic beverage to such licensee. No
alcoholic beverages, or beverages of any kind, in glass containers are allowed
in the parks.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 112
§ 90.12 DANGEROUS GAMES.
   No person shall play or engage in any game or exercise which shall be liable
to injure travelers or endanger the passage of vehicles on any adjoining street
or within the limits of any park.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS.
   No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol, BB/pellet gun, bow and
arrow, sling shot or other firearm or any rocket, torpedo or other fireworks of
any description or throw any stones or missiles within city parks, nor carry
any of the above in any park.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 EXCLUSIVE PARK USE.
   Athletic games, sports, picnics and other forms of recreation or amusement
sanctioned by the city may be held or practiced in such parts of the parks as
shall be designated for such use, subject to such regulations as may be made by
the city and subject to the orders of any law enforcement official or other
officer connected with the park on duty enforcing the rules of the city.
Permits for the exclusive use of any picnic area or playground for any
specified date or time may be granted at the discretion of the city, and no
person shall in any manner disturb or interfere with any club or party
occupying the ground under such permit without their consent.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.15 RUBBISH.
   No glass containers, filth, dirt, stone, wood, ashes, dead carcass, garbage
matter, substance or rubbish, including household garbage of any kind, shall be
placed or deposited in any park.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 ANIMALS.
   No quadrupeds or other animals, except those placed in the parks by the
authority of the city, and excepting dogs and cats accompanying their owners or
other person having charge thereof and controlled by a line, chain or strap,
shall be conducted into the parks or to be allowed to remain therein. It is
unlawful for any person who owns or has custody of a dog or cat to cause or
permit such animal to defecate on any public property, unless such person
immediately removes the excrement and places it in a proper receptacle.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 SIGNS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall post or affix any printed or written bill or placard, notice
or other paper or any sign upon any tree, structure or thing within the parks
or upon any gate, fence or enclosure within the limits thereof, except park
notices and other authorized bulletins or signs put up by direction of the
city.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.18 PARADES RESTRICTED.
   No military target, fire, hook-and-ladder or hose company or civic or other
procession shall parade, march, drive or perform any military or other
evolution or movement within the parks without the written permission of the
city.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.19 THEATRICAL ENTERTAINMENT AND THE LIKE.
   No person or persons shall have or give any theatrical entertainment in any
park, nor shall any parade, procession, public gathering or public meeting of
any kind take place in any public park; nor shall any person march in columns
on any parkway; but this shall not exclude social or other picnics in such
portion of the various parks as may be designated by the city for that purpose.
This section may be temporarily suspended on special or extraordinary occasions
by formal resolutions of the City Council, duly passed and entered on record in
their minutes.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 VETERAN'S MEMORIAL.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The City Council finds that there should be an
area within the city's park and open space system set aside exclusively as a
memorial to and to honor our nation's, state's and city's men and women
currently serving in or who have served in the Armed Forces of the United
States. The Veterans Memorial located within Byron Roundabout area and
described below herein is hereby so designated. The Veterans Memorial is hereby
set aside for purposes of the public honoring and remembering the service and
sacrifice of our Nation's veterans and that certain other activities
inconsistent with such purpose, when the same may freely occur in the city's
other extensive public park and open space areas, inherently contravene,
interfere with and are injurious to such purpose. Accordingly, the city has a
compelling interest in imposing time, place and manner restrictions on those
activities inconsistent with the purpose for which the Veteran’s Memorial is
designated on a content neutral basis and in a manner that does not
unreasonably infringe upon the rights of the city's inhabitants and visitors to
engage in free speech or the free exercise of religion. Therefore, the rules of
this section define the standards of conduct required of all the city's
inhabitants and visitors to the Veterans Memorial, which is a shrine to honor
present and past members of the Armed Forces of the United States and contains
monuments for the Civil War, World War I, World War II, Korea, Vietnam, Desert
Storm and an All Wars Monument. In addition, POWs, MIAs, Gold Star Spouses and
Parents, and Purple Heart holders are also honored.
   (B)   Definitions. When used in this section:
      (1)   Veterans Memorial or Memorial means the area located between 10th
Avenue and westerly line of the round about/Byron monument sign and between
Canadian Pacific Railroad property and Frontage Road NE.
      (2)   Military memorial service or ceremony means a formal group activity
conducted by an established military service group intended to honor the active
service or memory of members of the Armed Forces.
   (C)   Conduct within Veteran’s Memorial. Because the Veteran’s Memorial is a
shrine, certain acts, appropriate elsewhere in Byron, are not appropriate
within the Veteran’s Memorial. All visitors, including those attending or
taking part in memorial services, shall observe proper standards of conduct,
decorum and decency. Specifically, no person shall:
      (1)   Deface, climb on, sit on, stand on or otherwise damage any
monuments located within the Memorial;
      (2)   Use the memorial grounds for playing sports or participating in
athletics;
      (3)   Use the memorial grounds for grilling or other cooking activities;
      (4)   Erect a tent, hammock or other structure unless the use of the same
is part of a military memorial service or ceremony authorized by this section;
      (5)   Ride a bicycle or skateboard or use rollerblades within the
memorial; unless going through the area on the bike path.
      (6)   Deposit or throw litter on/in memorial grounds;
      (7)   Drive any motor vehicle within the memorial other than in the
parking lot;
      (8)   Engage in any disorderly conduct as defined in statute or city code
within the memorial;
      (9)   Display or distribute commercial advertising for the purpose of
soliciting business or otherwise solicit business while within the memorial; or
      (10)   Be within the boundaries of the memorial between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (D)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Public safety. The operations of authorized public safety or other
city personnel or emergency or city vehicles, including without limitation
police vehicles, fire vehicles, ambulances and city, county or state
snowplowing vehicles, the use of sirens, warning devices, sound amplification
devices or other equipment by public safety personnel or other city personnel
in emergency situations or otherwise.
      (2)   Emergency or other city work. Activities or work by city personnel
in the performance of emergency work to preserve the public health, safety, or
welfare, or in the performance of emergency work necessary to restore a public
service or eliminate a public hazard or such other work as the City
Administrator or City Council deems necessary or appropriate in the public
interest.
      (3)   Government sponsored or permitted or licensed activities. Those
certain government, and/or government permitted or licensed activities shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section.
   (E)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 7-25-17)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and may be sentenced up to a $200.00 fine.
(Ord. 412, passed 9-25-96; Am. Ord. 412, passed 2-11-04)
CHAPTER 91: TREES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Shade tree regulations adopted by reference
   
91.03   Designation and duties of city
Tree Planting Regulations
   
91.35   Permits
   
91.36   Street tree species to be planted
   
91.37   Spacing
   
91.38   Distance from curb and sidewalk
   
91.39   Distance from street corners and fire hydrants
   
91.40   Utilities
   
91.41   Public tree care
   
91.42   Tree topping
   
91.43   Pruning, corner clearance; street trees, street lights and lighting
   
91.44   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property and boulevard
   
91.45   Removal of stumps
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names and all areas owned by the city or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the city.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.02 SHADE TREE REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   M.S. §§ 89.001, 89.01 and 89.51 through 89.64, as amended from time to
time, are adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if set out
here in full, except as hereinafter provided. A copy of said agency rules
herewith incorporated is on file in the city office.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to store or otherwise harbor, on any property in
the city, the material from any diseased or infected trees.
   (C)   Where the provisions of this section conflict or are inconsistent with
any other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this section shall supersede
except in instances where one regulation is more restrictive than another, in
which case the more restrictive shall apply and control.
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.03 DESIGNATION AND DUTIES OF CITY.
   (A)   The city shall have jurisdiction and supervision over all trees,
shrubs, and plants located within street rights-of-way, parks and public places
in the city, and trees, shrubs and plants located on private property that may
constitute a hazard or threat to the public.
   (B)   The city may direct the planting, care, maintenance, removal and
replacement of any tree, shrub or plant on public grounds and the removal of
diseased and/or dead trees or shrubs on private property. This will be done at
the owner's expense.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
TREE PLANTING REGULATIONS
§ 91.35 PERMITS.
   Any new tree planted on a city street right-of-way that would constitute a
street tree must first be approved by the city. A written permit stating the
exact location and variety of tree must be obtained before planting. The city
will make available an approved list of street trees.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.36 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   A list constituting the official street tree species for Byron, Minnesota
shall be detailed in a city resolution. No species other than those included in
the list may be planted as street trees without written permission from the
city.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.37 SPACING.
   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
size classes listed in the city resolution, and no trees may be planted closer
together than the following: medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet;
except in special plantings designed or approved by the city.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.38 DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.
   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in the city
resolution. All trees are to be planted a minimum of five feet from the curb
and a minimum of five feet from the bike trail/sidewalk. No street tree shall
be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of
nearest intersection curbs or curb-lines. No street tree shall be planted
closer than 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.39 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs or curb-lines. No street
tree shall be planted closer than 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.40 UTILITIES.
   No street trees may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any
overhead utility wire or over or within ten lateral feet of any underground
water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.41 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares and public grounds as may be necessary to insure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city
may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in
an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers,
electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvement, or is
affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not
prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing
that the selection and location of the trees is in accordance with §§
91.35 through
91.39. The city shall not replace nor pay to replace street trees that are
removed for any reason noted above.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.42 TREE TOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this chapter at the determination of the city.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.43 PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE; STREET TREES, STREET LIGHTS AND LIGHTING.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of 11 feet above the surface of the street
or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or
broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property
when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a
street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or
sign and assess cost of pruning on the owner's property tax notice.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.44 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY AND BOULEVARD.
   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential
threat to other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing the
owners of such trees/shrubs. Removal shall be done by said owners of such
trees/shrubs. Removal shall be done at the owner's expense within 60 days after
the date of service notice; in the event of failure of owners to comply with
such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and
assess cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.45 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 3-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 11-15-16)
CHAPTER 92: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Right-Of-Way Construction Regulations
   
92.01   Findings, purpose, and intent
   
92.02   Election to manage the public right-of-way
   
92.03   Definitions
   
92.04   Administration
   
92.05   Registration and right-of-way occupancy
   
92.06   Registration information
   
92.07   Reporting obligations
   
92.08   Permit requirement
   
92.09   Permit applications
   
92.10   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
92.11   Action on small wireless facility permit applications
   
92.12   Permit fees
   
92.13   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
92.14   Joint applications
   
92.15   Supplementary applications
   
92.16   Other obligations
   
92.17   Denial or revocation of permit
   
92.18   Installation requirements
   
92.19   Inspection
   
92.20   Work done without a permit
   
92.21   Supplementary notification
   
92.22   Revocation of permits
   
92.23   Mapping data
   
92.24   Location and relocation of facilities
   
92.25   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
92.26   Damage to other facilities
   
92.27   Right-of-way vacation
   
92.28   Indemnification and liability
   
92.29   Abandoned and unusable facilities
   
92.30   Appeal
   
92.31   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
Construction, Repair and Maintenance of Sidewalks
   
92.45   Purpose
   
92.46   Definitions
   
92.47   Repairs and improvements
   
92.48   Removal without replacement
   
92.49   Maintenance
 
   
92.99   Penalty
RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
§ 92.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights of way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code
relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter imposes
reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and
equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
Federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the
rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this
chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons
using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws,
Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163,
237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and 2017 Mimi. Laws, Ch. 94, Art. 9,
amending the Act, and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city
and users of the right-of-way. This chapter shall also be interpreted
consistent with Minn. Rules 7819.0050-7819.9950 and Minn. Rules, Ch. 7560 where
possible. To the extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted
consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with
the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter
shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city
to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to
M.S. § 237.163, subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply in this chapter of this code. References
hereafter to “sections” are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections
in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms, whether or not
capitalized.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   CITY. The city of Byron, Minnesota. For purposes of §
92.28, city also means the city's elected officials, officers, employees, and
agents.
   COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the
city or other governmental unit.
   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, subd. 3, over a continuous length in excess
of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee's option:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, subd. 3;
      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; and
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules 7819.1100, means the cost to
achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to
13, set forth in Minn. Rules, parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   DEPARTMENT. The department of public works of the city.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patcriing, or restoration as established
by permit.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that:
      (1)   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of
property; or
      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to
restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An excavation permit
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right of way described in such
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in §
92.12.
   FACILITY OR FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions
for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless
facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-
way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct
the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits.
MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way
user for the use of the right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party
contractor used by the city including fees tied to or based on customer counts,
access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the
fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session
Laws 1997, Chapter 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163; or any ordinance enacted
under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken
pursuant to §
92.30 of this chapter.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in §
92.13.
   PATCH OR PATCHING. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A patch consists of:
      (1)   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base; and
      (2)   The replacement, in land, of the existing pavement for a minimum of
two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch is
considered full restoration when deemed by the city.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate, or gravel.
   PERMIT. Has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions
of this chapter.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified
in writing that they have been put on probation.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who:
      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any
right-of-way; or
      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-
of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
   RESTORE OR RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission rules.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in which
the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit,
or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. 
      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. §
237.162, subd. 4; or
      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that
is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a
right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
   SERVICE OR UTILITY SERVICE. Includes:
      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. §
216B.02, subds. 4 and 6;
      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information;
      (3)   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in M.S. Ch.
238;
      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by the city;
      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Ch. 308A; and
      (6)   Water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling, or
heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer's premises.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet
in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, batteiy backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a pemrit that had already
been issued.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbasc and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. May be allowed by the city under extenuating circumstances.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless
service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information.
For purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and
regulated under M.S. Ch. 238, and telecommunication activities related to
providing natural gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized
under M.S. Ch. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Ch. 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes
of this chapter except to the extent such entity is offering wireless service.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision
of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver,
antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and a
small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures,
wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless
support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly
associated with a specific antenna.
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SERVICE does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way
designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by the city.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   The city official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way,
right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The city official may
delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.05 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will
consist of providing application information.
   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any
part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain
boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between then
property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard
plantings shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall
comply with City Code
Chapter 91 Trees for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings under
this chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the M.S. Ch. 216D, Gopher One Call Law.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.06 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at the time
of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      (2)   The name, address, and email address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of
Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the:
            1.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees; and
            2.   Placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-
way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees,
including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from
completed operations, damage of underground facilities, and collapse of
property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers' compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
         (f)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
         (g)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is
required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the
secretary of state.
         (h)   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or
approval from the applicable state or Federal agency to lawfully operate, where
the person is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from
said commission or other state or Federal agency.
   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge
of any change.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.07 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations. 
      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December
1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground
facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using a format
designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city
to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency
of excavations and obstructions of right-of-way. The plan shall include, but
not be limited to, the following information:
         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of
all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
"next-year project"); and
         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated
beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years
following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five-year project”).
      (2)   The term "project" in this section shall include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
      (3)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for
inspection in the city's office a composite list of all projects of which the
city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for
keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
      (4)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project
in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other
registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant
listed by the other registrant.
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.08 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in
the right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way
permit from the city to do so.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-
of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project.
      (3)   Small wireless facility permit.
         (a)   A small wireless facility permit is required by a registrant to
erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small wireless
facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified
portion or the right-of-way, to the extent specified therein, provided that
such permit shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in
use, unless lawfully revoked.
         (b)   Decorative and aesthetic requirements. Where an applicant
proposes collocation or placement of a small wireless facility on a decorative
wireless support structure, sign or other structure, the city may impose
reasonable, objective requirements to accommodate the particular design,
appearance or intended purpose of such structure, including, but not limited
to, the following requirements:
            1.   The small wireless facility must have, to the greatest extent
reasonably possible, limited exposed cabling and mounting hardware; and
            2.   The small wireless facility must match the wireless support
structure, sign, or other structure to the greatest extent reasonably possible,
in color, material, and design.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless:
      (1)   Such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-
way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and
      (2)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rule 7819.1000, subp. 3 and
notwithstanding division (B) of this Section, the city shall establish and
impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established
from time to time by City Council resolution.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17; Am. Ord. 19-03, passed 3-12-19) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 92.09 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.
   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management
costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city;
      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
   (D)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing.
   (E)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.10 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state, and Federal laws, including but not limited to
M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and
Minn. Rule Ch. 7560.
   (C)   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to division (B), the
erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a
small wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless facility in
the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the
particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications,
and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application.
      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way
shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written authorization,
provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit
to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way
and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an
existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a
structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may
be imposed in the applicable permit.
      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its
wireless support structure.
      (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements
between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other
facilities in and around the right-of-way.
      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless
support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure.
      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support
structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.
   (D)   Small wireless facility agreement. A small wireless facility shall
only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by
the city, or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has
executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the
city. The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the following:
      (1)   Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure.
      (2)   Twenty-five dollars per year for maintenance associated with the
collocation;
      (3)   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
         (a)   Seventy-three dollars per radio node less than or equal to 100
maximum watts;
         (b)   One hundred and eight-two dollars per radio node over 100
maximum watts; or
         (c)   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the
foregoing.
      (4)   The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not
in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however,
that the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or
franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit
does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the
city and applicant.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.11 ACTION ON SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless
facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such application.
The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit
application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the
application within the review periods established in this section.
   (B)   Consolidated applications. 
      (1)   An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit
application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless
facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local government unit,
provided that all small wireless facilities in the application:
         (a)   Are located within a two-mile radius;
         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support
structures.
      (2)   In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the
city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not
use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless
facilities in the application.
   (C)   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
      (1)   The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking
approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-
day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such
applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of such
extension.
      (2)   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information
and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within
30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents or
information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of
any still-missing information.
      (3)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing
to toll the review period.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.12 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall impose an excavation permit fee
in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs;
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall impose an obstruction permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.
   (C)   Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
      (1)   Management costs; and
      (2)   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated
with collocation of small wireless facilities.
   (D)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
   (E)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in §
92.22 are not refundable.
   (F)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.13 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
92.16.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city
may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with correcting the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule
7819.3000.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching, and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rule 7819.1100.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under §
92.16.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.14 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on then applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.15 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater
area:
      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby; and
      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new peimit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.16 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses,
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable
rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to M.S. §§ 216D.01
through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minn. Rules, Ch.
7560. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable
codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work
done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the
work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited
to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Ch. 216D and Minn. Rules, Ch. 7560 and shall require potholing or open
cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by
the city.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.17 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
   (B)   Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be
made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must
notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business days
of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied, the
right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and
resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of
receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be
imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30
days after submission.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.18 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as
they are not inconsistent with the M.S., §§ 237.162 and 237.163. Installation
of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn. Rule, Ch. 7560
and these ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those
requirements and conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits
and/or agreements referenced in §
92.22(B) of this subchapter.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.19 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minn. Rule 7819.1300.
   (B)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work site available to the
city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of city.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the city may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety,
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The city may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does
not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the city that the
violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the
required time, the city may revoke the permit pursuant to §
92.22.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.20 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations. 
      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the city of any event
regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant
may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Excavators' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency
situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's
facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each
registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event,
the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the
city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to
the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.21 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.22 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit.
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens.
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit.
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee's control.
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
92.19.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the city shall
make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand
shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the
permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its
discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate
and remedy the breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to so
contact the city, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan,
or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee's failure to
so contact the city, or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and
permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.23 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules
7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of any work
pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the city accurate maps and
drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all equipment installed, owned,
and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the
horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be
provided consistent with the city's electronic mapping system, when practical
or as a condition imposed by the city. Failure to provide maps and drawings
pursuant to this subsection shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder's
registration.
   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rule 7560.0150,
subp. 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of establishing
the horizontal locations of installed service laterals and the service lateral
vertical locations in those cases where the city reasonably requires it.
Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the city evidence
satisfactory to the city of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance
with this division (B) and with applicable Gopher State One Call law and
Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after Dec. 31, 2005, shall
be a condition of any city approval necessary for:
      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project,
including those under M.S. Ch. 429; and
      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other subdivision or
site plan approval under M.S. Ch. 462. The city shall reasonably determine the
appropriate method of providing such information to the city. Failure to
provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed may
result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or future permits to
the offending permittee or its subcontractors.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.24 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the
Act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000, and
7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available
to cities.
   (B)   Corridors. 
      (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facility that
is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be located
within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued
by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall
designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position
at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at
the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs, and hardship to the
registrant. Relocation of utilities or facilities would be considered to be an
expense borne by the registrant,
   (C)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities
found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   (D)   Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
public, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the
city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or
additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the
city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and
potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular
utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with
respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the
right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development
projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.25 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through
216D.09 (“One Call Excavation Notice System”) before the start date of any
right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the
area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all
said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches below
a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best
procedure for excavation.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.26 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its
facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the
city's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.27 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the
facilities of a registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way
are governed by Minn. Rule 7819.3200.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.28 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.1250.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.29 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city mat the registrant's obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the city.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.30 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that:
   (A)   Has been denied registration;
   (B)   Has been denied a permit;
   (C)   Has had a permit revoked;
   (D)   Believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with M.S. §
237.163, subd. 6; or
   (E)   Disputes a determination of the city regarding §
92.23(B) of this subchapter may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or
decision reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council
shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to
include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the City Council
affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and
supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
§ 92.31 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 11-14-17)
CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS
§ 92.45 PURPOSE.
   The City of Byron intends to provide safe pedestrian walkways throughout the
community and, in particular, to provide for safe pedestrian traffic to and
from schools and school bus stops, and other services to the neighborhood and
community.
(Ord. 100, passed 1-13-10)
§ 92.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
    DEFECTIVE SIDEWALK.  Any of the following:
      (1)   Vertical separations of 3/4 inch or more;
      (2)   Horizontal separations of 3/4 inch or more;
      (3)   Holes or depressions of three inches or more in diameter and 3/
4 inch more in depth; spanning over 50% of a five-foot by six-foot square or
panel of the sidewalk with one or more depressions of 3/4 inch or more;
      (4)   A single square or panel of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that
no part thereof has a piece greater than one square foot, or is cracked in such
a manner that it constitutes a danger or a potential danger to the public
safety; or
      (5)   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A sidewalk shall be a monolithic pour of concrete of four inches in
thickness placed on two inches of gravel base;
      (2)   All sidewalks shall slope 1/4 inch per foot away from the property
line and the profile grade shall not exceed 6%;
      (3)   All side streets sidewalks in the residential district shall be
five feet in width; and five foot sidewalks width on main local streets. All
sidewalks in the business district shall be ten feet in width exclusive of the
curb. Exception to these limits may be made in the case of new construction
between portions of sidewalk already constructed, in such cases; the new
construction shall be the same width as the contiguous sidewalk;
      (4)   Sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of-way within six
inches of the property line;
      (5)   Joints. Expansion joints shall be placed not less than 60 feet on
center for full width of sidewalk and full thickness of slab. Joint materials
shall be at least 1/2 to one inch thick and shall be performed by a contractor.
Contractor joints shall be placed not more than six feet on the center full
width of slab and cut through to depth of at least 1/2 inch. Both expansion and
contraction joints shall be finished with a 1/2 inch edging tool. Similar
expansion joints shall be placed at the junction of walks with curbs; or in
other cases where natural expansion movement is restrained;
      (6)   Handicapped accessible corners. The slope of the sidewalk shall
meet current MNDOT standards, Standard Plate # 7036F - Pedestrian Curb Ramp;
      (7)   New subdivisions. All new subdivisions are required to install
sidewalks on both sides of local streets per requirements of subchapter.
Reviewing of all subdivision plans shall be by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council, with final approval by the City Council. There
may be circumstances where the terrain or other circumstance may not allow for
sidewalks on one or both sides of the street. The City Council reserves the
right to determine and set forth the requirements for sidewalks in each
proposed subdivision on a case by case basis; or
      (8)   Sidewalks in existing neighborhoods. The City of Byron will review
sidewalks or lack thereof on a biennial basis to determine replacement/
installation and funding options.
   SIDEWALK MASTER PLAN.  A plan established by motion of the City Council,
which includes all sidewalks in the city, which the City Council finds
necessary or convenient for public pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 100, passed 1-13-10; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-13-18)
§ 92.47 REPAIRS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Inspections and reports. The owner of any private property within the
city abutting a sidewalk (whether or not such sidewalk is on the Sidewalk
Master Plan) shall report any defective, unsafe, or broken sidewalk to the
Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall cause inspections to be
made throughout the city, at such time as are reasonably necessary, to
determine whether public sidewalks within the city are safe for pedestrians.
   (B)   Barricades and signal lights. Whenever any materials of any kind are
deposited on any sidewalk when sidewalk improvements are being made, or when
any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it is the duty of all persons having
any interest in the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or where such dangerous condition exits, to put in conspicuous
places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of materials
deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved barricades and/or
signal lights, and to keep such signal lights burning continuously to secure
the same.
   (C)   All sidewalks.
      (1)   Duty to repair. The owner of any private property within the city
abutting a sidewalk (whether or not such sidewalk is on the Sidewalk Master
Plan) shall keep the sidewalk in repair and safe condition. The only exceptions
to the above are cases in which the city has damaged sidewalks through
maintenance or repair of city-owned infrastructures such as water, sewer, or
storm sewers, or damage caused by boulevard trees. In these instances, the
city, after approval by the City Council, may accept the responsibility for the
repair or replacement of sidewalk damaged through its own actions. A sidewalk
damaged by a homeowner’s own negligence shall be the responsibility of that
homeowner. All sidewalk repair shall be done by the city, unless otherwise
determined by the City Council.
      (2)   Repair.
         (a)   If the Public Works Director finds that any sidewalk abutting on
private property is unsafe, defective, or in need of repairs, he or she shall
cause a notice to be served. The notice shall be served upon the record owner
by personal service, or upon the record owner and occupant by registered or
certified mail to his or her last known address if the owner does not reside
within the city or cannot be found therein. The notice shall inform the owner
that the city will be repairing the sidewalk within a reasonable period of
time, that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and that if unpaid,
it will be made a special assessment against the property concerned, if the
work is performed by the city.
         (b)   After service of the notice, the Public Works Director shall
report the facts to the City Council. The City Council may, by resolution or
motion, order the construction or repairs to be made. If the City Council
orders construction or repairs to be made, the Public Works Director shall keep
a record of the total cost of repair attributable to each lot or parcel of
property and report such information to the City Clerk.
         (c)   The city shall be responsible for the total cost of repairing
the sidewalks in the designated areas of the city. If there are any further
repairs to these same sidewalks, the costs shall be shared equally between the
city and the landowner.
      (3)   Special assessments.  On or before September 1 of each year, the
City Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of repair service
against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
subchapter. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, the City
Council may spread the charges against the property benefitted as a special
assessment under M.S. § 429.101 and other pertinent statutes for certification
to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following
year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten years, as the City Council
may determine in each case.
(Ord. 100, passed 1-13-10) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.48 REMOVAL WITHOUT REPLACEMENT.
   Removal of a sidewalk designated on the Sidewalk Master Plan, without
replacement of that sidewalk, shall occur only by the following:
   (A)   If the owner of the abutting property petitions the City Council and
the City Council determines by resolution or motion that it is in the interest
of the public to remove the sidewalk without replacing it.
   (B)   The City Council, on its own motion, seeks the removal of sidewalk
without replacement by resolution or motion, and the motion passes by at least
a 4/5 vote.
(Ord. 100, passed 1-13-10) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.49 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish remaining on a public sidewalk more
than 48 hours after its deposit thereon is a public nuisance. The owner and the
occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to
keep such walk safe for pedestrians. No such owner or occupant shall allow
snow, ice, dirt, or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 48 hours after
its deposit thereon.
   (B)   If the Public Works Director finds that any snow, ice, dirt or rubbish
has remained on a public sidewalk more than 48 hours after its deposit thereon,
he or she shall cause notice to be served upon the recorded owner of the
property by personal service, or upon the occupant if the owner does not reside
within the city or cannot be found therein, ordering the owner or occupant to
have the snow, ice, dirt or rubbish removed and made safe within 24 hours and
stating that if the owner or occupant fails to do so, the Public Works Director
will do so on behalf of the city, that the expense thereof must be paid by the
owner, and that if unpaid it will be a special assessment against the property
concerned.
   (C)   If the snow, ice, dirt or rubbish is not removed within 24 hours after
service of the notice, the Public Works Director shall cause the snow, ice,
dirt, or rubbish to be removed. The Public Works Director shall keep a record
of the total costs of the removal attributable to each lot or parcel of
property and report such information to the City Clerk.
   (D)   On or before September 1st of each year, the City Clerk shall list the
total unpaid charges for each type of current service against each separate lot
or parcel to which they are attributable under this chapter. After notice and
hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, the City Council may then spread the
charges against the property benefitted as a special assessment under M.S. §
429.101 and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor
collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten years, as the City Council may determine in
each case.
(Ord. 100, passed 1-13-10)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of §
92.30 et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The minimum fine given by the
City Council for a violation shall be as follows:
      (1)   First winter season offense (October-April): $30 per incident for
residential property and $50 per incident for commercial property.
      (2)   Second winter season offense (October - April): $60 per incident
for residential property and $100 per incident for commercial property.
      (3)   Third or more winter season offense (October - April): $120 per
incident for residential property and $200 per incident for commercial
property.
   (C)   The penalties in this section are in addition to the cost recovery
provisions in § 92.34(D).
   (D)   In addition to receiving a fine per the schedule listed above property
owners will be charged for the clearing of the sidewalk. The rate for sidewalk
clearing will be determined by the most recent Olmsted County Maintenance
Agreement rates for equipment.
(Ord. 100, passed 4-26-06 Ord. 100, passed 1-13-10)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Open Burning
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Prohibited materials
   
93.03   Permit required for open burning
   
93.04   Purposes allowed for open burning
   
93.05   Permit application for open burning; permit fees
   
93.06   Permit process for open burning
   
93.07   Permit holder responsibility
   
93.08   Revocation of open burning permit
   
93.09   Denial of open burning permit
   
93.10   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
93.11   Rules and laws adopted by reference
OPEN BURNING
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire
protection services to the city.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products
are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or
chimney, except a “recreational fire” as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices
such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers, and propane or
natural gas devices are not defined as “open burning.”
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three
feet in height, contained within the border of a “recreational fire site” using
dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the
property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished
completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions,
neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety
hazards will not be created. No more than one recreational fire is allowed on
any property at one time.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE. An area of no more than a 3-foot diameter circle
(measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by
non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural
rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only an which area is
depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. Included are
permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a recreation
fire site as defined herein. Recreational fire sites shall not be located
closer than 25 feet to any structure.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter
fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas
burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto logs,”
charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include
wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated
with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreational
fires when cut into three foot lengths.
§ 93.02 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils, petro
fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous
waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving
or consumption of food.
   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or
grass clippings.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.03 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city
without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not
required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in §
93.01.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.04 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other
practical means.
      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.
      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or
wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-
way where chipping, composting, land spreading or other alternative methods are
not practical.
      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased or infected
nursery stock, diseased bee hives.
      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes
generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other
alternative disposal methods are not practical.
   (B)   Fire training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.05 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form
prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire
Department. The permit application shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing those
applications.
   (B)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees
shall be in the amount established by the City Council, and as amended from
time to time.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.06 PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit
fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a
preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special
conditions, and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety
considerations.
§ 93.07 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible
for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every
open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder or his or her
competent representative. The open burning site shall have available,
appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire
safety plan.
   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit
holder or his or her representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to
smolder with no person present. It is the responsibility of the permit holder
to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available for
inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA
representative or DNR forest officer.
   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of
all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as
established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.08 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR
forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals.
Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a fire hazard existing or
developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit
being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions
developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame
present.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.09 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not
met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire
Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.
§ 93.10 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has
officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or
when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.11 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22, as these statutes may be amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
CHAPTER 94: ANIMALS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Dogs and cats
   
94.03   Non-domestic animals
   
94.04   Farm animals
   
94.05   Impounding
   
94.06   Kennels
   
94.07   Nuisances
   
94.08   Seizure of animals
   
94.09   Animals presenting a danger to health and safety of city
   
94.10   Diseased animals
   
94.11   Dangerous animals
   
94.12   Dangerous animal requirements
   
94.13   Basic care
   
94.14   Breeding moratorium
   
94.15   Enforcing officer
   
94.16   Veterinarian hospital, clinic or kennel
   
94.17   Interference with officers
Urban Chickens
   
94.30   Definitions
   
94.31   Purpose
   
94.32   Investigation and enforcement
   
94.33   Permit required
   
94.34   Application
   
94.35   Permit conditions
   
94.36   Fees/insurance
   
94.37   Term
   
94.38   Revocation
Prescribed Grazing
   
94.50   General regulations protection of natural features
Honey Bees
   
94.60   Definitions
   
94.61   Registration
   
94.62   Required conditions
   
94.63   Colony density
   
94.64   Colony location
   
94.65   Inspection
   
94.66   Denial, revocation or suspension
 
   
94.99    Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and
poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
Animals shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated
household pets. Unless otherwise defined, domestic animals shall include dogs,
cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish,
chickens (refer to §§
94.30 et seq.), non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting reptiles or
amphibians, and other similar animals.
      (2)   FARM ANIMALS. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or
performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, farm
animals shall include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine
family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (pheasants, turkeys [refer to §§
94.30 et seq.]), fowl (ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied
pigs), goats, and other animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.
      (3)   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly considered to be
naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly
considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of
people. Unless otherwise defined, non-domestic animals shall include:
         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including
lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated house cats.
         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae)
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated dogs.
         (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk
(whether or not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those
members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
         (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which
can be reasonably defined by the terms of this section, including but not
limited to bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and
control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or
otherwise restrained or confined.
   CAT. Both the male and female of the felidae species commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
   COMMERCIAL KENNEL. A place where four or more dogs or four or more cats are
kept or housed for commercial use of the property owner or occupant.
   DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping, or harboring an animal.
   PRESCRIBED GRAZING. The application of goats as a landscape management
technique to control noxious, invasive, or other undesirable vegetation at a
specific location and for a defined length of time. For purpose of this
definition goats used for prescribed grazing purposes are not considered pets
or livestock.
   PRIVATE KENNEL. A place where four or more dogs or four or more cats over
the age of six months are kept or housed for the sole non-commercial use,
benefit or enjoyment of the property owner or occupant. The owner of a private
kennel also must be a Byron resident.
   RELEASE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Animal Control Officer or other
person in charge of the veterinarian hospital, clinic or kennel for the release
of any animal that has been taken to the veterinarian hospital, clinic or
kennel. A release permit may be obtained upon payment of a fee to the City
Administrator, or his or her designee, in accordance with the regular license
requirement if the animal is unlicensed, payment of a release fee, and any
maintenance costs incurred in capturing and impounding the animal. The release
fee shall be as established by the City Council, and may be amended from time
to time.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07; Am. Ord. - -, passed 9-27-12; Am. Ord. 20-05,
passed 9-8-20)
§ 94.02 DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat
of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A
person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a
responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a
responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash,
shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an
area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”
   (B)   License required.
      (1)   All dogs and cats over the age of six months kept, harbored, or
maintained by their owners in the city, shall be licensed and registered with
the city. Animal licenses shall be issued by the City Administrator, or his or
her designee, upon payment of the license fee as established by the City
Council, and as amended from time to time. The owner shall state, at the time
application is made for the license and upon forms provided, his or her name
and address and the name, breed, color, and sex of each dog or cat owned or
kept by him or her. No license shall be granted for a dog or cat that has not
been vaccinated against distemper and rabies, as evidenced by a certificate by
a veterinarian qualified to practice in the state in which the dog or cat is
vaccinated.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog or cat subject to this
section to pay to the City Administrator, or his or her designee, the license
fee established in the City Council, and as amended from time to time.
      (3)   Upon payment of the license fee as established by City Council, and
as that ordinance may be amended from time to time, the City Administrator, or
his or her designee, shall issue to the owner a license certificate and
metallic tag for each dog or cat licensed. The tag shall have stamped on it the
year for which it is issued and the number corresponding with the number on the
certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog or cat with a
collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and shall see that the collar
and tag are constantly worn. In case an animal tag is lost or destroyed, a
duplicate shall be issued by the City Administrator, or his or her designee. A
charge shall be made for each duplicate tag in an amount established by the
City Council, and as amended from time to time. Animal tags shall not be
transferable from one animal to another and no refunds shall be made on any
animal license fee or tag because of death of an animal or the owner’s leaving
the city before the expiration of the license period.
      (4)   The licensing provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to
dogs or cats whose owners are non-residents temporarily within the city, nor to
dogs or cats brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any
animal show, nor shall this provision apply to “seeing eye” dogs properly
trained to assist blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from
place to place.
      (5)   The funds received by the City Administrator, or his or her
designee, from all animal licenses and metallic tags fees as established by the
City Council, and as amended from time to time, shall first be used to defray
any costs incidental to the enforcement of this chapter; including, but not
restricted to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and
maintenance of the dogs or cats.
   (C)   Vaccination.
      (1)   All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained, or transported within
the city shall be vaccinated at least once every three years by a licensed
veterinarian for:
         (a)   Rabies - with a live modified vaccine; and
         (b)   Distemper.
      (2)   A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the
date of vaccination, owner’s name and address, the animal’s name (if
applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and the
veterinarian’s signature. Upon demand made by the City Administrator, or his or
her designee, the Animal Control Officer or a police officer, the owner shall
present for examination the required certificate of vaccination for the animal.
In cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the
animal shall have seven days in which to present the certificate to the City
Administrator, or his or her designee, or officer. Failure to do so shall be
deemed a violation of this section.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer for
sale, any non-domestic animal within the city. Any owner of a non-domestic
animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days in which to
remove the animal from the city after which time the city may impound the
animal as provided for in this section. An exception shall be made to this
prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually providing
assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals brought into
the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research
laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 FARM ANIMALS.
   Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural district of the city, or
on a residential lot of at least ten acres in size provided that no animal
shelter shall be within 300 feet of an adjoining piece of property. An
exception shall be made to this section for those animals brought into the city
as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research
laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.
§ 94.05 IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   Running at large. Any unlicensed animal running at large is hereby
declared a public nuisance. Any Animal Control Officer or police officer may
impound any dog or other animal found unlicensed or any animal found running at
large and shall give notice of the impounding to the owner of the dog or other
animal, if known. The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall not enter
the property of the owner of an animal found running at large or the owner of
an unlicensed animal unless the officer has first obtained the permission of
the owner to do so or has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction to search for and seize the animal. In case the owner is unknown,
the officer shall post notice at the city office that if the dog or other
animal is not claimed within the time specified in division (C) of this
section, it will be sold or otherwise disposed of. Except as otherwise provided
in this section, it shall be unlawful to kill, destroy, or otherwise cause
injury to any animal, including dogs and cats running at large.
   (B)   Biting animals. Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live
modified rabies vaccine and which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has
been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall be confined in a
veterinarian hospital, clinic or kennel for a period of not less than ten days,
at the expense of the owner. The animal may be released at the end of the time
if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies, and by the payment of all costs by
the owner. However, if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon
receipt of notice of need for the confinement by the officer to voluntarily and
immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a veterinary
hospital, clinic or kennel of the owner’s choosing, not outside of the county
in which this city is located, and provide immediate proof of confinement in
the manner as may be required, the owner may do so. If, however, the animal has
been inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of
the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner may
confine the dog or other animal to the owner’s property.
   (C)   Reclaiming. All animals conveyed to the veterinarian hospital, clinic
or kennel shall be kept, with humane treatment and sufficient food and water
for their comfort, at least five regular business days, unless the animal is a
“Dangerous Animal” as defined under §
94.11 in which case it shall be kept for seven regular business days or the
times specified in §
94.11, and except if the animal is a cruelly- treated animal in which case it
shall be kept for ten regular business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their
owners or keepers as provided by this section. In case the owner or keeper
shall desire to reclaim the animal from the veterinarian hospital, clinic or
kennel, the following shall be required, unless otherwise provided for in this
code or established from time to time by resolution of the City Council:
      (1)   Payment of the release fee and receipt of a release permit as
established by the City Council, and as amended from time to time.
      (2)    Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the veterinarian
hospital, clinic or kennel, per day or any part of day while animal is in the
veterinarian hospital, clinic or kennel; and
      (3)   If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee as
established by the City Council, and as amended from time to time, and valid
certificate of vaccination for rabies and distemper shots is required.
   (D)   Unclaimed animals. At the expiration of the times established in
division (C) of this section, if the animal has not been reclaimed in
accordance with the provisions of this section, the officer appointed to
enforce this section may let any person claim the animal by complying with all
provisions in this section, or cause the animal to be destroyed in a proper and
humane manner and shall properly dispose of the remains thereof. Any money
collected under this section shall be payable to the City Administrator, or his
or her designee.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 KENNELS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   License required. No person shall maintain a private or commercial
kennel in the city without a license.
      (2)   License application. Application for a kennel license shall be made
on forms provided by the city. The application shall contain:
         (a)   A description of the property to be used; and
         (b)   The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s).
      (3)   Application fees, license fee and license year. The application fee
and license fee shall be established every year with the City Council Fee
Schedule. The application fee shall be paid when the application is filed.
      (4)   Granting or denial of license. Prior to the issuance of a private
kennel license, the applicant will provide a complete application as well as
any other information that is deemed pertinent at the time of submittal.
         (a)   Private kennel licenses do not confer any property rights upon
the licensee, and the issuance of said licenses does not ensure that future
licenses will be granted.
         (b)   Kennel licenses will be issued for a set number of dogs and/or
cats, which shall not be exceeded. Licensees who wish to add dog(s) or cat(s)
shall need to reapply for a kennel license. Licensees who relocate to another
area of the city shall need to reapply for a kennel license. Licenses are not
assignable to other parties.
         (c)   The initial term for a kennel license shall be one year;
subsequent licenses, if so granted, will be for a term of up to three years.
         (d)   Licenses authorize city staff to perform periodic, random
inspections of the kennel for the purpose of determining compliance with the
conditions of their license.
   (B)   Conditions for issuance of a private kennel license. The following
conditions are mandatory for the issuance of a private kennel license:
      (1)   The applicant shall have no previous animal or kennel violations.
      (2)   Housing enclosures shall be located so as not to create a nuisance
and shall not encroach upon any setback area.
      (3)   Dogs shall be confined to their own property by a provable means.
      (4)   Housing and shelter must be provided which will keep animals
comfortable and protected from the elements.
      (5)   All accumulation of feces shall be removed at such periods as will
ensure that no leaching or objectionable odors exist, and the premises shall
not be allowed to become unsightly.
      (6)   All dogs and cats shall have access to indoor housing from the
hours of 10:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m.
      (7)   Regulations applicable to the site’s animal quarters.
         (a)   Indoor housing facilities must be structurally sound with ample
heat, light and ventilation.
         (b)   Animals kept outside must have continual access to the shelter
so as to be protected from the elements as necessary.
         (c)   If animals are confined by chains, such chains must be attached
so as to not become entangled with chains of other animals.
         (d)   Individual animal enclosures must be of a size to allow each dog
to turn fully around, stand, sit and lie in a comfortable condition.
         (e)   The temperature of indoor housing facilities shall not be less
than 50 F. for dogs not accustomed to lower temperatures.
         (f)   Disposal facilities shall be provided to minimize virus
infestation, odors and disease hazards.
         (g)   Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to protect
food supplies against contamination and deterioration.
         (h)   City staff reserves the right to issue additional conditions on
a case basis in order to maintain the public repose.
   (C)   Conditions for a commercial kennel license.
      (1)   License required. No person shall maintain a commercial kennel in
the city without a license.
      (2)   License application. Application for a commercial kennel license
shall be made on forms provided by the city. The application shall contain:
         (a)   A description of the property to be used;
         (b)   The names and addresses of the owner, lessee (if any) and the
operator or manager; and
         (c)   The names, addresses and phone numbers of those persons who will
from time to time be designated as a contact person.
      (3)   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation or
partnership, it shall be accompanied by appropriate business records showing
the names and addresses for all individuals having an interest in the business
and, in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers.
Applicants shall furnish to the city, along with their application, documents
establishing the applicants’ interest in the premises on which the business
will be located. Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, a deed, a
contract for deed or any other document which establishes the applicants’
interest.
      (4)   Application fees, license fee and license year. The application fee
and license fee shall be established every year with the City Council Fee
Schedule. The application fee shall be paid when the application is filed. a
separate license shall be obtained for each place of business. The licensee
shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed business at all
times. Licenses shall expire on the December 31 following the issuance of the
license. Applications to renew an existing license must be submitted by
December 1.
      (5)   Granting or denial of license. Prior to issuance of a kennel
license from the City Council, a hearing before the Planning Commission must be
held. Notice must be given to all affected property owners within 350 feet of
the parcel upon which the kennel is proposed, and published in the city’s
official newspaper at least ten days before the meeting. the Planning
Commission will make a recommendation to the City Council on the request.
         (a)   Kennel licenses will be issued for a set number of dogs and/or
cats, which shall not be exceeded. Licensees who wish to add dog(s) or cat(s)
shall need to reapply for a kennel license. Licensees who relocate to another
area of the city shall need to reapply for a kennel license. Licenses are not
assignable to other parties.
         (b)   The initial term for a kennel license shall be one year;
subsequent licenses, if so granted, will be for a term of up to three years.
         (c)   Licenses authorize city staff to perform periodic, random
inspections of the kennel for the purpose of determining compliance with the
conditions of their license.
      (6)   In addition to the private kennels requirements listed above in
this chapter, commercial kennels shall also operate according to the following
rules and regulations:
         (a)   The licensed facility must at all times have a designated
contact person available. The designated contact person must be available to
correct and mitigate violations of this chapter whenever they occur. The
licensee shall notify the city in writing of the designated contact person,
along with contact information. The licensee shall notify the city in writing
of any change in the contact person.
         (b)   Housing enclosures for dogs and cats shall be 200 feet from any
neighboring residential structure used for human habitation.
         (c)   No commercial kennel shall be issued for a lot smaller than one
acre.
         (d)   All dogs and cats shall be housed indoors when the commercial
kennel employee(s) is/are not present at the subject property.
         (e)   Facility employees shall ensure that dogs are not allowed to
create noise in violation of the city code. When a citizen complaint is
received, facility employees must take steps to reduce animal noise including,
but not limited to, bringing dogs to indoor areas.
         (f)   Outdoor exercise confinement areas (dog runs) shall be screened
and buffered.
         (g)   All commercial kennel licensees, when accepting animals for
boarding, shall require from the animal owner evidence of rabies vaccination.
   (E)   Applicable to all kennel licenses.
      (1)   Revocation of kennel licenses.
         (a)   Upon observation that one or more of the conditions issued by
the City Council on a private or commercial kennel license is not observed, the
city will notify the licensee that the city intends to revoke the private or
commercial kennel license. A hearing will be held before the Planning
Commission will be held prior to making a final decision. A recommendation to
the City Council to revoke a private kennel license will require a majority of
those members present and voting.
         (b)   Upon evidence that the decision of the City Council has not been
followed by the licensee, the city will arrange for the animal(s) to be picked
up. All costs associated with compliance will be billed to the real property
owner where the animal resides. All unpaid bills will be placed as a lien on
the property.
      (2)   Exceptions to requirements to the number of dogs. Animals which
have been specifically trained and certified to perform certain tasks, such as
for handicapped individuals, police K-9 units, search-and-rescue, and other
designated service animals.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 NUISANCES.
   (A)   Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries. Habitual barking shall be defined
as barking for repeated intervals of at least five minutes with less than one
minute of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.
   (B)   Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any person’s dog or other
animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or not the owner
has knowledge of the damage.
   (C)   Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having the
custody or control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces
of the animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner whether on their
own property, on the property of others or on public property.
   (D)   Warrant required. The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall
not enter the property of the owner of an animal described in this section
unless the officer has first obtained the permission of the owner to do so or
has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction to search
for and seize the animal.
   (E)   Other. Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject to
impoundment as provided in §
94.05.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.08 SEIZURE OF ANIMALS.
   Any police officer or Animal Control Officer may enter upon private property
and seize any animal with the permission of the owner of the property, if that
person is also the owner of the animal, provided that the following exist:
   (A)   There is an identified complainant other than the police officer or
Animal Control Officer making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
   (B)   The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either the
barking dog criteria set out in §
94.07(A); the criteria for cruelty set out in §
94.13; or the criteria for an at large animal set out in §
94.01;
   (C)   The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous
complaint of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or that the
animal was at large at this address on a prior date;
   (D)   The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the
animal and the property to be entered and those attempts have either failed or
have been ignored;
   (E)   The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall not enter the
property of the owner of an animal described in this section unless the officer
has first obtained the permission of the owner to do so or has obtained a
warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction to search for and seize the
animal. If the officer has the permission of the owner, a property manager,
landlord, innkeeper, or other authorized person to enter the property or has
obtained a pass key from a property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other
authorized person to have that key shall not be considered unauthorized entry,
and a warrant to search for and seize the animal need not be obtained; and
   (F)   Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if
personal contact with the owner of the animal is not possible.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07)
§ 94.09 ANIMALS PRESENTING A DANGER TO HEALTH AND SAFETY OF CITY.
   If, in the reasonable belief of any person or the Animal Control Officer or
police officer, an animal presents an immediate danger to the health and safety
of any person, or the animal is threatening imminent harm to any person, or the
animal is in the process of attacking any person, the person or officer may
destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner whether or not the animal is
on the property of its owner. Otherwise, the person or officer may apprehend
the animal and deliver it to the veterinarian hospital, clinic or kennel for
confinement under §
94.05. If the animal is destroyed, the owner or keeper of the animal destroyed
shall be liable to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing of the
animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian fees. If the animal is found not to
be a danger to the health and safety of the city, it may be released to the
owner or keeper in accordance with §
94.05(C).
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07)
§ 94.10 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or
her premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in
the city, any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the health and
safety of the city, even though the animal be properly licensed under this
section, and a warrant to search for and seize the animal is not required.
   (B)   Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and
presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public, may be apprehended
and confined in the veterinarian hospital, clinic or kennel by any person, the
Animal Control Officer or a police officer. The officer shall have a qualified
veterinarian examine the animal. If the animal is found to be diseased in a
manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, the officer
shall cause the animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of
the remains. The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall
be liable to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal,
plus the costs of any veterinarian examinations.
   (C)   Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased
the animal shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.11 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Attack by an animal. It shall be unlawful for any person’s animal to
inflict or attempt to inflict bodily injury to any person or other animal
whether or not the owner is present. This section shall not apply to an attack
by a dog under the control of an on-duty law enforcement officer or to an
attack upon an uninvited intruder who has entered the owner’s home with
criminal intent.
   (B)   Destruction of dangerous animal. The Animal Control Officer shall have
the authority to order the destruction of dangerous animals in accordance with
the terms established by this chapter.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which has:
         (a)   Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;
         (b)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the
owner’s property; or
         (c)   Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the animal is potentially dangerous, the animal aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      (2)   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  An animal which has:
         (a)   When unprovoked, inflicted bites on a human or domestic animal
on public or private property;
         (b)   When unprovoked, chased or approached a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private
property, other than the animal owner’s property in an apparent attitude of
attack; or
         (c)   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
      (3)   PROPER ENCLOSURE.  Securely confined indoors or in a securely
locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to
provide protection for the animal from the elements. A proper enclosure does
not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure
that would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or any house or
structure in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the
only barriers which prevent the animal from exiting. The enclosure shall not
allow the egress of the animal in any manner without human assistance. A pen or
kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
         (a)   Have a minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet.
         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be
constructed of 11.5-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not
exceed two inches, support posts shall be 1¼-inch or larger steel pipe buried
in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided, the
sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.
         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The
cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls
and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two inches.
         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of
the same material as the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire
greater than two inches. The gate shall be equipped with a device capable of
being locked and shall be locked at all times when the animal is in the pen or
kennel.
      (4)   UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the animal is not purposely
excited, stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
   (D)   Designation as potentially dangerous animal. The Animal Control
Officer shall designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal upon
receiving evidence that the potentially dangerous animal has, when unprovoked,
then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or a domestic
animal as stated in division (C)(2). When an animal is declared potentially
dangerous, the Animal Control Officer shall cause one owner of the potentially
dangerous animal to be notified in writing that the animal is potentially
dangerous.
   (E)   Evidence justifying designation. The Animal Control Officer shall have
the authority to designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving
evidence of the following:
      (1)   That the animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked, or
threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal as stated in division (C)
(1).
      (2)   That the animal has been declared potentially dangerous and the
animal has then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or
domestic animal as stated in division (C)(1).
   (F)   Authority to order destruction. The Animal Control Officer, upon
finding that an animal is dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order, as part
of the disposition of the case, that the animal be destroyed based on a written
order containing one or more of the following findings of fact:
      (1)   The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an
unprovoked attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks; or
      (2)   The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or
unwillingness to control the animal in order to prevent injury to persons or
other animals.
   (G)   Procedure. The Animal Control Officer, after having determined that an
animal is dangerous, may proceed in the following manner: The Animal Control
Officer shall cause one owner of the animal to be notified in writing or in
person that the animal is dangerous and may order the animal seized or make
orders as deemed proper. This owner shall be notified as to dates, times,
places and parties bitten, and shall be given 14 days to appeal this order by
requesting a hearing before the City Council for a review of this
determination.
      (1)   If no appeal is filed, the Animal Control Officer shall obtain an
order or warrant authorizing the seizure and the destruction of the animal from
a court of competent jurisdiction, unless the animal is already in custody or
the owner consents to the seizure and destruction of the animal.
      (2)   If an owner requests a hearing for determination as to the
dangerous nature of the animal, the hearing shall be held before the City
Council, which shall set a date for hearing not more than three weeks after
demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal Control or City
Administrator’s office shall be admissible for consideration by the Animal
Control Officer without further foundation. After considering all evidence
pertaining to the temperament of the animal, the City Council shall make an
order as it deems proper. The City Council may order that the Animal Control
Officer take the animal into custody for destruction, if the animal is not
currently in custody. If the animal is ordered into custody for destruction,
the owner shall immediately make the animal available to the Animal Control
Officer. If the owner does not immediately make the animal available, the
Animal Control Officer shall obtain an order or warrant authorizing the seizure
and the destruction of the animal from a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (3)   No person shall harbor an animal after it has been found to be
dangerous and ordered into custody for destruction.
   (H)   Stopping an attack. If any police officer or Animal Control Officer is
witness to an attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the officer
may take whatever means the officer deems appropriate to bring the attack to an
end and prevent further injury to the victim.
   (I)   Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has been
identified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall notify the Animal
Control Officer in writing if the animal is to be relocated from its current
address or given or sold to another person. The notification shall be given in
writing at least 14 days prior to the relocation or transfer of ownership. The
notification shall include the current owner’s name and address, the relocation
address, and the name of the new owner, if any. If the animal is to be
relocated within Byron city limits the same requirements for housing a
dangerous animal must be observed.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.12 DANGEROUS ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements. If the City Council does not order the destruction of an
animal that has been declared dangerous, the City Council may, as an
alternative, order any or all of the following:
      (1)   That the owner provide and maintain a proper enclosure for the
dangerous animal as specified in §
94.11(C)(3);
      (2)   Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly visible
warning signs, including a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a
dangerous animal on the property as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as may be
amended from time to time;
      (3)   Provide and show proof annually of a surety bond in the minimum
amount of $50,000;
      (4)   If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper enclosure, the dog
must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash (not to exceed
six feet in length) and under the physical restraint of a person 16 years of
age or older. The muzzle must be of a design as to prevent the dog from biting
any person or animal, but will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration;
      (5)   If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily identifiable,
standardized tag identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to its collar at all
times as specified in M.S. § 347.51, as it may be amended from time to time,
and shall have a microchip implant as provided by M.S. § 347.151, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (6)   If the animal is a cat or dog, the animal must be licensed and up-
to-date on rabies vaccination. If the animal is a ferret, it must be up-to-date
with rabies vaccination.
   (B)   Seizure. As authorized by M.S. § 347.54, as it may be amended from
time to time, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately seize any dangerous
animal if the owner does not meet each of the above requirements within 14 days
after the date notice is sent to the owner that the animal is dangerous.
Seizure may be appealed to district court by serving a summons and petition
upon the city and filing it with the district court.
   (C)   Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized under §
94.12(B), may be reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment of
impounding and boarding fees and presenting proof to animal control that each
of the requirements under §
94.12(B), is fulfilled. An animal not reclaimed under this section within 14
days may be disposed of as provided under §
94.11(F), and the owner is liable to the city for costs incurred in confining
and impounding the animal.
   (D)   Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal has subsequently
violated the provisions under §
94.11 with the same animal, the animal must be seized by animal control. The
owner may request a hearing as defined in §
94.11(F). If the owner is found to have violated the provisions for which the
animal was seized, the Animal Control Officer shall order the animal destroyed
in a proper and humane manner and the owner shall pay the costs of confining
the animal. If the person is found not to have violated the provisions for
which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal under the
provisions of §
94.12(C). If the animal is not yet reclaimed by the owner within 14 days after
the date the owner is notified that the animal may be reclaimed, the animal may
be disposed of as provided under §
94.11(F) and the owner is liable to the animal control for the costs incurred
in confining, impounding and disposing of the animal.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07)
§ 94.13 BASIC CARE.
   All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment,
housing in the winter, and sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any
person not treating his or her pet in a humane manner will be subject to the
penalties provided in this section.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07)
§ 94.14 BREEDING MORATORIUM.
   Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building or
other enclosure in a manner that it cannot come in contact with another dog or
cat except for planned breeding.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07)
§ 94.15 ENFORCING OFFICER.
   The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control officer(s) to
enforce the provisions of this section. In the officer’s duty of enforcing the
provisions of this section, he or she may from time to time, with the consent
of the City Council, designate assistants.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07)
§ 94.16 VETERINARIAN HOSPITAL, CLINIC OR KENNEL.
   Every year the Council shall designate an official veterinarian hospital,
clinic or kennel to which animals found in violation of this chapter shall be
taken for safe treatment, and if necessary, for destruction.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07)
§ 94.17 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.
   No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any person
authorized by the City Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and
convey them to the veterinarian hospital, clinic or kennel while engaged in
that operation. Nor shall any unauthorized person break open the veterinarian
hospital, clinic or kennel , or attempt to do so, or take or attempt to take
from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in compliance with this
chapter, or in any other manner to interfere with or hinder the officer in the
discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07) Penalty, see §
94.99
URBAN CHICKENS
§ 94.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BROODING . The period of chicken growth when supplemental heat must be
provided, due to the bird's inability to generate enough body heat.
   CHICKEN. A domesticated bird that serves as a source of eggs.
   COOP. The structure for the keeping or housing of chickens permitted by the
subchapter.
   EXERCISE YARD. A larger fenced area that provides space for exercise and
foraging for the birds when supervised.
   HEN. A female chicken.
   OFFICER. Any person designated by the city as an enforcement officer.
   PERMANENT RUN. A fully enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where
the chickens can roam unsupervised.
   PORTABLE COOP/RUN. A portable structure for the keeping or housing of
chickens with a fully enclosed and covered area attached to the coop where
chickens can roam unsupervised. The coop/run is capable of being moved.
   POULTRY. Domesticated birds that serve as a source of eggs or meat and that
include among commercially important kinds, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese,
peafowl, pigeons, pheasants and others.
   ROOSTER. A male chicken.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12)
§ 94.31 PURPOSE.
   It is recognized that the ability to cultivate one’s own food is a
sustainable activity that can also be a rewarding past time. Therefore, it is
the purpose and intent of this subchapter to permit the keeping and maintenance
of chicken hens for eggs in a clean and sanitary manner that is not a nuisance
to or detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of the community,
the keeping of other poultry is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.32 INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Officers designated by the city shall have authority in the
investigation and enforcement of this subchapter, and no person shall interfere
with, hinder or molest any such officer in the exercise of such powers. The
officer shall make investigations as is necessary and may grant, deny, or
refuse to renew any application for permit, or terminate an existing permit
under this subchapter.
   (B)   Limitations for each single dwelling residential unit:
      (1)   No more than five chicken hens shall be housed or kept on any one
residential lot in any area of the city zoned R-1, R-2, PUD, PRD, and AG with a
permit as outlined below;
      (2)   Roosters are prohibited.
      (3)   Slaughtering of chickens in the city limits is prohibited.
      (4)   Leg banding of all chickens is required. The bands will be issued
by the city upon chicken permit approval. The city will keep on file the
owner's name, address, phone numbers and band numbers.
      (5)   A separate coop is required to house chickens. Coops must be
constructed and maintained to meet the following minimum standards:
         (a)   Located in the rear or side yard.
         (b)   Setback at least ten feet from the rear or side property lines
and at least six feet from existing structures.
         (c)   Interior floor space - minimum of three square feet per bird.
         (d)   Interior height - four to six feet to allow access for cleaning
and maintenance.
         (e)   Doors - one standard door to allow humans to access the coop so
that cleaning the coop is possible and one for birds (if above ground level,
must also provide a stable ramp).
         (f)   Windows - one square foot window per 12 square feet floor space.
Windows must be able to open for ventilation.
         (g)   Climate control - adequate ventilation and/or insulation for
extreme temperatures.
         (h)   Nest boxes - one box per five hens.
         (i)   Roosts - one and one-half inch diameter or greater, located 18
inches from the wall and two to three inches above the floor.
         (j)   Rodent proof - coop construction and materials must be adequate
to prevent access by rodents.
         (k)   Coops shall be constructed and maintained in a manner so as to
not become a nuisance as defined in
Chapter 96, Nuisances.
         (l)   Structure must be in compliance with the current zoning and
building codes.
      (6)   A portable coop/run is permitted to house the chickens. Portable
coop/runs must be constructed and maintained to meet the following minimum
standards:
         (a)   Setback at least ten feet from the rear or side property lines
and at least six feet from existing structures.
         (b)   Interior space - minimum of three square feet per bird.
         (c)   Doors - adequate access to allow humans the space to clean the
coop.
         (d)   Outside run - a minimum of five square feet a bird.
      (7)   A run or exercise yard is required. Permanent runs must be
constructed and maintained to meet the following minimum standards:
         (a)   Location: rear or side yard. Setback at least ten feet from the
rear or side property lines and at least six feet from existing structures.
         (b)   Space: minimum of nine square feet a bird.
         (c)   Height: Four to six feet in height to allow access for cleaning
and maintenance.
         (d)   Gate: One gate to allow human access to the run.
         (e)   Cover: Adequate to keep hens in and predators out.
         (f)   Substrate: Composed of material that can be easily raked or
regularly replaced to reduce odor and flies.
      (8)   Chickens must not be housed in a residential house or an attached
or detached garage or accessory building, except for brooding purposes only.
      (9)   All premises on which chicken hens are kept or maintained shall be
kept clean from filth, garbage, and any substances which attract rodents. The
coop and its surroundings must be cleaned frequently enough to control odor.
Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in a way that causes an unsanitary
condition or causes odors detectable on another property. Failure to comply
with these conditions may result in the officer removing chickens from the
premises and/or revoking a chicken permit.
      (10)   All grain and food stored for the use of the hens on a premise
with a chicken permit shall be kept in a rodent proof container.
      (11)   Chicken hens shall not be kept in such a manner as to constitute a
nuisance to the occupants of adjacent property.
      (12)   Dead chickens must be disposed of according to the Minnesota Board
of Animal Health rules which require chicken carcasses to be disposed of as
soon as possible after death, usually within 48 hours to 72 hours. Legal forms
of chicken carcass disposal include offsite burial, offsite incineration or
rendering, or offsite composting.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 9-22-15; Am. Ord. 20-02, passed
7-14-20) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.33 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of any live chicken
(s) without first obtaining a permit in writing from the city.
   (B)   Where an adjacent property consists of a multiple dwelling or multi-
tenant property, the applicant needs to notify the owner or manager, or other
person in charge of the building.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12; Am. Ord. 20-02, passed 7-14-20) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.34 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a permit required under the provisions of this
subchapter shall make a written application to the city upon a form prescribed
by and containing such information as required by the city. Among other things,
the application shall contain the following information:
   (A)   A description of the real property upon which it is desired to keep
the chickens;
   (B)   The number of chickens to be maintained on the premises;
   (C)   A site plan of the property showing the location and size of the
proposed chicken coop and run, setbacks from the chicken coop to property lines
and surrounding buildings and the location, style, and height of fencing
proposed to contain the chickens in a run or exercise area. Portable coops and
cages are allowed, but portable locations must be included with the site plan;
   (D)   Statements that the applicant will at all times keep the chickens in
accordance with all of the conditions prescribed by the officer, or
modification thereof, and that failure to obey such conditions will constitute
a violation of the provisions of this subchapter and grounds for cancellation
of the permit; and
   (E)   Such other and further information as may be required by the officer.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12; Am. Ord. 20-02, passed 7-14-20)
§ 94.35 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   If granted, the permit shall be issued by the city and shall state the
conditions, if any, imposed upon the permitted for the keeping of chickens
under this permit.
   (B)   The permit shall specify the restrictions, limitations, conditions and
prohibitions which the officer deems reasonably necessary to protect any person
or neighboring use from unsanitary conditions, unreasonable noise or odors, or
annoyance, or to protect the public health and safety. Such permits may be
modified from time to time or revoked by the officer for failure to conform to
such restrictions, limitations, and prohibitions. Such modification or
revocation shall be effective after ten days following the mailing of written
notice thereof by certified mail to the person or persons keeping or
maintaining such chickens.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12; Am. Ord. 20-02, passed 7-14-20)
§ 94.36 FEES/ISSUANCE.
   For each residential site the fee for a permit is as may be imposed, set,
established and fixed by the City Council, by resolution, from time to time.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12)
§ 94.37 TERM.
   The permit period under this section shall expire three years from the date
the permit is issued.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12; Am. Ord. 19-02, passed 3-12-19; Am. Ord. 20-02, passed 7-
14-20)
§ 94.38 REVOCATION.
   The city may revoke any permit issued under this subchapter if the person
holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this subchapter, with any
regulations promulgated by the City Council pursuant to this subchapter, or
with any state or local law governing cruelty to animals or the keeping of
animals. Any person whose permit is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter,
humanely dispose of all chickens being owned, kept or harbored by such person,
and no part of the permit fee shall be refunded.
(Ord. passed 9-27-12)
PRESCRIBED GRAZING
§ 94.51 GENERAL REGULATIONS PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section is to allow prescribed grazing of
goats on certain property in the City of Byron for a specific period and for
the express purpose of controlling invasive, undesirable and/or noxious
vegetation. Prescribed grazing is intended to provide an alternative means to
control undesirable vegetation on steep slopes or other challenging terrain
where it is difficult for humans to access. Prescribed grazing is not intended
to allow the raising or keeping of goats as livestock or pets on property.
   (B)   Allowable locations for prescribed grazing. Prescribed grazing is
allowed in all zoning districts with the following conditions:
      (1)   Prescribed grazing shall be limited to properties that are
primarily used for public, semi-public, or institutional uses, such as parks,
trails, public or private schools, or similar uses as determined by the city.
      (2)   The city may authorize prescribed grazing on properties other than
those described in division (B)(1) of this section if the property is directly
contiguous to a property where prescribed grazing is allowed.
   (C)   Duration of a prescribed grazing activity. The duration of a
prescribed grazing activity shall be consistent with the following:
      (1)   Properties under two acres in area. On properties with an area of
less than two acres, prescribed grazing shall not be permitted for more than 30
consecutive days. No more than two prescribed grazing permits may be issued
within one year for the property. There shall be a minimum or 60 days between
expiration of the first permit issued and the second permit issued in a one
year period. Maximum duration and consecutive days allowed may be altered at
the city's discretion.
      (2)   Properties two or more acres in area. On properties with an area of
two or more acres, the duration of the prescribed grazing activity shall be as
specified by the city in the approved prescribed grazing permit.
   (D)   Proper enclosure. The prescribed grazing activity shall be fully and
properly enclosed at all times. Proper enclosure refers to any combination of
temporary or permanent fences or structures designed to prevent the escape of
the prescribed grazing animals and to protect the prescribed grazing animals
from the intrusion of other animals. All sides of the enclosure(s) shall be of
sufficient height and the bottom of the enclosures shall be constructed or
secured in a manner as to prevent prescribed grazing animals from escaping over
or under the enclosure(s). Enclosures shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Permanent enclosures. Fences and structures constructed to enclose
prescribed grazing animals, but intended to remain at the expiration of the
prescribed grazing activity, shall comply with the regulations for the zoning
district in which the prescribed grazing is located.
      (2)   Temporary enclosures. Temporary fencing and structures for the sole
purpose of enclosing prescribed grazing animals shall be allowed for the
duration of the prescribed grazing as specified by the City in the approved
prescribed grazing permit.
         (a)   Temporary fences may be electric or electrified as specified in
the approved prescribed grazing permit. Where electric fences are used, the
city may require a double fence system with non-electric outer fence line to
serve as a safety barrier to reduce the possibility of the public coming in
contact with the electric fence.
         (b)   Any electric or electrified fence in association with a
prescribed grazing activity must have a warning sign posted on every boundary
of the enclosure at least every 50 feet along each side of the fence. The
warning sign shall clearly identify the electric fence. No single sign shall
exceed four square feet in area. Each sign shall be clearly visible on the
approach to the fence and be posted on or within one foot of the electric or
electrified fence.
   (E)   Animal welfare. The welfare of the prescribed grazing animals must be
ensure by the owner of the prescribed grazing animals.
      (1)   Supervision. A 24-hour contact must be provided to the city for
someone who can take responsibility for removing the prescribed grazing animals
as required in a timely manner.
      (2)   Health. Prescribed grazing animals must receive proper veterinary
treatment and regular deworming. In the event that a prescribed animal becomes
ill, hurt, or perishes, the owner of the prescribed grazing animal(s) must
provide immediate on-site care or remove the animal(s) from the property
promptly if immediate on-site care cannot be provided.
      (3)   Neutering. Male goats used for prescribed grazing must be neutered.
Male goats less than six months of age that accompany an adult female goat
shall be exempt from the neutering requirement.
   (F)   Storage of supplement feed. Any feed for the prescribed grazing
animals (other than the vegetation on the property that is intended for
grazing) must be securely stored so as not to encourage vermin or other pests.
   (G)   Protection of significant natural resources. Prescribed grazing shall
not adversely affect significant natural resources. Prescribed grazing
activities shall comply with the following.
      (1)   Prescribed grazing activities shall comply with all applicable
regulations promulgated by Minnesota Department of Agriculture, the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources, Olmsted Soil and Water Conservation District,
all state laws, and all federal laws, including the best management practices
established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
      (2)   Prescribed grazing activities shall not impair water quality as
defined by the Federal Clean Water Act.
      (3)   Threatened or endangered plant species shall not be negatively
impacted by the prescribed grazing activities.
   (H)   Identification signage. A single sign, not to exceed four square feet
in area and not to exceed four feet in height if freestanding, shall be erected
and visible from the nearest public right-of-way, but not in the public right-
of-way. The city may approve an alternate location for the sign or may require
more than one identification sign if needed to comply with the intent of this
chapter. The sign shall include the prescribed grazing permit number for the
issued permit and the phone number for a 24-hour contact for the prescribed
grazing animals. The sign shall be present for the duration of the prescribed
grazing activity and shall be promptly removed at the conclusion of the
prescribed grazing activity.
   (I)   When an applicant submits an application for a prescribed grazing
permit, the applicant shall also submit a current, effective insurance policy
or a copy thereof providing liability insurance covering claims arising out of
the prescribed grazing activity.
   (J)   Prescribed grazing permit and fee. A prescribed grazing permit
approved by the City of Byron shall be required for each prescribed grazing
activity covering a specific period. The fee for the permit shall be as
established in the city's applicable fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 6-12-18)
HONEY BEES
§ 94.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APIARY. The assembly of one or more colonies of honey bees on a single lot.
   APIARY SITES. The lot upon which an apiary is located.
   BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of honey
bees.
   BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT. Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as
hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
   COLONY. An aggregate of honey bees consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs, and honey.
   HIVE. A dome-shaped or box-like structure in which bees are kept.
   HONEY BEE. All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera
species.
   LOT. One unit of a recorded plat, subdivision or registered land survey, or
a recorded parcel described by metes and bounds.
   NUCLEUS COLONY. A small quantity of honey bees with a queen housed in a
smaller than usual hive box designed for a particular purpose, and containing
no supers.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, company, limited liability
company, other entity, or unincorporated association.
   REGISTRANT. Any registered beekeeper and any person who has applied for
approval of a beekeeping registration.
   ROOFTOP. The uppermost section of a primary or accessory structure of at
least one full story and at least 12 feet in height. Areas including but not
limited to decks, patios and balconies shall not be considered a rooftop.
   SUPER. A part of a commercial or other managed beehive, such as a hobbyist,
that is used to collect honey.
   SWARMING. The process where a queen bee leaves a colony with a large group
of worker bees.
   UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. Any lot that is not improved with a structure that has
or is required to have a certificate of occupancy; and all streets and
highways.
   UNUSUAL AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR. Any instance in which unusual aggressive
characteristics such as stinging or attacking without provocation occurs.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 9-8-20)
§ 94.61 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   No beekeeping may occur unless the city issues a permit to the
beekeeper on that specific property. This excludes properties that are zoned
Agricultural and are ten acres or more in size.
   (B)   A beekeeping permit will only be issued if:
      (1)   The permit application documents the satisfaction of all applicable
items found in §§
94.60 et seq.; and
      (2)   Notices have been mailed to all homes within 350 feet of the
applicant's property lines.
         (a)   If there are objections received within ten days of mailing the
notices, the permit application must be considered by the Planning Commission
with final approval by the City Council.
         (b)   If there are no objections received within ten days of mailing
the notices, the permit application will be processed by city staff. It will
not be referred to the Planning Commission for consideration.
   (C)   The permit shall be renewed on a yearly basis. If a beekeeper
relocates a hive or colony to a new apiary site, the beekeeper shall apply for
an updated registration prior to the relocation. All information required by
the forms shall be answered fully and completely by the beekeeper.
   (D)   Permits are non-transferable and do not run with the land.
   (E)   A permit constitutes a limited licensed granted to the beekeeper by
the city and in no way creates a vested zoning right.
   (F)   By signing the permit, the beekeeper acknowledges that he or she shall
defend and indemnify the city against any and all claims arising out of keeping
the bees on the premises.
   (G)   Beekeeping permit fees shall be established annually by the City
Council's fee resolution.
   (H)   All standards of practice and colony density standards in §§
94.60 et seq. must be followed.
   (I)   If the standards of practice are not followed subsequent to issuance
of a beekeeping permit, the permit may be revoked by the city.
   (J)   Beekeeping training is required for the beekeeper prior to issuance of
an initial beekeeping permit by the city:
      (1)   Either provide a certificate of completion from a honeybee keeping
course from an educational institution; or
      (2)   Request consideration for substituting equivalent experience for
the honey bee keeping course by providing a letter from a current beekeeping
instructor or by an educational institution offering similar beekeeping
courses. The letter must state that the permit applicant has gained, through
other means, substantially similar knowledge that could be gained through
appropriate beekeeping courses through the educational institution.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 9-8-20)
§ 94.62 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames, which
frames shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
   (B)   Materials from a hive or colony which might encourage the presence of
honey bees, such as wax comb, shall be promptly disposed of in a sealed
container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.
   (C)   For each colony permitted to be maintained in §§
94.60 et seq., there may be one nucleus colony, with no supers, in one standard
sized hive structure not to exceed 9 and 5/8 inches in depth.
   (D)   Beekeeping equipment shall be maintained in good condition, including
keeping the hives painted and free of peeling or flaking, and securing unused
equipment from weather, potential theft or vandalism, and occupancy by swarming
honey bees.
   (E)   Hives shall be continuously managed to provide adequate living space
for their resident honey bees in order to prevent swarming.
   (F)   In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual aggressive
behavior, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly re-queen the
colony.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 9-8-20)
§ 94.63 COLONY DENSITY.
   (A)   Every lot within the city shall be limited to the following number of
colonies based on the size of the lot:
      (1)   1/2 acre or smaller = 2 colonies;
      (2)   More than 1/2 acre to 1 acre = 4 colonies;
      (3)   More than 1 acre to 5 acres = 8 colonies; and
      (4)   More than 5 acres = up to 2 colonies per acre.
   (B)   If any person removes honey bees from locations where they are not
desired, that person shall not be considered in violation of the restriction in
§
94.63 if the person temporarily houses the honey bees on the apiary site of a
beekeeper registered in §
94.63 for no more than 30 days and remains at all times in compliance with the
other provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 9-8-20)
§ 94.64 COLONY LOCATION.
   (A)   Excluding lots that are zoned Agricultural and are ten acres or more
in size, no hive shall occupy any front yard. For the purposes of §§
94.60 et seq., a corner lot shall be considered to have two front yards.
   (B)   In no instance shall any part of a hive be located within ten feet of
any lot line.
   (C)   In no instance shall any part of a hive be located within ten feet of
any dwelling unit in any zoning district.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in §§
94.60 et seq., in each instance where any part of a hive is kept within ten
feet of a lot line of the apiary site, the beekeeper shall establish and
maintain along said lot line screening consisting of a flyway barrier of at
least six feet in height.
      (1)   The flyway barrier may consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation,
or a combination thereof, such that honey bees will fly over rather than
through the material to reach the colony.
      (2)   If a flyway barrier of dense vegetation is used, the initial
planting may be four feet in height, so long as the vegetation reaches a height
of six feet or higher.
      (3)   The flyway barrier must continue parallel to the lot line of the
apiary site for ten feet in both directions from the hive, or contain the hive
or hives in an enclosure at least six feet in height.
      (4)   A flyway barrier is not required if the hive is located on a
rooftop or if the lot abutting the lot line of the apiary site where the flyway
barrier would be required is:
         (a)   Undeveloped property, except that the sides of the lot abutting
developed property, once the undeveloped property becomes developed, shall
comply with the flyaway barrier requirement; or
         (b)   Zoned Agricultural and is ten acres or more in size.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 9-8-20)
§ 94.65 INSPECTION.
   Upon prior notice to the owner of the apiary site, a representative of the
city shall have the right to inspect any apiary for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with §§
94.60 et seq. Failure to allow a representative from the city to inspect will
be considered a violation.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 9-8-20)
§ 94.66 DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Beekeeping registrations under the provisions of §§
94.60 et seq. may be denied, revoked or suspended by the Zoning Administrator
or designee after notice and the right to request a hearing, for any of the
following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements on any application or
registration form or during the course of the registered activity;
      (2)   The keeping of honey bees in a manner so as to constitute a breach
of peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare
of the public; or
      (3)   Any violation of §§
94.60 et seq.
   (B)   Notice of the denial, revocation, or suspension shall be in writing,
specifically setting forth the grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension
and the registrant's right to request a hearing before the Council. Such notice
shall be mailed to the registrant at the address listed on the application. A
registrant may request a hearing by filing a written request for hearing
addressed to the City Administrator within 15 days of the date of the notice. A
hearing shall be held within 30 days of the request. The city shall notify the
registrant in writing of the time, date and location of the hearing at least
five days prior to the hearing. Within 15 days after the hearing the Council
shall issue a written decision and that decision shall be final. A copy of the
decision shall be mailed to the registrant. If the registrant fails to request
a hearing within 15 days of the date of the notice, the denial, suspension, or
revocation shall automatically be deemed final. A revocation or suspension of a
registration shall not be effective until issuance of a decision by the
Council.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 9-8-20)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Separate offenses. Each day a violation of this chapter is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable under this section.
   (B)   Misdemeanor. Unless otherwise provided, violation of this chapter
shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in §
10.99.
   (C)   Petty misdemeanor. Violations of §§
94.02,
94.07,
94.13 and
94.14 are petty misdemeanors punishable as provided in §
10.99.
   (D)   (1)   Any person violating §§
94.30 through 94.39 shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
      (2)   If any person is found guilty by a court for violation of §§
94.30 through 94.39, their permit to own, keep, harbor, or have custody of
chickens shall be deemed automatically revoked and no new permit may be issued
for a period of one year.
      (3)   Any person violating any conditions of the permit (contained in §
94.30 through 94.39) shall reimburse the city for all costs borne by the city
to enforce the conditions of the permit including but not limited to the pickup
and impounding of chickens.
(Am. Ord. - -, passed 5-23-07; Am. Ord. passed 9-27-12)
CHAPTER 95: ABANDONED, JUNK AND UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES
Section
   
95.01   Purpose
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Authority to impound vehicles
   
95.04   Sale; waiting periods
   
95.05   Right to claim
   
95.06   Disposition by impound lot
   
95.07   Disposal authority
   
95.08   Contracts; reimbursement by agency
   
95.09   Public nuisance
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to define the types of vehicles that can
be taken into custody, impounded and sold by the city and to regulate the
removal, impoundment and sale of said vehicles.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLES. A motor vehicle that:
      (1)   Has remained:
         (a)   For a period of more than 48 hours on any property owned or
controlled by any unit of government or on any street or highway or more than
four hours on that property when it is properly posted, or on private property
for 30 days or more, without the consent of the person in control of the
property; and
         (b)   Lacks vital component parts or is in inoperable condition such
that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual
functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building.
      (2)   Classic cars or pioneer cars as defined in M.S. § 168.10, as
amended from time to time, are not considered abandoned vehicles. Vehicles on
the premises of junk yards and automobile grave yards that are defined,
maintained and licensed in accordance with M.S. § 161.242, as amended from time
to time, or that are licensed and maintained in accordance with local laws and
zoning regulations are not considered abandoned vehicles. A vehicle being held
for storage by agreement or being held under police authority or pursuant to a
writ or court order is not considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as
abandoned while the police hold, writ or court order is in effect.
   AGENCY. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   DEPARTMENT. The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
   IMPOUND. To take and hold the vehicle in legal custody. There are two types
of impounds, public and non-public.
   IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OWNER. A person who engages in impounding or
storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles.
   JUNK VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that:
      (1)   Is three years old or older and is damaged, with the damage
including such things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train or
transmission;
      (2)   Is three years old or older and is apparently inoperable;
      (3)   Is three years old or older and does not have a valid current
registration plate; or
      (4)   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate
value of the scrap in it.
   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that:
      (1)   Is subject to removal and impoundment pursuant to M.S. § 169.041 or
M.S. § 168B.04, subd. 2, as amended from time to time, including, but not
limited to the removal of a motor vehicle from public property for a parking or
traffic violation four hours after issuance of the traffic ticket or citation;
      (2)   Is parked in violation of snow emergency regulations, blocking
driveways, alleys or fire hydrants;
      (3)   Is parked in bus lanes or bus stops during hours when parking is
prohibited;
      (4)   Is parked within 30 feet of a stop sign and visually blocking the
stop sign;
      (5)   Is parked in a handicapped transfer zone or handicapped parking
space without a handicapped parking certificate or license plates;
      (6)   Is parked in an area that has been posted with temporary restricted
parking;
      (7)   Is parked within the right-of-way of a controlled access highway or
within the travel portion of a public street when travel is allowed there;
      (8)   Is unlawfully parked in a zone that is restricted by posted signs
to be used by fire, police and public safety emergency vehicles;
      (9)   A law enforcement official has probable cause to believe that the
vehicle may constitute or may contain evidence of a crime;
      (10)   The driver, operator or person in physical control of the vehicle
has been taken into custody and the vehicle is impounded for safe keeping;
      (11)   A law enforcement official has probable cause to believe that the
owner, operator or person in physical control of the vehicle has failed to
respond to five or more citations for parking or traffic offenses;
      (12)   Is unlawfully parked and presents a risk for a lawfully parked
vehicle;
      (13)   Is parked on a school day during prohibited hours in a school zone
on a public street where official signs prohibit parking;
      (14)   Has been left unattended on a public highway and properly tagged
by a peace officer after four hours;
      (15)   Is unattended and located so as to constitute an accident or
traffic hazard to the traveling public as determined by a peace officer;
      (16)   Is left unattended in a parking facility or other public property
owned and controlled by a unit of government that has been properly posted
after four hours;
      (17)   Is left unattended on private property not owned or occupied by
the owner of the motor vehicle for the time period stated below:
         (a)   Property that is a single family or duplex residential property,
immediately;
         (b)   Property that is private, nonresidential property, properly
posted, immediately;
         (c)   Property that is private, nonresidential property, not posted
after 24 hours; or
         (d)   Property that is any residential property, properly posted,
immediately.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and also
means trailers or wagons requiring licenses under applicable state law.
   MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE. Solid waste and liquid waste derived in the operation
of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as tires and
used motor oil, but excluding scrap metal.
   NON-PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot that is not a public impound lot.
   OPERATOR. An operator of a public or non-public impound lot, regardless of
whether a tow-truck service is provided.
   PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot owned by or contracting with the city or
any other governmental organization.
   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to
the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things as the motor,
drive train, transmission and wheels.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99; Am. Ord. 500, passed 1-23-02)
§ 95.03 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   (A)   Abandoned or junk vehicles. The city and its Police Department may
take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicles.
   (B)   Unauthorized vehicles. The city and its Police Department may take
into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle as defined in §
95.02.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99)
§ 95.04 SALE; WAITING PERIODS.
   (A)   Sale of abandoned and junk vehicles. An impounded vehicle is eligible
for disposal or sale 15 days after notice to the owner if the vehicle is
determined to be:
      (1)   A junk vehicle except that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subdivision; or
      (2)   An abandoned vehicle.
   (B)   Sale of unauthorized vehicles. An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale 45 days after notice to the owner if the vehicle is determined
to be an unauthorized vehicle.
   (C)   Notice of taking and sale.
      (1)   Contents; notice given within ten days. When an impounded vehicle
is taken into custody, the city shall give notice of the taking within ten
days. The notice shall:
         (a)   Set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make,
model and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if such information can
be reasonably obtained and the place where the vehicle is being held;
         (b)   Inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim
the vehicle; and
         (c)   State that failure of the owner or lien holders to exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the appropriate time
allowed under this section shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title
and interest in the vehicle and consent to the transfer of title to and
disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents.
      (2)   Notice by mail or publication. The notice shall be sent by mail to
the registered owner, if any, of any impounded vehicle and to all readily
identifiable lien holders of record. If it is impossible to determine with
reasonable certainty that the identity and address of the registered owner and
all lien holders, the notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned.
Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy.
      (3)   Unauthorized vehicles. If an unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed
after 30 days from the date that notice was sent, a second notice shall be sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested to the registered owner, if any, of
the unauthorized vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of
record.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99)
§ 95.05 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
   (A)   Payment of charges. The owner or any lien holder of an impounded
vehicle shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the city or its
contracted impound lot operator taking such vehicle into custody upon payment
of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into
custody within 15 or 45 days as applicable under and after notice as required
by §
95.04.
   (B)   Lien holders. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any
lien of a garage keeper under the laws of the State of Minnesota or the right
of a lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section GARAGE KEEPER
is an operator of a parking place or establishment, operator of a storage
facility or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99)
§ 95.06 DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.
   (A)   Auction or sale.
      (1)   If an abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicle and contents taken
into custody by a unit of government or contracted impound lot is not reclaimed
under §
95.08, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible pursuant
to the previous sections.
      (2)   The purchaser shall be given a receipt in the form prescribed by
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of
the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the
vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and
claims of ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of
title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.
   (B)   Abandoned or unsold vehicles. Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by
the city or its contracted impound lot shall be disposed of in accordance with
§
95.07.
   (C)   Sale proceeds; public entities. From the proceeds of a sale under this
section by the city or its contracted impound lot of an abandoned, junk or
unauthorized vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the costs of towing,
preserving and storing the vehicle and all administrative, notice and
publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to the previous
sections. Any remainder from the proceeds of the sale shall be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days and then shall be
deposited in the treasury of the city.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99)
§ 95.07 DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.
   The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and, if no bids are received, may utilize its own equipment and personnel
for the collection, storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned
scrap metal; provided however, that the city may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the collection and storage of not more than five abandoned or
unauthorized vehicles without advertising for or receiving bids in any 120
days.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99)
§ 95.08 CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY AGENCY.
   (A)   Agency review and approval. If the city enters into a contract with a
person licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency pursuant to this
chapter or a contract pursuant to the previous section, the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency may review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the
agencies plan for solid waste management and its compliance with agency rules.
If the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency approves the contract, the city may
seek reimbursement for costs incurred under the contract that have not been
reimbursed.
   (B)   City equipment. If the city uses its own equipment and personnel and
the use of the equipment and personnel conforms to the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency’s plan for solid waste management and is in compliance with
agency rules, the city may be reimbursed by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency for reasonable costs incurred which had not been reimbursed.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99)
§ 95.09 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Without limiting any other remedy or course of action available to the city
for violations of this chapter, abandoned, junk and unauthorized motor vehicles
are declared a public nuisance affecting public peace and safety. The
enforcement of this section of possible abatement of the nuisance is provided
for in Chapter 96 to this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99)
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 96
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Ord. 500, passed 12-23-99)
CHAPTER 96: NUISANCES
Section
   
96.01   Authority
   
96.02   Purpose
   
96.03   Conflicting ordinances
   
96.04   Public nuisance defined
   
96.05   Nuisances enumerated
   
96.06   Sale on public rights-of-way prohibited; exceptions
   
96.07   Vehicles constituting a public nuisance
   
96.08   Enforcement
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 AUTHORITY.
   This title and subsequent chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority
granted to Minnesota municipalities through M.S. §§ 412.221, 429.021, 463.152
through 463.261, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 561, passed 10-14-99)
§ 96.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of this title and its subsequent chapters is to encourage a
clean, healthy and satisfying environment for its citizens, one free from
nuisances, eyesores and unhealthy or devaluating conditions. To these ends, the
city seeks to regulate, identify and provide a means to enforce the regulations
to protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents and property owners.
   (B)   The city will only accept complaints from complainants who are
directly affected by an alleged violation of this chapter. The term “directly
affected” refers to complainants who own real property within 350 feet of the
allegedly offending property. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City
Council from acting on its own motion to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 561, passed 10-14-99; Am. Ord., passed - -)
§ 96.03 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this title are
inconsistent with its provisions, specifically including previous ordinance of
the city or amendments thereto, are repealed or superseded to the extent
necessary to give this chapter full force and effect.
(Ord. 561, passed 10-14-99)
§ 96.04 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.
   (A)   A nuisance shall mean any act, substance, matter, emission or thing
which creates a dangerous or unhealthy condition or which threatens the public
peace, health, safety or sanitary conditions of the city or which is offensive
or has a blighting influence on the community and which is found upon, in being
discharged or flowing from any street, alley, highway, lot grounds or other
property located within the city.
   (B)   Nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, those enumerated
below:
      (1)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures
or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of members of the public;
      (2)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any
public road or right-of- way, street, alley or highway or waters used by the
public;
      (3)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law to be a
public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided;
      (4)   In any way renders any other person insecure in life or the use of
property;
      (5)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
(Ord. 561, passed 10-14-99)
§ 96.05 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   (A)   Public nuisances affecting health, safety, comfort or repose. The
following are declared to be public nuisances affecting health, safety, comfort
or repose:
      (1)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water except retention/detention
ponds designated wetlands and/or lakes;
      (2)   All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public;
      (3)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death, excluding game animals;
      (4)   Accumulations of manure or rubbish;
      (5)   Privy vaults, garbage cans and garbage receptacles which are not
fly-tight;
      (6)   The effluence from any cesspool, septic tank, drain field or sewage
disposal system discharging upon the surface of the ground;
      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal
or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
      (8)   Any accumulation of cans, bottles, trash or debris of any nature or
description, the throwing, dumping or depositing of any dead animals, manure,
garbage, waste decaying matter, ground, sand, stones, ashes, rubbish cans,
glass food containers, construction material such as concrete, scrap, metal or
other materials of any kind on private or public property;
      (9)   Trades and businesses, as defined by statute or ordinance, not
licensed as provided by law;
      (10)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders in quantities
as to render the occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person;
      (11)   The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such
samples are placed in the hands of an adult person by someone properly
licensed;
      (12)   The failure to maintain basic repairs and upkeep on a vacant
residence or building, including, but not limited to snow removal, lawn
maintenance and exterior maintenance;
      (13)   Ownership of a HAZARDOUS BUILDING, defined as any building which
because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary
condition or abandonment constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public safety
or health;
      (14)   All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations and uses of
property which are deemed to be a menace to the health of the inhabitants of
the city or a considerable number thereof.
   (B)   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency. The following are
declared to be public nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
      (1)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards not lawfully
allowed by Minnesota State statutes;
      (2)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such operations;
      (3)   All places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold,
bartered or given away in violation of the law or where persons are permitted
to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquors as a beverage
contrary to law or where intoxicating liquors are kept for sale, barter or
distribution in violation of the law and all liquor, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars
and other property kept at and used for maintaining such a place;
      (4)   Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating
liquor and/or illegal controlled substances;
      (5)   The looking into or peeping through doors, windows or openings or
private homes by methods of stealth and without proper authority and by
surreptitious methods or what is commonly known as window peeping;
      (6)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous
sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses.
   (C)   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following are
declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
      (1)   All trees and hedges, billboards or other obstructions which
prevent persons from having a clear view or street signs and/or a clear view of
all traffic approaching an intersection;
      (2)   All limbs of trees which are less than eight feet above the surface
of any public street or alley;
      (3)   The outside piling, storing or keeping of old machinery, junk,
furniture, household furnishings or appliances or component parts thereof,
rusting metal, inoperable/unusable equipment or debris visible on private or
public property;
      (4)   The placing or throwing on any street, alley, road, highway,
sidewalk or other public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other
substances which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire
when passing over the same;
      (5)   The intentional throwing or depositing of, maintaining, permitting
or failing to remove garbage, trash, rubbish, bottles, cans and other refuse on
any property within the city, including large quantities of organic debris and
materials, which accumulated by other than natural means, except properly
maintained compost piles;
      (6)   Property in a residential district not seeded, sodded or otherwise
planted with a ground cover more than 240 days after any disturbance to the
property caused by construction, grading or other activity or any time prior to
the 240 days if the property is causing erosion or drainage problems on the
same or nearby properties, including public streets;
      (7)   Ownership of a HAZARDOUS BUILDING, defined as any building which
because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary
conditions or abandonment constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public
safety or health;
      (8)   Subject to the above, nuisances shall include, but not be limited
to violations of the following requirements:
         (a)   No part of any exterior surface shall have deterioration, holes
(greater than one inch square in size), breaks (greater than one inch in
width), loose or rotten board or timbers;
         (b)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as
paint applied shall be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the
finish. No wall or other exterior surface shall have pooling, cracked, chipped
or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
            1.   Any one wall or other flat surface; or
            2.   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters and similar
projections on any on side or surface;
         (c)   All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface
of any public street or alley;
         (d)   All exterior doors and shutters shall be hung properly and have
an operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place;
         (e)   All cornices, molding, lintels, bay or dormer windows and
similar projections shall be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects which make them hazardous or unsightly;
         (f)   Roof surfaces shall be tight and have no defects that admit
water. All roof drainage systems shall be secured and hung properly;
         (g)   Chimneys, antennae, air vents and other similar projections
shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Such projections shall be
secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof;
         (h)   All foundations shall be structurally sound and in good repair;
      (9)   All buildings, walls and other structures that have been damaged by
fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half of their fair market
value or which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public;
      (10)   Any structure or portion thereof in a residential district whose
exterior is not completed in accordance with city approved construction plans
within 360 days after the date the city building permit was issued;
      (11)   Any construction materials, including piles of dirt, sand and sod
left on the property more than 60 days after construction has been completed or
a certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever occurs first;
      (12)   All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected in
violation of Minnesota State Building Code concerning manner, materials or
construction;
      (13)   Any vehicle that deposits mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
other material on any street or highway;
      (14)   Any discarded construction material or other litter at a
construction site which is not placed in an adequate waste container and
thereafter removed from the site or which is buried on or under the
construction site or which is allowed to blow around or off the site;
      (15)   All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances
or materials stored or accumulated in any manner or in any amount other than
provided by law or ordinance;
      (16)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use of the
public streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such
conditions as provided by ordinance and any other excavation left unprotected
or uncovered indefinitely or allowed to exist in such a manner as to attract
people;
      (17)   All use or display of fireworks, except as provided by law or
ordinance;
      (18)   Radio aerials strung or erected in any manner except that provided
by law or ordinance;
      (19)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any
use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds or people to
gather obstructing traffic and the free use of public streets or sidewalks;
      (20)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over
public streets or sidewalks or so situated as to endanger public safety, not
constructed and maintained as provided by law or ordinance or without proper
permit;
      (21)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery, equipment or other property in
any public place or so situated or operated on private property so as to
attract the public;
      (22)   The distribution of handbills, except as provided by law or
ordinance;
      (23)   Throwing, dropping or releasing printed matter, paper or any other
material or object over the city from an airplane, balloon or other aircraft or
in such manner as to cause such material to fall or land in the city;
      (24)   Placing entrance culverts or doing any act which may alter or
affect the drainage of public streets or alleys or the surface or grade of
public streets, alleys or sidewalks without proper permit;
      (25)   Making repairs to motor vehicles or tires in public streets or
alleys, except for emergency repairs when it will not impede or interfere with
traffic;
      (26)   The placement of mailboxes and other delivery receptacles on
public right-of- way, except those which are in compliance with United States
Postal Service requirements for location and type;
      (27)   The placement, erecting or painting of unauthorized traffic signs
or advertising signs in streets or alleys or on sidewalks;
      (28)   The making or causing of loud, unnecessary or disturbing noise is
prohibited.
         (a)   General provision. It shall be unlawful for any person to make
or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys,
disturbs or affects the comfort, repose, health or peace of others.
         (b)   Loud or disturbing noises enumerated; restrictions. The
following acts set forth in the following subsections are declared to be loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.
            1.   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection,
including excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any building between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on Saturdays and all day Sunday, except where single individuals or families
work on single-family residences for their own occupancy owned by them, except
that the Clerk-Treasurer, or their designee in case of emergency, grant
permission to repair at any time when he or she finds such repair work will not
affect the health and safety of persons in the vicinity.
            2.   Nighttime noise in residential areas; parties.
               a.   No person shall between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 7:00 a.m. on the
weekend day participate in any loud party or gathering of people from which
noise emanates of a sufficient volume as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose
of persons residing in any residential areas.
               b.   Loud noises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on any weekday or between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 7:00 a.m. on weekend
days or such volume as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the
residential premises or within an apartment building or a townhouse complex the
volume is plainly audible in the adjoining housing unit or across the apartment
hallway wherein such loud party or gathering is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this chapter.
               c.   No persons shall visit or remain within any residential
dwelling unit wherein such loud party or gathering is taking place, except the
owner, persons residing in that unit or persons who are there for the sole
purpose of abating the disturbance.
            3.   Loud sound amplification systems. No person operating or
occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, driveway or
public/private property shall operate or permit the operation of any sound
amplification system (“SAS”) from within the vehicle.
               a.   Sound amplification system (SAS). Any radio, tape player,
compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for the
amplification of sound.
               b.   Plainly audible. Any sound produced by an SAS from within
the vehicle that clearly can be heard at a distance of 50 feet or more.
Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon direct line
of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and bass reverberations are
included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a
street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway on either public or private
property.
               c.   Defense. It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
this section that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from
operating the SAS and that any of the following apply:
                  i.   The SAS was being operated to request medical or
vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
                  ii.   The vehicle containing the SAS was an emergency or
public safety vehicle;
                  iii.   The SAS was owned and operated by the city or a gas,
electric, communications or refuse company and said system was being used for a
bona fide function of said entity;
                  iv.   The SAS was being used for the purpose of giving
instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting music or
assemblages of persons in compliance with the ordinances of the city;
                  v.   The SAS was used for a bona fide public activity,
including but not necessarily limited to, parades, fireworks, sports events,
musical productions and other activities for which a permit has otherwise been
licensed or been expressly approved by the City Council.
      (29)   Obstructions. lt is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
display any fence, goods, or other obstructions upon, over, across or under any
public property without first having obtained a written permit from the
Council, and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and
conditions of such permit, and taking precautionary measures for the protection
of the public. An electrical cord or device of any kind is hereby included, but
not by way of limitation, within the definition of an obstruction.
(Ord. 561, passed 10-14-99; Am. Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2018-01,
passed 3-22-16; Am. Ord. 2024-01, passed 5-14-24)
§ 96.06 SALE ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, buy, barter or offer to sell, buy, barter for
any goods, wares or merchandise or otherwise engage in any type of business or
sales transaction on any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way within the
city, including but not limited to the sale or barter of the following goods:
      (1)   Motor vehicles;
      (2)   Boats; and
      (3)   Trailers.
   (B)   This section shall not apply when the activities prohibited in this
chapter are expressly permitted in a defined area for a specified period of
time by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 561, passed 10-14-99)
§ 96.07 VEHICLES CONSTITUTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any violation of Chapter 95 of the city code regarding abandoned, junk and
unauthorized vehicles is declared a public nuisance.
(Ord. 561, passed 10-14-99)
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned, junk and unauthorized vehicles, see
Ch. 95
§ 96.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Council to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and the City Council may, by resolution, delegate to other
officers or agencies power to enforce particular provisions of this section,
including the power to inspect private premises, and the officers charged with
the enforcement of this chapter shall take all reasonable precautions to
prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisance.
   (B)   The City Administrator or designee is authorized to enter upon any
property if necessary to determine whether the provisions of this code or any
applicable state statute has been violated to make any examinations or surveys
or to conduct any tests that may be reasonably necessary in the performance of
their duties. All inspection and testing must be done in a reasonable manner.
      (1)   Abatement. Whenever, in the judgment of the officer charged with
enforcement, it is determined upon investigation that a public nuisance is
being maintained or exists within the city, such officer shall notify in
writing the person committing and maintaining such a public nuisance and
require him or her to terminate and abate said nuisance and remove such
conditions or remedy such defects. Notice to the owner shall be satisfied by
notice to the person listed as the taxpayer on the county’s tax records if the
premises are not occupied, the address of the owner is unknown and no other
responsible person can be reasonably identified, notice may be served on the
property by posting a copy of the notice on the premises. The notice shall
require the owner or occupant of such premises, or both, to take reasonable
steps within a reasonable amount of time as designated in said notice, but the
maximum time of the removal of said violation after service of said notice
shall not in any event exceed 30 days. If the owner, occupant or other
responsible party does not comply with the notice within the time specified,
the City Council may, after notice to the owner and occupant or other
responsible party and the opportunity to be heard has been provided to the
owner, occupant or other responsible party and the nuisance has not been
abated, the nuisance may be abated by the city. The notice shall be served in
the same manner as the notice by the enforcing officer and shall be given at
least 10 days before the date stated within the notice when the City Council
will consider the matter. If notice is given by posting, at least 30 days shall
elapse between the day of posting and the hearing date.
      (2)   Summary abatement. The enforcing officer may provide for abating a
public nuisance without following the procedure required above when:
         (a)   There is an immediate threat to the public health or safety;
         (b)   There is an immediate threat of serious property damage;
         (c)   A public nuisance has been caused by private parties on public
property or if the enforcing officer abated the nuisance pursuant to this
section, the officer must reasonably attempt to notify the owner, occupant or
other responsible party of the intended action and the right to appeal the
abatement and any cost at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
      (3)   Cost recovery. The owner of property in which a nuisance has been
abated by the city or a person who has caused a public nuisance on property not
owned by that person shall be personally liable to the city for the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the Clerk-Treasurer or the designee shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner or other responsible
party. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office
of the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (4)   Assessment. If the cost or any portion of it has not been paid
under subsection (3), within 30 days after the date of the bill, the unpaid
cost may be certified against the property to which the cost is attributable.
Before certification against the property, reasonable notice of the impending
certification and an opportunity to be heard by the City Council must be given
to the taxpayer of record. Failure of the taxpayer to receive the notice shall
not invalidate the certification, however. Thereafter, the unpaid cost may be
certified to the County Auditor for collection along with current taxes on the
following year or in such annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the City
Council may determine in each case.
      (5)   Other remedies. The city is also authorized to use any remedy
provided by Minnesota Statute, including but not limited to M.S. §§ 463.16
through 463.152, as amended from time to time, regarding the right to correct
or remove hazardous buildings.
      (6)   Penalty. Any person in violation of any of the provisions in this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day on which such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 561, passed 10-14-99)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, occupant, property owner or owners, firm, partnership or
corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in §
10.99. Each date that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate
offense.
(Ord. 561, passed 10-14-99)
CHAPTER 97: REGULATION OF PUBLIC DANCES
Section
   
97.01   Regulation of public dances
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Permit required
   
97.04   Application for permit
   
97.05   Insurance
   
97.06   Location
   
97.07   Permit to be posted
   
97.08   Liquor license required
   
97.09   Licensed police officer presence
   
97.10   Hours
   
97.11   Minors prohibited
   
97.12   Certain behavior prohibited
   
97.13   Lighting
   
97.14   Noise
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 REGULATION OF PUBLIC DANCES.
   All public dances held in this city shall be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms stated below shall have the following meanings:
   DANCE. Any dance where the general may participate, whether or not a charge
for admission for dancing is made.
   DANCING PLACE. Any room or space or other area, whether indoors or outside,
which is open to the general for the purpose of participating in public
dancing.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11)
§ 97.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall conduct a public dance in this city unless a permit
has been obtained from the City Administrator prior to the holding of the
dance. The fees for a permit shall be as established by the City Council by the
annual city fee schedule. The application shall be submitted to the City
Administrator at least 20 days before the date of the proposed dance or
adequate time to be reviewed by the City Council. The application shall set
forth the name and address of the applicant, who shall be the person
responsible for conducting the dance and any business, committee or
organization sponsoring the dance, the place where the dance is to be held, the
date of the dance and the time of the dance. Proof os insurance required shall
be submitted with the application and no permit shall be issued until proof of
insurance has been received. The required insurance shall list the city as a
named insured and provide a provision to defend, indemnify and hold harmless
the city and any of its employees from any claims arising from the event.
   (B)   In addition to this fee, the applicant shall be responsible for any
expense associated with providing security for the event. The City Council
shall establish criteria for determining the number of licensed peace officers
required to be present at any dance. No permit shall be issued until the fee
and arrangements for law enforcement have been secured.
   (C)   Permits are required for outdoor dances. Indoor dances do not require
a permit. All indoor dances must meet fire code capacity as set by the State
Fire Marshal.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.04 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person desiring a permit to hold a public dance in this city shall
submit an application for a permit on the form provided by the City
Administrator, submitted to the City Administrator at least ten days before the
date of the proposed dance. The application shall set forth the name and
address of the applicant, who shall be the person responsible for conducting
the public dance, and any business, committee or organization sponsoring the
dance, the place where the dance is to be held, the date of the dance and the
time of its beginning and end. Proof of all insurance required by this chapter
shall be submitted with the application and no permit shall be issued until
proof of insurance has been received. A request for any use of a city building
or other city property shall be included with the permit application, and no
permit shall be issued until the fees for the use of the city building or other
city property have also been paid.
Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.05 INSURANCE.
   All insurance policies required for the event, including any insurance
required by law for the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall list the city as a
named insured and provide a provision to defend, indemnify and hold harmless
the city and any of its employees from any claims arising from the event.
Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.06 LOCATION.
   The applicant shall make sure that adequate parking is available for the
persons wishing to attend the dance and make sure that the location is safe and
accessible. This information shall also be provided to the City Administrator
before a permit shall be issued.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.07 PERMIT TO BE POSTED.
   When a permit is issued, the holder of the permit shall post the permit in a
prominent location on the premises on which the dance is to be held during the
time the dance is occurring. The applicant shall be present at all times while
the dance is occurring.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.08 LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall give, hold, conduct or permit any public dance where liquor
will be served, as defined in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to
time, without obtaining a license from the city.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.09 LICENSED PEACE OFFICER PRESENCE.
   No dance shall occur without at least one licensed peace officer or more, if
more are required under the criteria established by the City Council, who shall
be present at the dancing place during the duration of the dance and after the
dance, until all of the participants have left the dancing place.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.10 HOURS.
   No dance shall occur between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.11 MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed to be present by the permit
holder or any peace officer at a dance where alcohol is sold or consumed,
unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.12 CERTAIN BEHAVIOR PROHIBITED.
   No person present at any dance shall engage in any disorderly conduct, as
defined by M.S. § 609.72, as it may be amended from time to time, and any
disorderly person shall be immediately removed from the dance by the peace
officer present at the dancing place. Should a substantial number of persons at
the dance engage in disorderly conduct, the peace officer present shall
terminate the dance and remove all persons from the dancing place.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.13 LIGHTING.
   In order to protect the safety of persons attending a dance, dancing places
shall be adequately illuminated and dancing therein while lights are
extinguished, dimmed or turned low so as to give inadequate or imperfect
illumination is hereby prohibited. All exit areas shall be illuminated at all
times during the dance with light having intensity of not less than one
footcandle at floor level. Illumination of less than 0.5 foot-candles in any
area where dancing is occurring, permitted or encouraged is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.14 NOISE.
   All dances shall be subject to the provisions of this code regulating noise.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any permit holder violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in §
10.99, and their dance permit is suspended immediately at the time of any
arrest or citation for violating this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-13-11)
CHAPTER 98: WEEDS
Section
   
98.01   Purpose
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Nuisance declared
   
98.04   Exemptions
   
98.05   Duties of owners, lessees and occupants
   
98.06   Cutting by the city
   
98.07   Violation and penalty
§ 98.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect
and preserve this city’s neighborhoods and the public health, safety and
welfare of those who live there. The Byron City Council determines that keeping
the city free of tall grass and noxious weeds improves the quality of life of
city residents by improving the aesthetics of the city, by eliminating harbor
for rodents and insects, and by eliminating fire hazards. At the same time, the
Council recognizes that requiring the mowing of grasses and noxious weeds is
under certain circumstances impractical and unreasonable. The exemptions
contained within this chapter are intended to cover these circumstances.
   (B)   The City Council also determines that a variety of properly maintained
landscapes in the city adds diversity and a richness to the quality of life,
and does not want to discourage the preservation, restoration and maintenance
of diverse biologically stable natural plant communities or environmentally
sound practices. The City Council finds that the establishment of prairie,
naturalistic and meadow plant communities is an acceptable landscape treatment
in the city.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LANDSCAPING. The active involvement in the encouragement of selected plants
to grow on a site.
   MEADOW VEGETATION. Grasses and flowering broad-leaf plants that are native
to, or adapted to, the State of Minnesota, and that are commonly found in
meadow and prairie plant communities, except weeds.
   NATIVE GRASSES. Grasses (Beach Grass, Wood Chess Grass, Sand Reed Grass,
Wheat Grass, Bluestem Grass, Grama Grass, Brome Grass, Buffalo Grass, Switch
Grass, Indian Grass, Wild Rye) that existed in the area prior to European
settlement.
   NATIVE PLANTS. Plants that existed in the area prior to European settlement.
   NATURAL LANDSCAPING. The use of groups of plants native to the area.
   NATURAL WOODED LOT. An area where the land, trees and vegetation appear not
to have been graded, landscaped, mowed, or otherwise disturbed by human or
mechanical means at any time.
   NATURALISTIC LANDSCAPING. The use of native and non-native plants.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Plants so designated by the Commissioner of Agriculture under
authority of M.S. § 18.77, subd. 8.
   PERSON. One or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations,
partnerships, associations, societies and all other entities of any kind
capable of being sued.
   PRAIRIE. A plant community dominated by a diversity of native perennial
herbaceous plants and grasses.
   REGULARLY CUT. Mowing or otherwise cutting vegetation so that it does not
exceed eight inches in height.
   TRADITIONAL LANDSCAPING. The use of turf grasses and woody plants (shrubbery
and trees) with defined areas for cultivation of annual and perennial plants.
   TURF GRASSES. Bluegrass, fescue and ryegrass blends with non-woody
vegetation interspersed with them commonly used in regularly cut lawns.
   WEEDS. All noxious weeds as defined in M.S. § 18.77 and 21.72. For the
purposes of this chapter, Taraxacum ssp (common dandelion) is not considered a
weed.
   WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where
the water table is near the surface. The boundary of wetlands for purposes of
this chapter shall be determined according to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Wetland Delineation Manual.
Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 98.03 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   (A)   No owner, lessee or occupant, nor agent, servant, representative, or
employee of any such owner, lessee, or occupant having control of any lot or
land or any part thereof within the corporate limits of this municipality shall
permit or maintain on any such lot or land, or on or along any sidewalk
adjacent to the same, or along any street adjacent to the said property between
the property line and the curb, or on or along any alley adjacent to the said
property between the property line and the middle of the alley, any growth of
grasses, rank vegetation or weeds whether defined as noxious weeds or not to a
height greater than as follows:
      (1)   Upon any lot in a residential area or developed property lot, no
greater than eight inches;
      (2)   Upon any vacant lot contiguous to any occupied lot, no greater than
ten inches;
      (3)   Upon any natural wooded lot, no greater than ten inches; or
      (4)   Upon any other lot annexed into the City of Byron that has been
platted, no greater than 12 inches.
   (B)   No person shall cause, permit, or allow poison ivy, ragweed, or other
poisonous plants or plants detrimental to health, to grow on any such lot or
any such land in such a manner that any part of said weeds or plants shall
extend upon, overhang or border any public place, or in such a manner that said
weeds or plants are allowed to seed or to emit pollen or other poisonous
particles into the atmosphere in a manner such that said particles are carried
through the air into any public place.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 98.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Non-noxious weeds and grass vegetation in wetland areas;
   (B)   Non-noxious weeds, grasses and herbaceous vegetation within 50 feet of
designated stormwater ponds or within 50 feet of natural and altered creeks,
rivers and stream corridors, including riparian buffer strips, that convey
water, provided they are cut to less than 10 inches at least once per year if
located within 200 feet of an occupied residence or developed property;
   (C)   Areas of any occupied lot or parcel of land having wetland-type
vegetation because of neighborhood drainage patterns, where the drainage
pattern is evident on contour maps and from field observation, and the
vegetation is confined to a single lot, separated from adjacent lots, and
managed so as not to be a nuisance;
   (D)   Non-noxious weed and grass vegetation growing on land that, no matter
underlying zoning, is utilized agriculturally as long as land is owned by the
same family or family members as when originally annexed;
   (E)   Non-noxious weeds and grass vegetation present in areas zoned as
Industrial;
   (F)   Temporary erosion-control grasses;
   (G)   Maintained and weeded prairie, meadow or natural landscape vegetation
that does not contain noxious weed growth and that includes the cultivation of
native grasses indigenous to Minnesota;
   (H)   An area of at least two acres used by an educational institution or
public agency for prairie land restoration, if the prior vegetation is
eliminated and the prairie vegetation is planted through transplanting or
seeding. The area shall be cut at least once per year to a height of no more
than 18 inches if weeds cover more than 25% of the area. If such mowing is
necessary and the area is likely to be seen by the public, a sign shall be
posted advising that a meadow or prairie is being established. The size of the
sign shall be one square foot and it shall be posted no higher than three feet;
   (I)   Grass and non-noxious weed vegetation in publicly owned parks
designated as natural preserves or private property so designated by the City
Council or natural undisturbed areas where the land and vegetation appears not
to have been graded, landscaped or otherwise disturbed by human or mechanical
means in recent times;
   (J)   Grasses and non-noxious weed vegetation on natural or altered slopes
steeper than 2:1; or
   (K)   Ornamental grasses.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 98.05 DUTIES OF OWNERS, LESSEES AND OCCUPANTS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any lot or land to
cut and remove, or to cause to be cut and removed, all such weeds, grass, or
other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to
comply with the provisions within this chapter.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 98.06 CUTTING BY THE CITY.
   (A)   If the provisions of the foregoing sections in this chapter are not
complied with, the city shall serve written notice of such fact upon the owner,
lessee, occupant, or any agent or person having the care or control of such lot
or land. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects, or
refuses to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed, such weeds, grasses,
or other vegetation within the time specified in the notice, after receipt of
such notice, or if no person can be found in this municipality who either is or
claims to be the owner of such lot or land, or who either represents or claims
to represent such owner, the city may cause such weeds, grass, or other
vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed.
   (B)   The cost of cutting and removing shall be set annually by the City
Council’s Fee Schedule together with a $25 administrative fee and such other
additional costs incurred in connection therewith. The amount so charged
against said premises, lots, or parcels of land shall be a lien upon the
property on which said weeds, grass and vegetation were located, and shall be
added to, and become, and form part of the taxes to be assessed against said
property.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 98.07 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Any person who shall neglect to cut and remove weeds, grass or other
vegetation as directed in this chapter, or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with the provisions of any notice herein provided, or who shall violate
any of the provisions of §
98.03, or who shall resist or obstruct any City of Byron employee in the
cutting and removal of weeds, grass, and other vegetation shall, upon
convictions, be guilty of a petty offense as provided in §
10.99 of this code, and each day on which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 99: OUTDOOR FURNACES
Section
   
99.01   Purpose
   
99.02   Definition
   
99.03   Prohibition
   
99.04   Authority
 
   
99.99   Penalty
§ 99.01PURPOSE.
   It is the intention of the Byron City Council by the adoption of this
chapter to establish and impose restrictions upon the construction and
operation of outdoor furnaces within the limits of the City of Byron for the
purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience,
safety, welfare and prosperity of the city and its inhabitants. It is generally
recognized that the types of fuel used, and the scale and duration of the
burning of such furnaces create noxious and hazardous smoke, soot, fumes, odors
and air pollution, can be detrimental to citizens’ health, and can deprive
neighboring residents of the enjoyment of their property or premises.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 99.02 DEFINITION.
   As used in this chapter, OUTDOOR FURNACE shall mean an accessory structure,
designated and intended, through the burning of wood, coal, pellets, corn or
other materials, for the purpose of heating the water or principal structure
and/or any other site structure on the premises, including pools or spas.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 99.03 PROHIBITION.
   The construction and/or operation of outdoor furnaces are hereby prohibited
in the City of Byron.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 99.04 AUTHORITY.
   The Byron City Council or its enforcement officer(s) are hereby authorized
in the name and on behalf of the city to undertake and prosecute any
proceedings necessary or appropriate to enforce compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, occupant, property owner or owners violating any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code. Each date that a violation is permitted to exist
constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. - -, passed 3-23-05)
CHAPTER 100: EMERGENCY FIRE AND FIRST RESPONDERS' FEES
Section
   
100.01   Purposes and intent
   
100.02   Definitions
   
100.03   Parties affected
   
100.04   Rates
   
100.05   Billing and collection
   
100.06   Mutual aid agreement
   
100.07   Billing procedure for fire protection contracts with towns or other
cities
   
100.08   Application of collections to budget
§ 100.01 PURPOSES AND INTENT.
   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the City of Byron to
charge for fire/first responder service(s) as authorized by M.S. §§ 366.011,
366.012, and 415.01.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-19)
§ 100.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE SERVICE/FIRST RESPONDER. Any deployment of firefighting/first responder
personnel and/or equipment to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative
measure in an effort to protect equipment, life, or property in an area
threatened by fire. It also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel
and/or equipment to provide fire suppression, rescue, extrication, and any
other services related to fire and rescue as may occasionally occur.
   FIRE/FIRST RESPONDER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge imposed by the city for
receiving fire/first responder service(s).
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally
manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not
operated exclusively upon railroad tracks. It includes semi-trailers. It does
not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all terrain vehicles, or park
trailers.
   PROTECTION CONTRACT. A contract between the city and a town, other city or
township for the city to provide fire/first responder service.
   MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and a town or other city
for the city's Fire Department to provide assistance to the fire department of
a town or other city.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-19)
§ 100.03 PARTIES AFFECTED.
   (A)   Owners of property within the city who receive fire/first responder
service(s);
   (B)   Anyone who receives fire/first responder service(s) as a result of a
motor vehicle accident or fire within the city; and
   (C)   Owners of property in towns or cities to which the city provides fire/
first responder service pursuant to a fire/first responders protection
contract.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-19)
§ 100.04 RATES.
   Fees are set annually with the City Council Fee Schedule. Please refer to
current Fee Schedule for most recent charges.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-19)
§ 100.05 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Parties requesting and receiving fire/first responder services will be
billed directly by the City of Byron within 30 days of the fire/first responder
service. Additionally, if the party receiving fire/first responders services
did not request services but a fire or other situation exists which, at the
discretion of the fire/first responder department personnel in charge requires
fire/first responder service, the party will be charged and billed. All parties
will be billed whether or not the fire/first responder service is covered by
insurance. Any billable amount of the fire/first responder charge not covered
by a party's insurance remains a debt of the party receiving the fire/first
responder service.
   (B)   Parties billed for fire/first responder service will have 30 days to
pay. If the fire/first responder service charge is not paid by that time, it
will be considered delinquent and the city will send a notice of delinquency.
   (C)   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after this
notice of delinquency is sent, the city will use all practical and reasonable
legal means to collect the fire/first responder service charge. The party
receiving fire/first responder service shall be liable for all collection costs
incurred by the city including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees
and court costs.
   (D)   If the fire/first responder service charge remains unpaid for 30 days
after the notice of delinquency is sent, the City Council may also, on or
before October 15 of each year, certify the unpaid fire/first responder service
charge to the County Auditor in which the recipient of the services owns real
property for collection with taxes. The County Auditor is responsible for
remitting to the city all charges collected on behalf of the city. The city
must give the property owner notice of its intent to certify the unpaid fire/
first responder service charge by September 15.
   (E)   False alarms may be billed as a fire call.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-19)
§ 100.06 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.
   When the city Fire Department provides fire/first responder service to
another fire/first responder department pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, the
billing will be determined by the mutual aid agreement.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-19)
§ 100.07 BILLING PROCEDURE FOR FIRE PROTECTION CONTRACTS WITH TOWNS OR OTHER
CITIES.
   When the city Fire/First Responder Department provides fire/first service to
another fire/first responder department pursuant to a fire/first responder
protection contract, the billing will be determined by the contract.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-19)
§ 100.08 APPLICATION OF COLLECTIONS TO BUDGET.
   All collected fire/first responder charges will be city funds and used to
offset the expenses of the city Fire/First Responder Department in providing
fire/first responder services.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 2-12-19)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GAMBLING OPERATIONS
      
111.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
113.   LICENSES
      
114.   CRIME FREE RENTAL HOUSING
      
115.   UNATTENDED DONATION BOXES
      
116.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
117.   CANNABIS BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: GAMBLING OPERATIONS
Section
   
110.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
110.02   Purpose
   
110.03   Definitions
   
110.04   [Reserved]
   
110.05   Exemption
   
110.06   Applicability
   
110.07   Lawful gambling permitted
   
110.08   Council approval
   
110.09   Application and local approval of premises permits
   
110.10   License and permit display
   
110.11   Notification of material changes to application
   
110.12   [Reserved]
   
110.13   Designated trade area
   
110.14   Records and reporting
   
110.15   Hours of operation
   
110.16   Severability
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definitions of terms, conditions of operation,
provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful
gambling are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as
if set out in full. It is the intention of the Council that all future
amendments of M.S. Ch. 349, are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if
they had been in existence at the time this chapter was adopted.
   (B)   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained in
M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 349, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-
8-22)
§ 110.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the city,
to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of operations, and to
provide for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
   CITY. The City of Byron.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Byron.
   LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.
   PREMISE PERMIT. Issued in this chapter means a permit issued by the City.
   TRADE AREA. The City of Byron, Salem Township, Kalmar Township, Mantorville
Township and Canisteo Township.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.04 [RESERVED].
§ 110.05 EXEMPTION.
   This chapter shall not apply to a civic celebration recognized by resolution
or other similar official action of the local City Council, provided that bingo
is conducted for no more than 12 consecutive days in any calendar year or by an
organization which conducts less than five bingo occasions in any calendar
year.
(Ord. 349, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-
8-22)
§ 110.06 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful gambling
within the city except bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior
citizen housing project or by a senior citizen organization if the prizes for a
single bingo game do not exceed $10, total prizes awarded at a single bingo
occasion do not exceed $200, only members of the organization, residents of the
nursing home or housing project, and their guests, are allowed to play in a
bingo game, no compensation is paid for any person who conducts the bingo, and
a manager is appointed to supervise the bingo.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.07 LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.
   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city provided it is conducted in
accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.763, inclusive, as they may be
amended from time to time and M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23, inclusive, as they
may be amended from time to time, and this chapter.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.08 COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23, inclusive, as
they may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved
by Council, subject to the provisions of this chapter and state law.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.09 APPLICATION AND LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMITS.
   (A)   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit or bingo hall
license or renewal of a premises permit or bingo hall license from the Board
shall file with the City Clerk an executed, complete duplicate application
together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as filed
with the Board.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a premises
permit or bingo hall license, the City Clerk shall transmit the application to
the law enforcement agency for review and recommendation.
   (C)   The law enforcement agency shall investigate the matter and make a
review and recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no
event later than 45 days following receipt of the notification by the city.
Staff will then consider the application within 45 days of the date the
application was submitted to the City Clerk.
   (D)   Organizations or bingo halls applying for a state-issued premises
permit or bingo hall license
shall pay the city an investigation fee as the maximum established by state
statute (current is $100). This fee shall be refunded if the application is
withdrawn before the investigation is commenced.
   (E)   The applicant shall be notified of the date on which the Council will
consider the recommendation.
   (F)   The Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the
application within 60 days of receipt of the application.
   (G)   The Council may deny an application for issuance or renewal of a
premises permit for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state
rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last three years;
      (2)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing its
premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule, or city ordinance
relating to the operation of the establishment, including but not limited to,
laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances,
suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three
years;
      (3)   Failure of the applicant to pay the investigation fee provided by
division (D);
      (4)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to the
health, safety, and welfare of the community.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.10 LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.
   All permits issued under state law shall be prominently displayed during the
permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.11 NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGES TO APPLICATION.
   An organization holding a state-issued premises permit shall notify the city
in writing whenever any material change in the information submitted in the
application occurs within ten days of the change.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.12 [RESERVED].
§ 110.13 DESIGNATED TRADE AREA.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall
expend 85% of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes conducted
within the city’s trade area.
   (B)   This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of gross
profits derived from gambling conducted at a premise within the city’s
jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.14 RECORDS AND REPORTING.
   (A)   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file upon request with
the City Clerk one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with
the board, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time,
and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time.
The records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required
to be filed with the Board.
   (B)   Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a report with the city
proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed by §
110.13. Such a report shall be made on a form prescribed by the city and shall
be submitted annually and in advance of application for renewal.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.15 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. any
day of the week.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.16 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter is found to be invalid for any reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining provisions shall
not be affected.
(Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-8-22)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter; M.S. §§ 609.75-
609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; or M.S. §§
349.11-349.21, as they may be amended from time to time; or any rules
promulgated under those sections, as they may be amended from time to time,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, plus in either case
the costs of prosecution. In addition, violations shall be reported to the
Board and recommendation shall be made for suspension, revocation, or
cancellation of an organization’s license.
(Ord. 349, passed 12-18-96; Am. Ord. passed 11-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 2-
8-22)
CHAPTER 111: TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   License
   
111.04   Fees
   
111.05   Basis for denial of license
   
111.06   Exceptions and defense
Regulations
   
111.20   Prohibited sales
   
111.21   [Reserved]
   
111.22   [Reserved]
   
111.23   Responsibility
   
111.24   Compliance checks and inspections
   
111.25   Additional illegal acts
 
   
111.98   Violations
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 21 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco related devices, and such sale, possession and use are violations of
both state and federal laws; and because studies, which the city accepts and
adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the
age of 18 years and that those persons who reach the age of 18 years without
having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and
because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health
problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of
government; this chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession and
use of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices for the purpose of
enforcing and furthering existing laws to protect youth against the serious
effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco related devices and to further the official public policy of the State
of Minnesota in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as
stated in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 19-07, passed 6-11-19)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell licensed products are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS involve the use of persons
under the age of 21 who attempt to purchase licensed products. COMPLIANCE
CHECKS may also be conducted by other units of government for educational,
research, and training purposes or for investigating or enforcing appropriate
federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to licensed products.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance, whether natural or synthetic, intended for
human consumption through the inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE includes, but is not limited to, devices
manufactured, marketed, or sold as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pens,
mods, tank systems, or under any other product name or descriptor. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component or part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include any
nicotine cessation product that has been authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to be marketed and for sale as "drugs," "devices," or
"combination products," as defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco
products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single
bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form and single cans or other packaging of
snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this subdivision shall not be
considered individually packaged.
   LICENSED PRODUCTS. The term that collectively refers to any tobacco,
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery product.
   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single cigarette, cigar, and any
other licensed products that have been removed from their original packaging
and offered for sale. LOOSIES do not include premium cigars that are hand-
constructed, have a wrapper made entirely from whole tobacco leaf, and have a
filler and binder made entirely of tobacco, except for adhesives or other
materials used to maintain size, texture, or flavor.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a kiosk,
truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address or other permanent type of structure licensed for over-the-
counter transactions.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where licensed products are
available for sale to the general public. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS include, but
are not limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, tobacco product shops,
liquor stores, gasoline service stations, bars, and restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the
tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices, without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee. The assistance or
intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco
product or tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or
employee. Self-service merchandising shall not include vending machines.
   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf,
including but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut
or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut,
crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff flowers; cavendish;
shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf
prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling
papers or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a
manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or tobacco
products.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic or other type of
device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices
upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the
machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or
tobacco related device.
   YOUTH. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 21 years.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 19-07, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 20-07,
passed 10-13-20)
§ 111.03 LICENSE.
   No person shall sell or offer to sell any licensed product without first
having obtained a license to do so from the city.
   (A)   Application. An application for a license to sell licensed product
shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the
full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses
and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought
and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a
completed application, the city representative shall forward the application to
the Council for action at its next regularly scheduled Council meeting. If the
city representative shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or
she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the
information necessary to make the application complete.
   (B)   Action. The Council may either approve or deny the license or it may
delay action for such a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the
Council shall approve the license, the city representative shall issue a
license to the applicant. If the Council denies the license, notice of the
denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's
right to appeal the Council's decision.
   (C)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for one
calendar year from January. The length of the lease time may be modified from
time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   Revocation or suspension. Any licenses issued under this chapter may
be revoked or suspended as provided in §§
111.98 and
111.99.
   (E)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or
person shall be valid without the prior approval of the Council.
   (F)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be
licensed under this chapter.
   (G)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premises.
   (H)   Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more than 60 days before the
expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license issued under this
chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the
applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the
license.
   (I)   Minimum clerk age. Individuals employed by a licensed retail
establishment under this chapter must be at least 18 years of age to sell
licensed products.
   (J)   Smoking prohibited. Smoking, including smoking for the purpose of
sampling of licensed products, is prohibited within the indoor area of any
retail establishment licensed under this chapter.
   (K)   Samples prohibited. No person shall distribute samples of any licensed
product free of charge or at a nominal cost. The distribution of licensed
products as a free donation is prohibited.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 19-07, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 20-07,
passed 10-13-20)
§ 111.04 FEES.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fee shall be paid in full. The fee for the license under this chapter shall be
according to the annual official fee schedule.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97)
§ 111.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of
a license under this chapter; however, except as may otherwise be provided by
law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the
city must deny the license:
      (1)   The applicant is under 21 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance provision or other
regulation relating to licensed products;
      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products suspended
or revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application;
      (4)   The applicant fails to display or present licensed products in a
manner that is consistent with federal regulation, state law or this chapter;
and
      (5)   The applicant fails to store licensed products behind a counter or
other area not freely accessible to customers or in a case or other storage
unit not left open and accessible to the general public.
   (B)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be
revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for a license under
this chapter. The city will provide the license holder with notice of the
revocation, along with information on the right to appeal.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 19-07, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 20-07,
passed 10-13-20)
§ 111.06 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices to any person as part of an indigenous
practice or a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony or
practice. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this ordinance
for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state
law.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 19-07, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 20-07,
passed 10-13-20)
REGULATIONS
§ 111.20 PROHIBITED SALES.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to
sell any licensed product:
   (A)   To any person under the age of 21 years;
   (B)   By means of any type of vending machine;
   (C)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to
make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in
order to receive the licensed product and whereby there is not a physical
exchange of the licensed product between the licensee or the licensee’s
employee and the customer;
   (D)   By means of loosies as defined in §
111.02;
   (E)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes
or other products subject to this chapter; or
   (F)   By any other means, to any other person on in any other manner or form
prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision or other
regulation.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 19-07, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 20-07,
passed 10-13-20) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.21 RESERVED.
§ 111.22 RESERVED.
§ 111.23 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of
their employees in regard to the sale of licensed products on the licensed
premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be considered a
sale by the license holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are
appropriate under this chapter, state or federal law or other applicable law or
regulation.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 20-07, passed 10-13-20)
§ 111.24 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by law enforcement or
other authorized city officials during regular business hours. From time to
time, law enforcement shall conduct compliance checks. In accordance with state
law, law enforcement will conduct a compliance check that involves the
participation of a person at least 17 years of age, but under the age of 21, to
enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase licensed products. Prior
written consent from a parent or guardian is required for any person under the
age of 18 to participate in a compliance check. Persons used for the purpose of
compliance checks shall be supervised by city designated law enforcement
officers or other designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks
shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco related devices when such items are obtained as a part of the
compliance check. No youth used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a
false identification misrepresenting the youth's age, and all youth lawfully
engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the youth's age
asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any
identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws
for educational, research or training purposes or required for the enforcement
of a particular state or federal law.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 19-07, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 20-07,
passed 10-13-20)
§ 111.25 ADDITIONAL ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter.
   (A)   Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any licensed product to any youth.
   (B)   Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to have in his or her possession any licensed products. This division
shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
   (C)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to
smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any licensed product.
   (D)   Illegal procurement or prohibited furnishing. It shall be a violation
of this chapter for any youth to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise
obtain any licensed product, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor. It
shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a
minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any licensed product.
This division shall not apply to youths lawfully involved in a compliance
check.
   (E)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any youth to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 19-07, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 20-07,
passed 10-13-20) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.98 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violating
license holder shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that
sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of
his or her right to be heard on the accusation.
   (B)   Hearings. If a licensed business owner accused of violating this
chapter so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which
shall be published and provided to the accused licensed business.
   (C)   Hearing officer. The City Council shall serve as the hearing officer.
   (D)   Decision. If the hearing officer (the City Council) determines that a
violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing
officers' reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under §
111.99, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the
accused licensed business. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no
violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such findings
shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted licensed business.
   (E)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer (the City
Council) shall be filed in the District Court for the city in which the alleged
violation occurred.
   (F)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of
this chapter. If the city elects to seek misdemeanor prosecution, no
administrative penalty shall be imposed.
   (G)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 20-07, passed 10-13-20)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Licensees and employees. Any licensee found to have violated this
chapter shall be charged an administrative fine established by a resolution set
by the City Council annual Fee Schedule. Multiple violations at the same
location within a 24-month period will have an increase in fees up to three
offenses. In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended
for not less than seven days.
   (B)   Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated by
division (C) of this section, found to be in violation of this chapter shall be
charged an administrative fee established by the City Council annual Fee
Schedule.
   (C)   Misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from
seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 461, passed 7-24-97; Am. Ord. 20-07, passed 10-13-20)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
112.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
112.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
112.03   Definitions
   
112.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
   
112.05   Consumption in public places
   
112.06   Number of licenses which may be issued
   
112.07   Term and expiration of licenses
   
112.08   Kinds of liquor licenses
   
112.09   License fees; pro rata
   
112.10   Council discretion to grant or deny a license
   
112.11   Application for license
   
112.12   Description of premises
   
112.13   Applications for renewal
   
112.14   Transfer of license
   
112.15   Hearing and issuance
   
112.16   Restrictions on issuance
   
112.17   Conditions of license
   
112.18   Hours and days of sale
   
112.19   Minors on premises
   
112.20   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
   
112.21   Suspension and revocation
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of
the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
chapter is adopted.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101 as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter:
   LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or a “3.2% malt” includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt
liquor.
   RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a restaurant as
defined by this chapter, an establishment shall have a license from the state
as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet
the definition of either a “small establishment,” “medium establishment” or
“large establishment” as defined in M.S. § 157.16, subd. 3(d), as it may be
amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that
receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is
heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of
this section unless it meets the definitions of a “small establishment,”
“medium establishment” or “large establishment.”
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
   (C)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by
law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or
3.2% malt liquor license or any other license issued under this chapter or the
imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of §
112.99(B).
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on any
public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other
than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this chapter, or where
the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted. It is unlawful for
any person to bring upon or possess in a park a container of an alcoholic
beverage which contains or has a capacity of more than eight gallons. This
section shall not apply to a person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages in a
park, to an employee or agent acting on behalf of such licensee, not to a
person delivering an alcoholic beverage to such licensee. No beverages of any
kind in glass containers are allowed in the parks.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.06 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue.
However, the number of licenses which may be granted under this section is
limited to four, even if a larger number of licenses are authorized by law or
election. The Council in its sound discretion may amend the chapter as allowed
by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. If a larger number of
licenses in a particular category has been authorized by a referendum held
under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.413, subd. 3 as it may be amended from time
to time, but not all of them have been issued, the larger number of licenses is
no longer in effect until the Council by chapter determines that any or all of
the licenses may be issued. The Council is not required to issue the full
number of licenses that it has available.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.07 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Each license, other than a temporary on-sale license, shall be issued for a
maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary licenses, shall
expire on the first day of March following the date of the issuance, except
that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the application was
made, a license may be issued for the remainder of the license year. All
licenses shall expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to
their terms, not to exceed four consecutive days. Consumption and display
permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the accompanying city
consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.08 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
   The council of a city that does not have a municipal liquor store is
authorized to issue the following licenses and permits, up to the number
specified in §
112.06. The council of a city which has a municipal liquor store is authorized
to issue only those licenses specified in this chapter.
   (A)   3.2% malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to golf
courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of
tobacco and soft drinks.
   (B)   3.2% malt liquor off-sale license.
   (C)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a
club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.
   (D)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to
exclusive liquor stores or drug stores that have an off-sale license which was
first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off-sale intoxicating
liquor license established by the Council under §
112.09 shall not exceed $240 or a greater amount which may be permitted by M.S.
§ 340A.408, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time (currently $250).
Not more than four off-sale licenses shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic
beverages in original packages for consumption off the licensed premises.
   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the
following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and this section: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers,
theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, theaters
and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval
of the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses established by
the Council under §
112.09 shall not exceed the amounts provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 2(b)
as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound discretion
authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the
licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(b) as it may be amended from time to
time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale
licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(a) as it may be amended from time to
time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor
to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being
held on the premises.
   (F)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after authorization
to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as provided by M.S.
§ 340A.504, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined in §
112.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least
30 persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which
serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of food. The maximum fee for
this license, which shall be established by the Council under the provisions of
§
112.09, shall not exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided by M.S. §
340A.504, subd. 3(c) as it may be amended from time to time (currently $200).
   (G)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if the city
has a population less than 10,000.
   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with
a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit
corporation that has existed for at least three years; a political committee
registered under state law; or a state university. No license shall be for
longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12
days worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.
   (I)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25
guests at one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as it may
be amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of restaurant in §
112.03; to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in
M.S. § 340A.4011, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time and to
theaters that meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 1(b) as it may be
amended from time to time. The fee for an on-sale wine license established by
the Council under the provisions of §
112.09 of this section, shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged
for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine
license who also holds an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license is authorized to
sell malt liquor with a content over 3.2% (strong beer) without an additional
license.
   (J)   One day consumption and display permits with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a
social activity in the city sponsored by the organization. Approval of the
issuance of a consumption and display permit by the Commissioner of Public
Safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which may be imposed by the
Council on a person who has been issued a consumption and display permit under
the provisions of §
112.09 of this chapter shall not exceed $300, or the maximum amount permitted
by M.S. § 340A.414, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time.
Consumption and display permits shall expire on March 31 of each year.
   (K)   Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a business
establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which
payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The
license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class,
at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine
or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for
consumption on the licensed premises only.
   (L)   Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commission
of Public Safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an auction. A
license issued under this division authorizes the sale of only vintage wine of
a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale by any
wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale of wine for not
more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600 cases of wine are
sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms, including license
fee, imposed by §
112.09.
   (M)   Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued
to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture and who meet
the criteria established at M.S. § 340A.24, as it may be amended from time to
time. Sales under this license at on-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per
year. If a brew pub licensed under this section possesses a license for off-
sale under §
112.08(O) below, the brew pub's total combined retail sales at on-sale or off-
sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not
total more than 500 barrels.
   (N)   Brewer off-sale malt liquor licenses, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee
under §
112.08(N) above and otherwise meets the criteria established at M.S. § 340A.24,
as it may be amended from time to time. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be
limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the city.
Malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the
applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores. All malt liquor
sold under this license shall be packaged in the manner required by M.S. §
340A.285 as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license may
not exceed 500 barrels per year. If a brewer licensed under this section
possesses a license under §
112.08(N) above, the brewer's total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not
exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than
750 barrels. Brewer off-sale malt liquor licenses may also be issued, with
approval of the Commissioner, to a holder of a brewer’s license under M.S. §
340A.301, subd. 6(c), (i) or (j) and meeting the criteria established by M.S. §
340A.28 may be amended from time to time. The amount of malt liquor sold at
off-sale may not exceed 750 barrels annually. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be
limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the
jurisdiction in which the brewer is located, and the malt liquor sold off-sale
must be removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time
at exclusive liquor stores. Packaging of malt liquor for off-sale under this
license must comply with M.S. § 340A.285.
   (O)   Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued,
with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, to brewers who
manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year for the on-sale
of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the brewer.
   (P)   A brewer taproom license may be issued to the holder of a brewer’s
license under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (i) or (j) as it may be amended from
time to time. A brewer’s taproom license authorizes on-sale of malt liquor
produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one
brewery location. A brewer may have only one taproom license and may not have
an ownership interest in a brewer licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(d) as
it may be amended from time to time. A brewer taproom license may not be issued
to a brewer that brews more than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor annually or a
winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of wine annually. Within ten
days of issuing a brewer taproom license the city will inform the Commissioner
of Public Safety of the licensee’s name, address, trade name and the effective
date and expiration date of the license. The city will inform the Commissioner
of Public Safety of a license transfer, cancellation, suspension, or revocation
during the license period.
   (Q)   A cocktail room license may be issued to the holder of a state
microdistillery license if at least 50% of the annual production of the
licensee is processed and distilled on premises. A microdistillery cocktail
room license authorizes on-sale of distilled liquor produced by the distiller
for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one distillery location owned
by the distiller. The holder of a microdistillery cocktail room license may
also hold a license to operate a restaurant at the distillery. No more than one
cocktail room license may be issued to any distiller and a microdistillery
cocktail room license may not be issued to any person having an ownership
interest in a distillery licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(a). No single
entity may hold both a microdistillery cocktail room and taproom license and a
microdistillery cocktail room and taproom license may not be co-located. Within
ten days of the issuance of a microdistillery cocktail room license, the city
shall inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of the licensee’s name and
address and trade name, and the effective date and expiration date of the
license. The city shall also inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of a
microdistillery cocktail room license transfer, cancellation, suspension, or
revocation during the license period.
   (R)   A microdistillery off-sale license may be issued to the holder of a
state microdistillery license if at least 50% of the annual production of the
licensee is processed and distilled on premises. A microdistillery off-sale
license authorizes off-sale of one 375-milliliter bottle per customer per day
of product manufactured on-site provided the product is also available for
distribution to wholesalers.
   (S)   A microdistillery temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license may be
issued to the holder of a state microdistillery license. A microdistillery
temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license authorizes on-sale of
intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the city sponsored
by the microdistillery.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.09 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a
liquor license.
   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time in the ordinance
establishing fees and charges the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is
authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the
license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws
and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing
mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees
at least 30 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year may be prorated on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is
filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only
if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (F)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction in
their annual license fee by the amount specified in M.S. § 340A.408 if at the
time of initial application or renewal they:
      (1)   Agree to have a private vendor approved by the city train all
employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to
the sale alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the responsibilities
of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
      (2)   Post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons
appearing to be 30 years old or less;
      (3)   Establish a written cash award and incentive program to award
employees who catch underage drinkers and a written penalty program to punish
employees in the event of a failed compliance check;
      (4)   Failure to abide by the provisions of this section may result in
suspension of the license until the conditions of the fee reduction are met and
may result in suspension and/or revocation of the license pursuant to §
112.21.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.10 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application
for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has
a right to a license under this chapter.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.11 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of
the applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to the applicant’s
character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant
is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that
business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from
time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall
be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also
contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified
and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an
application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under
this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility
as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with
regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public
Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be
licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times
effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the
license.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.12 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may
not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.13 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
   At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision
whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the
Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.14 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval
of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a
transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval
is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license
shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the
provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.15 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not
investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the hearing, the Council shall in
its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license shall become
effective until the proof of financial security has been approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.16 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises
described in the application.
   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued
within the city to any one person.
   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other
financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for a license under state law.
   (E)   No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or church.
The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the church or school to
the closest side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to be
sold.
   (F)   No license shall be issued for premises located within the areas
restricted against commercial use by the zoning code of the city or other
proceedings or legal processes regularly had for that purpose; and no license
shall be issued contrary to the provisions of the chapter or ordinances of the
city or general laws of the State of Minnsota restricting areas within
intoxicating liquor may be sold.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.17 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license
specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition
is met.
   (A)   (1)   All license owners/managers are required to annually attend a
qualified and city accepted alcohol training/education classes for the
permitted establishment. A certificate of completion of the class shall be
presented to the city upon completion of this class prior to the issuance and/
or renewal of a license.
      (2)   It is recommended that the owners/managers of the liquor
establishment provide and have each server of alcohol, for its establishment,
attend classes annually.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally
with the employee.
   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city
employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance
checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee
during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant.
   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and
of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
   (F)   Failure by an off-sale intoxicating liquor license who has received a
fee reduction pursuant to §
112.09(F) of this chapter to abide with the provisions of §
112.09(F).
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.18 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City Council
may, by resolution or chapter, provide for more restrictive hours than state
law allows.
   (B)   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale licensed
premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (C)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container
containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon any table,
bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than 30 minutes
after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (D)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on
the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale
can legally occur.
   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license.
   (F)   No licensee may sell intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on-sale
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. unless the licensee has obtained a
permit from the Commissioner. Application for the permit must be on a form the
Commissioner prescribes. Permits are effective for one year from the date of
issuance. Fees are established by M.S. § 304A.504 as it’s amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.19 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are
sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed
as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host or dishwashing
services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose
building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt
liquor are sold at retail on sale.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment
except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor
is not sold.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.20 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of
business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it
may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and
no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
§ 112.21 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or
revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter relating
to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act,
M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may
act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of
Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation
which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules
promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time:
      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale
of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of
intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt liquor, or
violation of §
112.04, the license shall be revoked.
      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under
§
112.21(A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute,
rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as follows:
         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year period, at least
one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed.
         (b)   For a second violation within any three-year period, at least
three consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year period, at least
seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license
shall be revoked.
      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which the license
will be suspended.
   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an
immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state
law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a
current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing
to the city, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within 30 days. Any
suspension under this §
112.21(B) shall continue until the Council determines that the financial
responsibility requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met.
   (D)   The provisions of §
112.99 pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in
lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this section or M.S. Ch. 340A
as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that
chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each
violation of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this
chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in order
for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative
Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time,
is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a
hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any person
who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for suspension or
revocation of the license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive
civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the
license is revoked:
      (1)   For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.
      (2)   For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.
      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year
period, $2,000.
   (C)   The term “violation” as used in §
112.21 includes any and all violations of the provisions in this chapter, or of
M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated
under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number of
violations shall be determined on the basis of the history of violations for
the preceding three-year period. Revocation shall occur within 60 days
following a violation for which revocation is imposed.
(Ord. 112, passed 3-8-22)
CHAPTER 113: LICENSES
Section
Moving Structures
   
113.01   Permit and license required
    
113.02   Exception
   
113.03   Contents of application
   
113.04   Additional expenses and deposit
   
113.05   Obstruction prohibited
   
113.06   Damaging of property
Residential, Commercial and Industrial Refuse Collection Licenses
   
113.15   Refuse collectors regulations
Massage Therapist and Massage Therapy License
   
113.25   Definitions
   
113.26   Licensed required
   
113.27   Exceptions to licensure
   
113.28   License ineligibility
   
113.29   Investigation, granting and denial of license application
   
113.30   Restrictions and regulations
   
113.31   Requirements
   
113.32   License suspension, revocation and denial
   
113.33   Rights of appeal
   
113.34   Hearing; hearing officer
   
113.35   Notice of appeal
   
113.36   Notice of hearing
 
   
113.99   Penalty
MOVING STRUCTURES
§ 113.01 PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall act as a building mover, as that phrase is defined in M.S. §
221.81, subd. 1a, as it may be amended from time to time, “...on the public
streets under the control of the city unless such person shall be licensed to
do so by the Minnesota Commissioner of Transportation, and has obtained a
permit as required by this chapter.”
(Ord. 04-02, passed 6-23-04)
§ 113.02 EXCEPTION.
   No permit is required for the moving of a structure of a size not more than
16 feet wide and/or 20 feet long and/or is not more than 15 feet high when
situated on a truck or moving carriage.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 6-23-04)
§ 113.03 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   No building shall be moved by a person until that person has obtained a
permit from the city, upon written application therefor, in which shall be
stated the present location of the building, the route of the moving, and the
proposed new location of the same. The City Administrator is authorized to
approve after consultation with the City Public Works Director. The permit fee
shall be $100. If said proposed new location complies with the zoning code, the
permit shall be granted. The building shall then be moved along such route and
at such time as may be specified by the Police Department or its
representative. It shall be a specific condition of each permit that the holder
thereof agrees to reimburse the city its actual cost, including all labor,
including pre-inspection and surveillance, overhead and materials of any
required temporary removal and replacement, relocation or damage to or
destruction of, public property or facilities, occasioned by the building’s
move.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 6-23-04)
§ 113.04 ADDITIONAL EXPENSES AND DEPOSIT.
   At the time the permit is granted, the city requires as a condition of
issuance that the applicant post a cash deposit with the city to cover the
estimated costs to be incurred by the city as a result of the building’s move.
Those costs may include the estimated costs of labor, overhead, and materials,
which will be expended by the city to facilitate the temporary removal and
replacement, relocation, or damage to, or destruction of, public property or
facilities, occasioned by the building’s move.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 6-23-04)
§ 113.05 OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
   No building in process of removal shall be allowed to stand still in or on
any public street or public ground in the city for more than one hour without
written consent of the public services department; nor shall it be allowed
unnecessarily to obstruct any railway or telephone, telecommunications,
telegraph, or electric line, for any time whatever, without consent from an
authorized agent of such railway or other line.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 6-23-04)
§ 113.06 DAMAGING OF PROPERTY.
   No person, in the process of moving any building shall break, injure or
remove any telephone, telecommunications, telegraph, electric line or pole, nor
in any way injure any shade tree or other private property, without permission
from the owner thereof, nor anchor in any manner to any manhole or inlet of any
sewer in the city.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 6-23-04)
RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL REFUSE COLLECTION LICENSES
§ 113.15 REFUSE COLLECTORS REGULATIONS.
   (A)   License required; limitation on number of licenses issued.
      (1)   Any commercial hauler engaged in the business or providing
collection and transportation services for residential, commercial or
industrial refuse in Byron must obtain a license from the city prior to
initiating services and must maintain the licenses at all times in providing
said services.
      (2)   Effective June 1, 2019, the city limits the number of licenses to
two. In issuing licenses those persons or companies currently licensed may
continue to receive a license as long as they maintain the same ownership and
business structure until such time as their license is voluntary terminated or
terminated pursuant to this section. Licenses cannot be transferred as a part
of a business sale or merger.
      (3)   A licensee shall provide written notice to the city 30 days prior
to terminating collection and transportation services which notices shall act
to then eliminate an outstanding license until such time as there are two
licensed entities. In the situation that the number of licenses available falls
to two, the two licenses will be only available to two individual parent
companies or owners.
   (B)   Licensing procedure. 
      (1)   Any person/company seeking a license to collect refuse in the city
may apply on a form provided by City Hall. The initial application and
subsequent applications for a license shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The name, address, phone number and fax number of the applicant
and business owner(s);
         (b)   A description of each vehicle to be used for collection,
including the vehicle identification and license numbers, vehicle make and
model and capacity of the body;
         (c)   The location and address describing the place where the
applicant is storing his or her equipment/vehicle(s);
         (d)   Annual DOT certification documentation; and
         (e)   Other information which the city may reasonably require from
time to time.
      (2)   Failure to provide information requested may result in a trash
hauler’s license not being issued or renewed.
   (C)   Insurance.
      (1)   Applicants for licenses or renewal must submit evidence of
insurance for personal injury and property damage liability and indemnity
coverage with coverage in the amount of at least $1,000,000 for general
liability and at least $500,000 for automobile liability.
      (2)   Failure to provide information requested may result in a trash
hauler’s license not being issued or renewed.
   (D)   Registration and license period and transfers.
      (1)   Registration and license period.  Each registration and license
granted by the city under this section shall expire on January 31, annually.
      (2)   Registration and license renewal. Application to renew licenses
shall be presented to City Hall no later than 30 days prior to license
expiration date, or sooner, as determined by the city.
      (3)   Availability. If at any time the number of licenses reaches the
maximum of five haulers that use smaller collection vehicles will be given
first preference for licenses.
      (4)   License requirement. It shall be unlawful for any business or
company to engage in the business of collecting mixed municipal solid waste,
recyclable material or construction debris without having first secured from
the city a license to do so.
      (5)   Non-assignability of license. Licenses issued by the city may not
be assigned or transferred in whole or in part by the hauler unless the City
Council, in its sole discretion, gives its approval prior to any proposed
assignment or transfer. Any attempt to assign or transfer the license in whole
or in part without prior approval of the City Council shall be grounds for
termination of the license.
      (6)   Revocation. A hauler’s license may be terminated by the city for
any violation of city ordinances, Olmsted County ordinances, state or federal
laws. The city may also terminate the license for unsatisfactory performance by
the hauler. The licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any license fee
upon revocation or voluntary ceasing to carry on the licensed activity.
   (E)   License and registration fees.
      (1)   Establishment. Fees are set annually by the City Council in the fee
schedule.
      (2)   Payment. Fees shall be paid with the initial application and
annually thereafter by the applicant as a condition for license renewal. Non-
payment shall be grounds for non renewal of the license.
   (F)   Hauler Requirements.
      (1)   Hauler shall be required to have water-tight, packer-type vehicles
in good condition to prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid cargo, that the
vehicle be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible and not
allowed to stand in any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect
garbage or refuse.
      (2)   No collection of garbage, refuse or recyclables shall be made
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday,
except if the refuse hauler is attempting to make up a day lost due to a
holiday.
   (G)   Penalty. Any owner or owners, firm, partnership or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished as provided in §
10.99 of the City Code. Each date that a violation is permitted to exist
constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 9-23-09; Am. Ord. 19-06, passed 5-14-19)
MASSAGE THERAPIST AND MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE
§ 113.25 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ACCREDITED INSTITUTION. An educational institution holding accredited status
from a regional accrediting agency presently or at the time the applicant
obtained his diploma or certificate of graduation. The term ACCREDITED
INSTITUTION also includes a state-licensed institution or state-approved
massage apprenticeship program.
   APPLICANT. Any person filing an application with the City Clerk seeking a
massage therapist or massage therapy business license pursuant to this
subchapter.
   CLEAN. The absence of dirt, rubbish, garbage and other offensive, unsightly
or extraneous matter.
   IN GOOD REPAIR. Free of corrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, pitting, excessive
wear and tear, leaks, obstructions and similar defects.
   ISSUING AUTHORITY. The City Clerk or designee.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The premises described in the application for a massage
therapy business license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   LICENSEE. Any person issued a massage therapist or massage therapy business
license pursuant to this chapter.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. A person who practices or provides therapeutic massage to
another for a fee or other consideration paid either directly or indirectly. A
MASSAGE THERAPIST does not include a medical doctor, chiropractor, osteopath,
podiatrist, licensed nurse, physical therapist, athletic doctor or trainer, or
beautician (cosmetologist) or barber who confines their treatment to the scalp,
face and neck or the lower leg and feet in the case of a pedicure.
   MASSAGE THERAPY or THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE. The scientific health care or health
maintenance techniques or procedures carried out by a massage therapist
involving the rubbing, tapping, pounding or kneading of a person's skin,
muscles, and tissues or the stretching of body limbs (e.g., Thai massage) for
the purpose of easing mental and physical tension, the breaking up of fatty
tissues, relaxing muscles, or alleviating muscle spasms, pain relief, aiding in
the healing process, promoting health and wellness, and the improvement of
circulation through the body.
   MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS. Any enterprise, establishment, or operation,
whether under the control of an individual or legal entity, providing or
offering to provide massage therapy within the city for a fee or other
consideration paid either directly or indirectly, that: (A) Has one or more
massage therapists, including the owner, employed or contracted to provide
massage therapy for the MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS; and (B) Is located in a fixed
location in a zoning district which permits massage therapy. A MASSAGE THERAPY
BUSINESS does not include a health or medical facility, office or clinic
operated by a state-licensed medical professional, or any health or medical-
related business operated by a state licensed medical professional, which
provides therapeutic massage to its patients.
   SANITIZE. To reduce or eliminate pathogenic agents (such as bacteria) on a
surface with a cleaner using bleach, peroxides, isopropyl alcohol, iodine or
chlorine as an active ingredient.
   STATE-LICENSED INSTITUTION. A private educational institution
(apprenticeship, collegiate or career school) holding licensed status,
registration and financial aid eligibility approved through the state in which
it is located, presently or at the time the applicant obtained their diploma or
certificate of graduation.
   STUDENT OF MASSAGE THERAPY. A person who is enrolled in and attends classes
at an accredited institution or at a state-licensed institution.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.26 LICENSED REQUIRED.
   (A)   Massage therapist license. No person may act as a massage therapist
within the city without a license issued by the city.
   (B)   Massage therapy business license. No person may operate a massage
therapy business within the city without a license issued by the city.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.27 EXCEPTIONS TO LICENSURE.
   (A)   Does not apply to, and no massage therapist license shall be required
of, a student of massage therapy provided:
      (1)   The massage therapy is provided during and as part of a course or
clinical component of an accredited program or course work; and
      (2)   The massage therapy student is supervised by an instructor or
participating in a school-sponsored externship or internship while providing or
performing massage therapy. A notice, advising the public that the person who
may provide massage therapy is a student of massage therapy and is not licensed
by the city, shall be posted in a conspicuous location in a public area of the
school.
   (B)   No massage therapist license is required if the massage therapist is
hired or employed by, and exclusively provides treatment on the premises of
persons duly licensed by the state to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy,
chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry, or professional practices licensed
under M.S. Ch. 147 or 148 or registered by the state and regulated by a
governmental body with a board where concerns and complaints could be directed,
provided the massage is administered in the regular course of the medical
business and not provided as part of a separate and distinct massage business.
   (C)   Does not apply to, and no massage therapy business license shall be
required for:
      (1)   A health care office, clinic or facility owned by a municipality,
the state or its agencies or licensed by the state;
      (2)   A business or entity owned and operated by a state-licensed medical
professional through whom therapeutic massage is provided to its patients as a
secondary health care treatment;
      (3)   Hospitals, hospice facilities, nursing homes or other approved
institutions established for the hospitalization or care of human beings that
are duly licensed under M.S. Ch. 144;
      (4)   A health or sport establishment allowing persons of all ages on the
premises and which meet the following criteria:
         (a)   The primary purpose of the establishment is health and fitness,
and the massage therapy is secondary;
         (b)   No more than 20% of the establishment revenue is derived from
massage therapy; and
         (c)   Massage therapy does not occupy more than 10% of the
establishment's public floor space; or
      (5)   An accredited institution which provides an accredited program of
study or course work in massage therapy or therapeutic massage provided:
         (a)   The massage therapy is provided during and as part of a course
or clinical component of the school's program or course work; and
         (b)   The massage therapy student is supervised by an instructor or
participating in a school-sponsored externship or internship while providing or
performing massage therapy.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal licensing of certain massage therapists prohibited, see M.S. §
471.709
§ 113.28 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   An application for a massage therapy business license can be denied
upon any of the following grounds:
      (1)   The proposed fixed location or premises in which the massage
therapy business proposes to provide massage therapy services is not located in
a properly zoned district in which a business, or medical or health care
facilities or uses are permitted by the zoning ordinances of this code;
      (2)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a 5% financial interest
in the proposed massage therapy business or the appointed on-site manager or
agent of the applicant has, within ten years of the date of application, a
conviction for, or was charged with, but convicted of a lesser charge of, a
crime directly related to the massage therapy business license. These crimes
shall include, but not be limited to, any of the crimes listed in M.S. §§
146A.08, subd. 1(b), 609.321, 609.322, 609.324, 609.3243, 609.33, or a felony
crime involving M.S. Ch. 152, or a crime committed in another state under a
statute in conformity with any of the statutes listed above. The Council must
consider evidence of rehabilitation as provided in M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3;
      (3)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a 5% financial interest
in the proposed massage therapy business had a massage therapist or massage
therapy business-related license in this or another jurisdiction that was
suspended or revoked within ten years preceding the date of application;
      (4)   The application was incomplete or failed to comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter;
      (5)   The applicant provided false or misleading information on the
application form, or has failed to pay the applicable fees;
      (6)   The proposed licensed premises is the subject of delinquent or
unpaid taxes, assessments, or other financial claims by the state, county or
city and the applicant has any interest or legal duty to pay those taxes,
assessments or claims;
      (7)   The applicant has been denied a license under this chapter within
the previous 12 months.
      (8)   Is not the real party of interest for the establishment.
      (9)   The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect as
required by this section.
   (B)   An application for a massage therapist license can be denied upon any
of the following grounds:
      (1)   The applicant has, within ten years of the date of application, a
conviction for, or was charged with, but convicted of a lesser charge of, a
crime directly related to the massage therapy license. These crimes shall
include, but not be limited to, any of the crimes listed at M.S. §§ 146A.08,
subd. 1(b), 609.321, 609.322, 609.324, 609.3243, 609.33, 609.52, 609.527,
609.528, 609.582, 609.74, or 617.23 or a felony crime involving M.S. Ch. 152,
or a crime committed in another state under a statute in conformity with any of
the statutes listed above. The Council must consider evidence of rehabilitation
as provided in M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3;
      (2)   The applicant had a massage therapist or massage therapy business-
related license in this or another jurisdiction that was suspended or revoked
within ten years preceding the date of application;
      (3)   The applicant is not 18 years of age or older;
      (4)   The applicant is not a United States citizen and is not legally
permitted to be in the United States;
      (5)   The application was incomplete or failed to comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter;
      (6)   The applicant provided false or misleading information on the
application form, or has failed to pay the applicable fees;
      (7)   The applicant has been denied a license under this chapter within
the previous 12 months.
      (8)   The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect as
required by this section.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.29 INVESTIGATION, GRANTING AND DENIAL OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every license application must be reviewed by the Olmsted County
Sheriff's Department, planning department and such other entities as the City
Clerk deems necessary, to determine whether the application satisfies all
applicable legal requirements. The Sheriff's Department must conduct a review
of the applicant's criminal history. If warranted by the Sheriff's Department's
review of the applicant's criminal history, the Department may require the
applicant to provide fingerprints or a photograph.
   (B)   The license application, along with any referral department comments,
shall be delivered to the Common Council for its review and action. The Council
must approve a license application only if it satisfies all of the requirements
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.30 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A massage therapy business license may only employ a massage therapist
licensed under this subchapter to perform massage therapy. A massage therapy
business license allows the licensee to operate the business only at the
licensed premises except as otherwise provided in this division. A massage
therapist employed or contracted by a massage therapy business licensee may
provide massage therapy:
      (1)   To a client at the client's residence;
      (2)   In a long-term or short-term care facility, such as a hospital,
nursing home, or convalescence facility;
      (3)   In connection with a special event or function whereby the massage
therapist provides massage therapy to attendees of the event or function;
      (4)   At a place of business (provided the license designates off-site
therapeutic massage); or
      (5)   In a hotel/motel room (provided the license designates off-site
therapeutic massage).
   (B)   The licensed premises shall, during operating hours, be open to
inspection by any building, health, zoning, code, licensing or law enforcement
officer to determine whether the licensed premises are in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances. As a condition to being issued a massage
therapy business license, the licensee consents to these inspections by these
officers. It is unlawful for any licensee, its agent, or employee to hinder or
prevent these inspections by these officers. Those performing the inspections
shall make every reasonable effort to honor and protect the privacy of the
client.
   (C)   The act of any employee of the licensee is deemed to be the act of the
licensee. The licensee shall be responsible for all acts and conduct
attributable to and in connection with massage therapy services provided by the
licensee or occurring on the licensed premises; however, the licensee's good
faith actions taken in the operation of the massage therapy business and in
response to the acts or conduct of licensee's employees shall be considered in
determining whether the licensee has acted responsibly.
   (D)   The person receiving massage therapy shall at all times have their
anus, intergluteal cleft (buttocks crease) and genitals covered with clothing
or properly draped with nontransparent material. The person who is receiving
massage therapy of the breast or buttocks (gluteal) shall have the breast or
buttock (gluteal muscle) that is not then immediately receiving massage therapy
properly covered and draped with nontransparent material.
   (E)   No alcoholic beverage, narcotic drug or controlled substance, as such
terms are defined by state law or this code, shall be used, ingested or present
during any massage therapy session.
   (F)   The licensee shall not knowingly bring or possess or knowingly allow
another person to bring or possess, a contraceptive device or obscene material.
   (G)   Only a massage therapy licensee shall practice or provide therapeutic
massage for:
      (1)   A massage therapy business licensee;
      (2)   A health care office, clinic or facility owned by a municipality,
the state or its agencies or licensed by the state;
      (3)   A business or entity owned and operated by a state-licensed medical
professional through whom therapeutic massage is provided to its patients as a
secondary health care treatment;
      (4)   Hospitals, hospice facilities, nursing homes or other approved
institutions established for the hospitalization or care of human beings that
are duly licensed under M.S. Ch. 144;
      (5)   A health or sport establishment allowing persons of all ages on the
premises;
      (6)   Athletic directors and trainers who perform massage therapy in the
course of any athletic program or event which is sponsored by a local unit of
government or an educational institution that complies with all applicable
state and local regulations; or
      (7)   Nonprofit corporations or associations duly organized under the
laws of the state for civic, fraternal, social or business purposes.
   (H)   The licensee, its agents and employees must comply with all applicable
ordinances, regulations and statutes.
   (I)   A massage therapist licensee shall not provide any massage therapy,
and the licensed premises shall not be open between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. of any day, except for those applying for and receiving an off-site
designation on their license.
   (J)   If the licensee is a partnership or corporation, the licensee must
designate a person to be manager and responsible for the conduct and operation
of the licensee's business establishment. Such person shall remain responsible
for the conduct of the business until another suitable person has been
designated in writing by the licensee. The licensee shall promptly notify the
Sheriff's Department in writing of any such change indicating the name, address
and telephone number of the new manager, and the effective date of the change
in management.
   (K)   A massage therapist licensee shall have the city-issued license in
their possession or posted in a conspicuous location while providing massage
therapy. A massage therapy business shall conspicuously post its city-issued
license upon the licensed premises where it is easily viewable by the general
public.
   (L)   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred. A massage
business therapy license shall terminate upon any change in the licensee's
officers or ownership interests unless the change is approved by the Common
Council, in which case, the license shall continue in force until the end of
the license term.
   (M)   The licensee must have obtained, from an insurance company authorized
to do business in the state, a general liability insurance policy providing
minimum coverage of $300,000 combined single limit per occurrence as well as
workers' compensation insurance as may be required by state law. The licensee
must provide a certificate of insurance evidencing the insurance coverage
required by this divison. No cancellation of any insurance policy will be valid
except upon 30 calendar days prior written notice to the city. Failure to keep
in full force and effect the insurance is grounds for suspension or revocation
of the license.
   (N)   A massage therapist shall be employed by, affiliated with, or own a
massage therapy business licensed by the city, unless a person or place is
specifically exempted from obtaining a therapeutic massage business license as
outlined in §
113.27.
   (O)   All licensees shall comply with all health and sanitation laws and
ordinances.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.31 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Toilet room requirements. Restrooms used in connection with the
massage therapy business shall be provided with mechanical ventilation with two
cubic feet per minute per square foot of floor area, a minimum of 20-foot
candles of illumination, a handwashing sink equipped with hot and cold running
water under pressure, single-use paper towels or other approved drying device
and a soap dispenser.
   (B)   Paper/linen requirements. A massage therapy business shall provide
single-service disposal paper or clean linens to cover the massage therapy
equipment on which the patron receives the massage; or in the alternative, if
the massage therapy equipment on which the patron receives the massage is made
of material impervious to moisture, such massage therapy table or, chair shall
be properly sanitized after each massage.
   (C)   Washing of hands required. The massage therapist shall wash his or her
hands and arms with water and soap, anti-bacterial scrubs, alcohol, or other
disinfectants prior to and following each massage service performed.
   (D)   Equipment. Massage tables, chairs, and other furniture on which
massages are performed must have surfaces that can be readily disinfected after
each massage. These surfaces must be disinfected following each massage
performed.
   (E)   Habitation. Massage businesses shall not contain nor allow the use by
any person of sleeping quarters or living spaces of any kind intended for
habitation, including but not limited to beds, cots, or mattresses. Futons as
used in the course of massage therapy sessions are permitted. Home-based
massage businesses shall not contain nor allow the use by any person of
sleeping quarters or living spaces of any kind intended for habitation,
including but not limited to beds, cots, or mattresses in any area where
massage is performed.
   (F)   Illness. A massage therapy business must be able to describe or
provide an employee illness policy.
   (G)   Bodily fluids. Surfaces must be clean and routinely disinfected.
Evidence of bodily fluids (blood, saliva, semen, sweat, etc.) will be treated
as a failure of sanitary practices and can be grounds for administrative
actions such as citation, probation, suspension or revocation.
   (H)   Compliance with Building and Fire Codes. Massage business premises
shall comply with all applicable fire and building code requirements.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.32 LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND DENIAL.
   (A)   Any license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter may be suspended, revoked or placed on probation or, in connection with
the application or renewal of a license, denied upon a finding that the
licensee:
      (1)   Failed to comply with any applicable state law, city ordinance or
building, safety or health regulation relating to a massage therapist or
massage therapy business;
      (2)   Was arrested for a crime directly related to massage therapy or
massage therapy business. These crimes shall include, but not be limited to,
any of the crimes listed at M.S. §§ 146A.08, subd. 1(b), 609.321, 609.322,
609.324, 609.3243, 609.33, or 617.23 or a felony crime involving M.S. Ch. 152,
or a crime committed in another state under a statute in conformity with any of
the statutes listed above;
      (3)   Employed or contracted with a person to perform massage therapy who
is required to be licensed by this subchapter, but who was not so licensed at
the time of employment or contract;
      (4)   Violated or did not meet any relevant provision of this subchapter;
      (5)   Failed to comply with any condition set forth in the license, set
forth in a Council action regarding the license, set forth by the hearing
officers or set forth as part of the placement of the license on probation;
      (6)   Allowed the licensed business to be operated or maintained in a way
that unreasonably annoyed, endangered or injured the safety, health, morals,
comfort or repose of any considerable number of members of the public; or
      (7)   Provided false or misleading information on the application.
      (8)   In the event of licensees owning multiple massage business
locations, any license revocation shall apply to all massage establishment
locations within the City of Byron.
   (B)   The filing of a criminal complaint against the licensee alleging a
violation of M.S. §§ 609.321, 609.322, 609.324, 609.3242 or 609.3243 shall
result in the immediate temporary suspension of the licensee's license. The
temporary suspension shall terminate at the time the complaint is dismissed,
the licensee is acquitted, or the criminal charge is otherwise resolved, and
for which all rights to appeal to a state court have been exhausted or waived.
   (C)   The city may issue a temporary suspension of a massage business
license, if the licensee, or any person working on behalf of the licensee, is
determined to be conducting business in an unlawful manner, or in any manner
that constitutes a substantial hazard to the health, safety, or general welfare
of the public. A written notice of the grounds for the suspension shall be
delivered to the licensee. The licensee must be given a minimum of 24 hours'
notice to suspend their business. A temporary suspension can last no longer
than 30 days. Longer suspensions must be approved through the hearing process.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.33 RIGHTS OF APPEAL.
   If the city denies, suspends or revokes or chooses to not renew a license,
written notice must be sent to the applicant or owner/licensee setting forth
the alleged grounds for the potential action. To appeal the revocation,
suspension, denial or non-renewal, the applicant or owner/licensee must file a
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 business days after the
city's determination. If the notice of appeal is not filed within 14 business
days, the right of appeal is terminated. A timely appeal from a suspension or
revocation shall not stay the suspension or revocation.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.34 HEARING; HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The City Clerk, or designee, the City Attorney, or designee, a member
of the public health department or designee, and the one member of the Council
shall act as the hearing officers. The city may also designate an external
individual to act in this capacity. The hearing officers shall have authority
to hear appeals from the following actions of the city:
      (1)   The denial or refusal to renew a license.
      (2)   The placing of a license on probation.
      (3)   The revocation of a license.
      (4)   The suspension of a license.
   (B)   Where an external individual is designated to act as a hearing officer
the Administrative Rules of Chapter 1-2-6 shall apply to the process.
   (C)   The hearing officers may receive all evidence and hear witnesses on
matters applicable to the appeal. The hearing officers shall afford the
registrant, permittee, business, or applicant making the appeal an opportunity
to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and be heard. The hearing
officers may affirm, modify, or reverse the city's action by a majority vote
rendered in writing.
   (D)   Any person or business aggrieved by the hearing officers'
determination may appeal to the Common Council. An appeal to the Common Council
shall be taken within 14 business days from the hearing officer's decision by
filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The matter shall be placed on
the City Council's scheduled meeting agenda for a public hearing. The Common
Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the hearing officer's decision. If the
notice of appeal is not filed within 14 business days, the right to appeal is
terminated.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.35 NOTICE OF APPEAL.
   All notices shall be given either by personal service, mail or electronic
mail to the address for service of notices as shown on the application form.
Service by mail shall be deemed complete on the date of certified receipt.
Failure of the applicant, licensee, or owner to receive such notice shall not
invalidate the action taken pursuant to such notice.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.36 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Notice of any hearing involving the registrant, permittee, or the applicant
shall be given by the City Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the
purpose, time, and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the
registrant, permittee, business, or applicant at least seven business days
prior to the date set for the hearing or shall be personally served at least
three business days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of §§
113.25–
113.36 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-11-2025)
CHAPTER 114: CRIME FREE RENTAL HOUSING
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Scope
   
114.03   Registration certificate required
   
114.04   Application for registration certificate
   
114.05   Application forms
   
114.06   Issuance of registration certificate
   
114.07   Notice of violation; rejection of application
   
114.08   Failure to register
   
114.09   Certificate of renewal and nontransferability
   
114.10   Suspension or revocation of registration certificate
   
114.11   Fees
   
114.12   Definitions
   
114.13   Conduct on licensed premises
   
114.14   License suspension and revocation
   
114.15   Prospective tenant background investigations
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community at large and the residents of rental dwellings in the
City of Byron and to ensure that rental housing in the city is decent, safe and
sanitary and is so operated and maintained as not to become a nuisance to the
neighborhood or to become an influence that fosters blight and deterioration or
creates a disincentive to reinvestment in the community. The operation of
rental residential properties is a business enterprise that entails certain
responsibilities. Owners and operators are responsible to take such reasonable
steps as are necessary to ensure that the citizens of the city who occupy such
units may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of life in
surroundings that are: safe, secure and sanitary; free of noise, nuisances and
annoyances; and free from unreasonable fears about safety of persons and
security of property.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.02 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings or
portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be let for human habitation.
This chapter does not apply to Minnesota Department of Health licensed rest
homes; convalescent care facilities; licensed group homes; nursing homes;
hotels; motels; as defined and governed by M.S. Chs. 515, 515A and 515B.
   (B)   With respect to rental disputes, and except as otherwise specifically
provided by the terms of this chapter, it is not the intention of the City
Council to intrude upon the fair and accepted contractual relationship between
tenant and landlord. The City Council does not intend to intervene as an
advocate of either party, nor to act an arbiter, nor to be receptive to
complaints from tenant or landlord which are not specifically and clearly
relevant to the provisions of this chapter. In the absence of such relevancy
with regard to rental disputes, it is intended that the contracting parties
exercise such legal sanctions as are available to them without the intervention
of city government. In enacting this chapter neither is it the intention of the
City Council to interfere or permit interference with legal rights to personal
privacy.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.03 REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No owner shall allow another person to occupy, nor shall any person
let to another for occupancy, any dwelling, or any apartment or rooming unit in
any dwelling, without first obtaining a registration certificate as provided in
this chapter or at such time that the registration certificate, or the right to
receive such a registration certificate, is suspended or revoked. Any
registration certificate obtained pursuant to this section shall be issued in
the name of the owner. In the case of a multiple unit dwelling, a registration
certificate issued pursuant to this section includes and applies to both the
entire dwelling as well as each individual rental unit within the dwelling. Any
suspension or revocation of the registration certificate or the right to
receive a registration certificate may involve the entire dwelling or any
individual unit or units within the dwelling.
   (B)   The occupancy or rental of any dwelling, or any apartment, or rooming
unit in any dwelling for which a registration certificate is required, need not
be interrupted or suspended for lack of a registration certificate if the same
is due to the inability of the city/City Administrator to process the
application within ten working days.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04 APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   An application for a registration certification shall be filed by the owner/
manager with the city/City Administrator and reviewed by the Planning
Coordinator/Crime Free Rental Housing Committee. An application for any
dwelling to be converted to a use which would require a registration
certificate shall be made and filed with the Planning Coordinator at least 30
days prior to such conversion.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.05 APPLICATION FORMS.
   (A)   Forms of application for registration certificates shall be supplied
by the City/City Administrator and will be available at City Hall.
   (B)   Each application for registration certificate shall contain the
following information.
      (1)   (a)   Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
dwelling. If the owner is a partnership, the name of the partnership, address
and telephone number of the managing partner. If the owner is a corporation,
the name and address of the corporation, and the name, address and telephone
number of the chief operating officer.
         (b)   If the dwelling is being sold on a contract for deed, the name
and address of the contract vendee. Where the word “owner” is used in any part
of the city housing codes, it shall include all persons as outlined in this
section.
      (2)   Name, address and telephone number of any agent appointed by the
owner to accept service of process and to receive or give receipt for notices.
      (3)   Name, address and telephone number of any operator or agent
actively involved in maintenance or management of the dwelling.
      (4)   Legal street address of dwelling.
      (5)   Complete details of the number and kind of units offered for rent,
classified as to the type of unit on the application, and the facilities
incorporated in such rental units.
      (6)   Any person making the application for a rental registration
certificate must provide proof of identification by the use of a driver’s
license, state issued identification card, military identification card or such
other identification as is acceptable to the city/City Administrator. The
identification provided must set forth the full name and date of birth of the
person making the application.
      (7)   An acknowledgment that the applicant has reviewed and understands
the provisions of this chapter, intends to abide by the provisions and will
include reference to this chapter in any written lease used in the renting of
the property.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.06 ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   Whenever the investigation of an application indicated that the dwellings,
apartments, or rooming units offered for rent comply with all provisions of
this code, including any provisions of the zoning ordinances, the city/City
Administrator shall issue a registration certificate within ten working days.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.07 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REJECTION OF APPLICATION.
   Whenever the investigation of an application for registration certificate
indicated that the dwelling, apartment, or rooming unit does not comply with
the provisions of this code including any provisions of the zoning ordinances,
the city/City Administrator shall return the application to the applicant
stating the reasons for the rejection of the application.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.08 FAILURE TO REGISTER.
   Every person required to register a dwelling, apartment, or rooming unit
offered for rent under the provisions of this chapter and who fails to do so,
or who allows the property to be occupied when the registration certificate or
right to receive such a registration certificate is revoked or suspended, shall
be guilty of a violation of this code. Each day that a property is rented out
without a valid rental registration certificate on file for that property is a
separate violation. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by up to a $1,000, 90 days in jail or both.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.09 CERTIFICATE OF RENEWAL AND NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   Registration certificates will initially be required on or before
November 1 of each year. All registration certificates shall expire on the
first day of November of the year following its issuance and must be renewed
annually. All information required by §
114.05(B) of this chapter must be submitted at the time of renewal.
   (B)   Every person who transfers title to property registered under this
chapter shall provide the city/City Administrator with the name, address,
telephone number and date of the transfer of title to the new owner within ten
days of the date of such transfer. Within 30 days of the date of such transfer,
the new owner shall apply for a new registration certificate. In the case of an
option contract where the holder of the option is collecting rents and/or is
paying on the mortgage to the property while the option remains unexercised,
the holder of the option shall be deemed to be the owner of the property for
purposes of this section and shall be required to apply for a rental
registration certificate in his or her name. The date the option contract is
created shall be deemed to be the date the holder of the option becomes the
“owner” for purposes of this section.
   (C)   (1)   Registration certificates may not be transferred or assigned
without approval of the city.
      (2)   Restrictions on transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit upon whom a pending
compliance order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose thereof to another person until the provisions of the
compliance order have been complied with, unless such owner shall furnish to
the grantee, lessee, or mortgage a true copy of any notice of violation or
compliance order and shall obtain and possess a receipt of acknowledgment.
Anyone securing an interest in the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit who
has received notice of the existence of a violation or compliance order shall
be bound by the same without further service of notice upon him and shall be
liable to all penalties and procedures provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.10 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Any registration certificate issued by the city pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked upon a finding that the
certificate holder, during the term of the certificate, failed to comply with
any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   A person’s right to apply and receive a registration certificate may
be suspended or revoked upon finding that the applicant has let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, or any apartment or rooming unit in any dwelling,
without first obtaining a registration certificate as required by this chapter
and, during such time, the premises were involved in a disorderly use as
defined in this chapter.
   (C)   Whenever it appears to the Council that adequate grounds may exist for
the suspension or revocation of a registration certificate or the right to
receive a registration certificate, the Council shall by resolution specify the
nature of the alleged grounds and order that a hearing on the matter be held as
provided in this chapter.
   (D)   No such suspension or revocation shall be effective until the license
or permit holder has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing under the
Minnesota Administrative Procedure Act, §§ 14.57 to 14.70.
   (E)   Upon a finding that the registration certificate holder or applicant
has violated this chapter, the Council may invoke any of the sanctions provided
in this chapter.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.11 FEES.
   (A)   In addition to such other fees as may be imposed by this code, a
nonrefundable fee per living unit shall be paid when an application for a
registration certificate or renewal is filed with the city/City Administrator
as required by this chapter. Such fee shall be established annually as part of
the master fee schedule. If an application for renewal is not made prior to the
expiration of the certificate, an additional fee of $2.50 per day shall be
charged for each day thereafter up to 20 days or until the application is
filed, whichever occurs first. The fees set forth above may be adjusted with
the adoption of the City of Byron Fee Schedule.
   (B)   The application fee shall be waived for each year the owner has a
current or valid crime free rental housing certificate for any premises
currently certified in Phase I of the Crime Free Multi-Housing program
conducted by law enforcement agencies certified in Minnesota Crime Prevention
Association (MNCPA). Phase I certification must be renewed every three years.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08; Am. Ord. 2025-09, passed 9-9-25)
§ 114.12 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROPRIATE ACTION. That action which is a reasonable rental property owner
would take based upon the facts and circumstances of each case so as to prevent
a reoccurrence of the disorderly use.
   CRIME FREE MULTI-HOUSING or CRIME FREE MULTI-HOUSING PROGRAM. The program
offered by the sheriff’s/police department and conducted according to
nationally recognized standards.
   DISORDERLY or DISORDERLY USE. That conduct occurring on the “licensed
premises” or “premises” which violates a provision of §
114.13.
   LICENSE. A registration certificate or the right to receive a registration
certificate as required by this chapter of the Byron Code of Ordinances.
   LICENSED PREMISES or PREMISES.  The property owned, operated or managed by a
rental property owner and shall refer to an individual unit within a multi-unit
complex when applicable.
   LIVING UNIT. One room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate
independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, for rent or lease,
and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in
the same structure and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
   RENTAL PROPERTY OWNER. One who holds the license or who is otherwise
obligated to obtain and maintain the license as required by this chapter of the
Byron Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.13 CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   Any rental property owner shall be responsible to take appropriate
action against persons occupying specific units in the licensed premises who
conduct themselves in such a manner as to cause the premises to be disorderly
in violation of the statutes or ordinances listed in this section. For purposes
of this chapter, the term PERSONS OCCUPYING THE PREMISES shall include tenants
and those persons on the licensed premises whose presence the tenant has
invited or to which the tenant has acquiesced. Violations of this section apply
to individual units within buildings or complexes containing multiple units
when the conduct occurs within a unit. Violations of this section by persons
occupying specific units that occur within a common area of the licensed
premises shall apply both to the individual and the common area of the licensed
premises.
   (B)   The following ordinances and statutes are applicable to this section:
      (1)   M.S. §§ 609.321 through 609.3241 prohibiting prostitution;
      (2)   M.S. § 609.33 which prohibits participation in a disorderly house;
      (3)   M.S. §§ 617.23 through 617.299 prohibiting obscenity;
      (4)   Chapter 96 Nuisances in the City of Byron Code of Ordinances
prohibiting public nuisances including, but not limited to; loud parties or
gatherings or other unnecessary loud noises;
      (5)   M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.76 which prohibit gambling;
      (6)   M.S. §§ 152.01 through 152.025 and § 152.027, subds. 1 and 2, which
prohibit the unlawful sale or possession of controlled substances;
      (7)   M.S. Ch. 340A which prohibits the unlawful sale, use or possession
of alcohol beverages;
      (8)   M.S. §§ 97B.021, 97B.045, 609.66 through 609.67 and §§ 624.712
through 624.716, which prohibit the unlawful possession, transportation, sale,
or use of weapon;
      (9)   M.S. § 609.72 which prohibits disorderly conduct; or
      (10)   M.S. §§ 609.221, 609.222, 609.223, 609.2231 and 609.224, which
prohibit assaults, except that domestic assaults, as the same are defined by
state law, are not included herein.
   (C)   The Olmsted County Sheriff’s Department or the city/City Administrator
shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing this section.
   (D)   Upon determination by the Sheriff’s Department or city/City
Administrator that the licensed premises were involved in a disorderly use, the
city shall notify the license holder by mail of such violation and direct the
license holder to take appropriate action to prevent further violations. Notice
shall be effective if mailed to the license holder at that person’s last known
address. This and subsequent notices are collectively referred to as disorderly
use notices.
   (E)   If a second instance of disorderly use on the premises occurs within
18 months of an incident for which a prior disorderly use notice was given, the
license holder shall be notified of a meeting with the Crime Free Rental
Housing Committee. The Crime Free Rental Housing Committee shall make a
determination regarding whether or not to recommend to the City Council to hold
a public hearing.
   (F)   If a third instance of disorderly use of the premises occurs within 18
months of two or more prior disorderly uses notices, the license or right to
obtain such license may be revoked or suspended for a specific unit or units
located on the licensed premises. If the notice of violation has been issued
with respect to a common area of a building or complex of buildings then the
license or right to obtain such license as to all units in such building or
complex may be suspended or revoked.
   (G)   If another instance of disorderly use of the premises occurs within 18
months of the expiration of a prior suspension issued pursuant to the provision
of this chapter, the license or right to obtain such license may be revoked or
suspended for the specific unit or units located on the licensed premises. If
the notice of violation has been issued with respect to a common area of a
building or complex of buildings then the license or right to obtain such
license as to all units in such building or complex may be suspended or
revoked.
   (H)   No suspension or revocation or other sanctions shall be imposed where
one or more of the three required disorderly use notices were mailed or
delivered to the landlord after the rental property owner has filed an eviction
action (unlawful detainer action) with the district court for the particular
unit or units identified in the disorderly use notice. Calls to the Sheriff’s
Department made by rental property owners shall not be considered incidents of
disorderly use in the implementation of this section.
   (I)   The initiation of an eviction action (unlawful detainer action) shall
not be a bar to sanctions, however, unless the action is diligently pursued by
the rental property owner. Notice of and a copy of the eviction action
(unlawful detainer action) shall be delivered to the city/City Administrator. A
determination that the licensed premises have been involved in a disorderly use
as described in this section shall be made upon a preponderance of the
evidence. It shall not be necessary that criminal charges be brought to support
a determination of disorderly use, nor shall the fact of dismissal or acquittal
of such a criminal charge operate as a bar to adverse license action under this
section.
   (J)   This section applies to all leases, whether written or oral, and a
landlord may consider any tenant’s conduct listed in this section to be both a
material breach of the lease and grounds for termination of any eviction action
(unlawful detainer action). Additionally, all written leases executed after
September 1, 2008, shall contain a clause providing that conduct that violates
this section constitutes both a material breach of the lease and grounds for
termination of such lease.
   (K)   The ordinance codified in this chapter is not intended to supersede
criminal sanctions that may be applied to the individual who violates the
statutes and ordinances listed in this section.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.14 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Upon a second violation within 18 months a meeting shall be held
before a body known as the Crime Free Rental Housing Committee. The Crime Free
Rental Housing Committee shall consist of the one city council member, one
member of the Planning Commission, and three citizens at large. The City
Administrator, City Planner and a representative from the Olmsted County
Sheriff’s Office will also attend these meetings. All members of the Crime Free
Rental Housing Committee shall be appointed annually by the City Council. All
parties shall be offered an opportunity to appear at such meeting after
receiving reasonable notice. The notice shall state the time, place and issues
involved. At this meeting, rental property owners may present evidence of
mitigating circumstances showing the absence of any need for a public hearing
before the City Council to consider the revocation or suspension of the license
or right to receive such a license, or the imposition of fines or other
sanctions. The board shall in good faith hear and consider this evidence in
making a determination regarding whether or not to recommend to the City
Council to hold a public hearing. At the conclusion of the meeting, the board
shall formulate a compliance order or make a recommendation to the City Council
regarding a public hearing. The board’s recommendation must be submitted to the
City Council for consideration. If the City Council determines to call for a
public hearing to consider the issue of suspension or revocation, or the
imposition of a fine, the City Council shall follow the procedures described in
§
114.13.
   (B)   No suspension or revocation shall be effective until the rental
property owner has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing under the
Minnesota Administrative Procedure Act, §§ 14.57 to 14.70. Should the City
Council hold a public hearing pursuant to the recommendation of the Crime Free
Rental Housing Committee, all parties shall be afforded an opportunity to
appear at such hearing after receiving reasonable notice. The notice shall
state the time, place, and issues involved. At this hearing, license holders
may present evidence of mitigating circumstances that would allow a rental
property owner to retain his or her license or the right to obtain such a
license. The City Council shall in good faith hear and consider this evidence
in making a determination to revoke or suspend the license or right to receive
a license, impose civil penalties, or impost other reasonable conditions based
upon violations of this chapter. The City Council may postpone or discontinue
such proceedings if it appears that the licensee has taken appropriate measures
that will prevent further instances of disorderly use.
   (C)   The City Council reserves the right to impose any of the following
sanctions for violations of §
114.13.
      (1)   Impose other reasonable conditions intended to limit future
incidents of disorderly use (including but not limited to requiring the
property owner(s) and manager(s) to attend the Crime Free Rental Housing
sessions.
      (2)   Impose a civil fine not to exceed an amount equal to one-month rent
for each violation found as a result of the hearings.
      (3)   Suspend the license or right to receive a license for up to 60
days.
      (4)   Revoke the license or right to receive a license and establish the
time period after which an application for a new certificate for the premises
may be made.
   (D)   Upon expiration of the suspension or revocation period, a license
holder shall pay to the city a reinstatement fee of $500 (this fee is not a
refundable application fee). This fee may adjusted with the annually.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
§ 114.15 PROSPECTIVE TENANT BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.
   It is the declared purpose and intent of this section to protect and reserve
this city’s neighborhoods and the public health, safety, welfare and morals of
it’s citizens by recommending that all landlords conduct a criminal history/
background investigation of prospective tenants. If a violation occurs as
stated under §
114.13 and the licensee can not prove a background check was completed on the
renter, the city may suspend or revoke the license.
(Ord. 114, passed 6-25-08)
CHAPTER 115: UNATTENDED DONATION BOXES
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Permits
   
115.03   Renewal of permits
   
115.04   Requirements and maintenance
   
115.05   Revocation of permit, removal of unattended donation boxes and
liability
   
115.06   Appeals to City Council
   
115.07   Exemptions
   
115.08   Effective date
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATOR (PERMITTEE). A person, entity, association or organization that
places, maintains or operates unattended donation box(es) to solicit donations
of salvageable personal property. OPERATOR may or may not own the property on
which the unattended donation box is located.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person, entity, association or organization who owns the
real property where the unattended donation box(es) is or is proposed to be
located.
   UNATTENDED DONATION BOX. Any unattended container, receptacle, or similar
device that is located on any lot within the city, which is used for soliciting
and collecting donations of clothing or other salvageable personal property.
This term does not include any unattended donation box located within a
building.
(Ord. passed 10-26-11)
§ 115.02 PERMITS.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any property owner or other
person, entity, association or organization to place, operate, maintain or
allow unattended donation boxes on real property unless the operator first
obtains a permit pursuant to this chapter and the donation box is placed,
operated and maintained in accordance with all provisions in this chapter.
   (B)   The permit application shall be made on a form provided by the city
and shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, email, website (if available) and telephone
number of the operator and property owner;
      (2)   The physical address of the property owner’s real property and a
drawing sufficient to indicate the proposed location of the unattended donation
box on the property owner’s real property and the size of the proposed
unattended donation box;
      (3)   The written consent of the property owner of the real property on
which the box will be placed is expressly given to the applicant.
   (C)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in the amount established annually by resolution of the City Council. This
fee shall be in addition to any fee or tax imposed by the city pursuant to any
other provision of this code.
   (D)   Applications shall be filed at City Hall.
   (E)   Within ten business days of receiving a completed application the city
shall issue a permit or deny the issuance of a permit.
   (F)   The city shall not issue a permit unless:
      (1)   The applicant has submitted a complete and accurate application
accompanied with the application fee.
      (2)   All entities (non-profit and for profit) must pay an application
fee. Entities that are deemed to be for profit will have an additional permit
fee upon approval. Fees will be established annually by City Council
resolution. Non-profit entities must provide supporting paperwork.
      (3)   The proposed location of the unattended donation box on the
property owner’s real property is in compliance with all applicable laws and
will not impede pedestrian, bicycle, site distances onto adjacent streets or
vehicular traffic. Unattended boxes cannot be placed in any right-of-way or
easements.
   (G)   If the city denies an application the city shall state, in writing,
the specific reasons for denial.
   (H)   The term of the permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance.
   (I)   No person or operator to whom a permit has been issued shall transfer,
assign, or convey such permit to another person or operator.
   (J)   Permits issued hereunder shall be valid for one unattended donation
box. Multiple unattended donation boxes shall have their own individual permit.
   (K)   Prior to expiration of the permit, the permittee may voluntarily
cancel the permit by notifying the city in writing of the intent to cancel the
permit. The permit shall become void upon the city’s receipt of a written
notice of intent to cancel the permit. If the permittee cancels their
unattended donation box permit a prorated refund will not be issued.
(Ord. passed 10-26-11) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.03 RENEWAL OF PERMITS.
   (A)   A permittee may apply for a permit renewal by submitting to the city
before the expiration of the permit, a renewal application and a non-refundable
renewal fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   The city shall either approve or deny the renewal of the permit within
ten business days of receipt of the complete renewal application and payment of
the renewal fee.
   (C)   The city shall approve the renewal of the permit if they find that no
circumstances existed during the term of the permit, existed at the time of
submission of an application for renewal or existed at any time during the
review of the application for renewal that are inconsistent with any findings
required for approval of a new permit as specified in this chapter or that
would justify the revocation of the permit as specified in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-26-11)
§ 115.04 REQUIREMENTS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   A permittee/property owner shall operate and maintain all unattended
donation boxes located in the city as follows:
      (1)   In good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes
or visible rust and shall be free of graffiti;
      (2)   Locked or otherwise secured to prevent the unauthorized removal of
donated items;
      (3)   Contact information in two inch type visible from the front of each
unattended donation box: the name, address, email and phone number of the
operator;
      (4)   Shall be serviced and emptied as needed, however, at least every 30
days, or within five business days of a request by the city;
      (5)   Unattended donation boxes shall be no more than 82 inches high, 56
inches wide and 49 inches deep.
      (6)   The area surrounding the unattended donation box(es) shall be free
of any junk, debris, tall grass or weeds or other material and shall be
responsible to the extent provided by law for the cost to abate any violation.
      (7)   No more than one unattended donation box shall be placed on each
parcel or business location.
   (B)   Unattended donation boxes are not allowed in the following areas:
      (1)   Residential areas.
      (2)   On required parking spaces.
(Ord. passed 10-26-11) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.05 REVOCATION OF PERMIT, REMOVAL OF UNATTENDED DONATION BOXES AND
LIABILITY.
   The city has the right for cause to revoke any permit issued hereunder. Any
of the grounds upon which the city may refuse to issue an initial permit shall
also constitute grounds for such revocation. In addition, the failure of the
permittee to comply with the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of
this code or other law shall also constitute grounds for revocation of the
permit. The city shall provide a written notification to the permittee stating
the specific grounds for revocation. Upon revocation, the unattended donation
box shall be removed from the permittee’s real property within 30 days and if
not removed within this time period, the city may remove, store and dispose of
the unattended donation box at the expense of the permittee. Upon revocation, a
permittee shall be prohibited from applying for a permit for a period of one
year. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter of a public nuisance
subject to abatement pursuant to City Code Chapter 96.
(Ord. passed 10-26-11)
§ 115.06 APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision rendered by the city in granting or
denying an application for a permit under this chapter or in revoking a permit
issued under this chapter may appeal the decision to the City Council. The
appeal shall be made by filing a written notice thereof with the city no later
than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the decision of the city. The
City Council’s decision shall be final.
(Ord. passed 10-26-11)
§ 115.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Unattended donation boxes located entirely within the interior of a
building are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Unattended donation boxes that are placed on a property for no more
than three months.
(Ord. passed 10-26-11)
§ 115.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provision of this chapter as enacted by this chapter shall apply to all
unattended donation boxes located within the city as of the effective date of
this chapter. All persons who have one or more unattended donation boxes
located on their property as of the effective date of this chapter shall have
60 days from that date to file an application for a permit as provided for in
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-26-11)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, permittee, operator, property owner, firm, partnership or
corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in City Code §
10.99. Each date that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate
offense.
(Ord. passed 10-26-11)
CHAPTER 116: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
116.03   Permitting; exemptions
   
116.04   Permit ineligibility
   
116.05   Permit suspension and revocation
   
116.06   Permit transferability
   
116.07   Registration
   
116.08   Prohibited activities
   
116.09   Exclusion by placard
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to-door for the
primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social, or other
ideological beliefs. For purpose of this chapter, the term DOOR-TO-DOOR
ADVOCATE shall fall under the term SOLICITOR and include door-to-door
canvassing and pamphleteering intended for non-commercial purposes.
   NON-PROFIT. Organization engaged in charitable, religious, patriotic or
philanthropic purposes.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of offering for sale, displaying for exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise, or other personal property that the person is carrying
or otherwise transporting. For purpose of this chapter, the term PEDDLER shall
have the same common meaning as the term hawker.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership, or similar association.
   PROFESSIONAL FUNDRAISER. Any person, including a corporation or other
entity, who, for compensation, performs any solicitations or other services for
a religious, politician, social, or other charitable organization.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be considered regular business days.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property, or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. For purposes of this
chapter, the term SOLICITOR shall have the same meaning as the term canvasser.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal
property and typically does not remain in any one location for more than 30
consecutive days.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
§ 116.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and
TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to:
      (1)   Non-commercial door-to-door advocates. Nothing within this chapter
shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict non-commercial door-to-door
advocates. Persons engaging in non-commercial door-to-door advocacy shall not
be required to register as a solicitor under §
116.07.
      (2)   Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods,
wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property to a retail seller of
the items being sold by the wholesaler.
      (3)   Any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the
purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery
route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products, such as baked
goods or milk.
      (4)   Any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products
to the customers on his or her established delivery route.
      (5)   Any person making deliveries of newspapers, newsletters, or other
similar publications on an established customer delivery route, when attempting
to establish a regular delivery route, or when publications are delivered to
the community at large.
      (6)   Any person conducting the type of sale commonly known as garage
sales, rummage sales, or estate sales.
      (7)   Any person participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or
flea market.
      (8)   Any person conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer.
      (9)   Any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale.
      (10)   Any person selling or attempting to sell items for a non-profit
organization.
   (B)   Exemption from these definitions shall not, for the scope of this
chapter, excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory
provision or requirement provided by another city ordinance.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
§ 116.03 PERMITTING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   City permit required. Except as otherwise provided for by this
chapter, no person shall conduct business within this jurisdiction as a peddler
or a transient merchant without first obtaining a city permit. Solicitors need
not be permitted, but are required to register with the city pursuant to §
116.07.
   (B)   Application. An application for a city permit to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting a business operation within
the city. Application for a permit shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the City Clerk. All applications shall
be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include the following
information:
      (1)   The applicant's full legal name;
      (2)   Any and all other names under which the applicant has or does
conduct business, or to which the applicant will officially answer;
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, any distinguishing marks or features, and the like);
      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence;
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence;
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed,
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or an
agent;
      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business, if any
exists;
      (8)   Any and all business-related telephone numbers of the applicant,
including cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines;
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
permit;
      (10)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business
with a maximum of five consecutive days (for peddlers/solicitors) and 30
consecutive days for transient merchants;
      (11)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up his or her business;
      (12)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor for
violating any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than minor
traffic offenses;
      (13)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;
      (14)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's
agent for any location to be used by a transient merchant;
      (15)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided;
      (16)   Any and all additional information as may be deemed necessary by
the City Council;
      (17)   The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form
of identification; and
      (18)   The license plate number, registration information, vehicle
identification number (VIN) and physical description for any vehicle to be used
in conjunction with the permitted business operation.
   (C)   Fee. Fees are due once the applicant's permit has been approved by the
City Clerk and prior to the issuance of the permit. All fees will be
established in the annual fee schedule as set by City Council.
   (D)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the application and payment of the permit
fee, the City Clerk will, within two regular business days, determine if the
application is complete. An application will be considered complete if all
required information is provided. If the City Clerk determines that the
application is incomplete, the City Clerk must inform the applicant of the
required, necessary information that is missing. If the application is
complete, the City Clerk must order any investigation, including background
checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the application.
Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete application the City
Clerk must issue the permit unless grounds exist for denying the permit
application under §
116.04, in which case the City Clerk must deny the request for a city peddler
or transient merchant permit. If the City Clerk denies the permit application,
the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for
denial and the applicant's right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20
days of receiving notice of rejection, an appeal before the City Council. The
City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of the request
for an appeal
   (E)   Duration. All permits granted under this chapter shall be valid only
during the time period indicated on the permit.
   (F)   Professional fundraisers not exempt. A professional fundraiser working
on behalf of an otherwise exempt group or person shall not be exempt from the
licensing requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   Permit exemptions.
      (1)   No permit shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated, or raised on their own farm(s).
      (2)   No permit shall be required for any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type
of place-to-place movement for the primary purpose of exercising that person's
state or federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, freedom
of the press, freedom of religion, and the like. This exemption will not apply
if the person's exercise of constitutional rights is merely incidental to what
would properly be considered a commercial activity.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
§ 116.04 PERMIT INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a peddler or transient merchant
permit:
   (A)   The failure of an applicant to truthfully provide any information
requested by the city as part of the application process.
   (B)   The failure of an applicant to sign the permit application.
   (C)   The failure of an applicant to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   (D)   A conviction within the past five years of the date of application for
any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local
ordinance, which adversely reflects upon the person's ability to conduct the
business for which the permit is being sought in a professional, honest and
legal manner. Such violations shall include, but are not limited to, burglary,
theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of
actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
   (E)   The revocation within the past five years of any permit issued to an
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant.
   (F)   When an applicant has a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad
business reputation shall include, but is not limited to, the existence of more
than three complaints against an applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the
Office of the Minnesota Attorney General or other state attorney general's
office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or law enforcement
agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints filed with the city
against an applicant within the preceding five years.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
§ 116.05 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any permit issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or
incorrect statements provided by an applicant on the application form;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the permitted activity;
      (3)   Subsequent conviction of any offense to which the granting of the
permit could have been denied under §
116.04;
      (4)   Engaging in any prohibited activity as provided under §
116.08 of this chapter; and/or
      (5)   Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one permit. The suspension or revocation of any
permit issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the permittee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the permittee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any permit issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide a permit holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the permittee of his or her right to an appeal on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the permit application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the permit
application.
   (D)   Council appeal. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the permittee shall have the right to request an appeal. If no
request for an appeal is received by the City Clerk within ten days following
the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the suspension or
revocation. For the purpose of a mailed notice, service shall be considered
complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If an appeal is
requested within the stated time frame, an appeal shall be scheduled within 20
days from the date of the request for the appeal. Within three regular business
days of the appeal, the City Council shall notify the permittee of its
decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant permitted under this chapter, the City Council
may immediately suspend the person's permit and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent Council appeal as prescribed in division (D) of this section.
   (F)   Court appeal. Any person whose permit is suspended or revoked under
this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
§ 116.06 PERMIT TRANSFERABILITY.
   No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other
than the person to whom the permit was issued.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
§ 116.07 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All solicitors and any person exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter under §
116.03 shall be required to register with the city prior to engaging in those
activities. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a permit
application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the
registration form, the City Clerk shall issue to the registrant a certificate
of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration
shall be non-transferable.
   (B)   Individuals that will be engaging in non-commercial door-to-door
advocacy shall not be required to register.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
§ 116.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door
advocate, or other person engaged in other similar activities shall conduct
business in any of the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or the items to be sold by
means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any
other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian,
on any street, sidewalk, alleyway, or other public right-of-way.
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of any specific individual or the general public.
   (D)   Conducting business before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license, or registration, and
identification when requested.
   (F)   Using the license or registration of another person.
   (G)   Alleging false or misleading statements about the products or services
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor,
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a permit or certificate of registration to that
person.
   (H)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave.
   (I)   Otherwise operating their business in any manner that a reasonable
person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
§ 116.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   (A)   Unless specifically invited by the property owner or tenant, no
peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate,
or other person engaged in other similar activities shall enter onto the
property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate, or similar
activity when the property is marked with a sign or placard stating: "No
Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants," "Peddlers, Solicitors, and
Transient Merchants Prohibited," or other comparable statement.
   (B)   No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove,
deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Any individual found in violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be
a guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 116, passed 4-24-13)
CHAPTER 117: CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
   
117.01   Administration
   
117.02   Registration of cannabis businesses
   
117.03   Requirements for cannabis businesses
   
117.04   Temporary cannabis events
   
117.05   Local government as a cannabis retailer
§ 117.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The City of Byron makes the following
legislative findings:
      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S.
Ch. 342, which authorizes the City of Byron to protect the public health,
safety, welfare of the City of Byron residents by regulating cannabis
businesses within the legal boundaries of the City of Byron.
      (2)   The City of Byron finds and concludes that the proposed provisions
are appropriate and lawful land use regulations for the City of Byron, that the
proposed amendments will promote the community's interest in reasonable
stability in zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed provisions
are in the public interest and for the public good.
   (B)   Authority and jurisdiction.
      (1)   The City of Byron has the authority to adopt this chapter pursuant
to:
         (a)   M.S. § 342.13(c), regarding the authority of a local unit of
government to adopt reasonable restrictions of the time, place, and manner of
the operation of a cannabis business provided that such restrictions do not
prohibit the establishment or operation of cannabis businesses.
         (b)   M.S. § 342.22, regarding the local registration and enforcement
requirements of state-licensed cannabis retail businesses and lower-potency
hemp edible retail businesses.
         (c)   M.S. § 152.0263, subd. 5, regarding the use of cannabis in
public places.
         (d)   M.S. § 462.357, regarding the authority of a local authority to
adopt zoning ordinances.
      (2)   This chapter shall be applicable to the legal boundaries of the
City of Byron.
   (C)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
   (D)   Enforcement. The City of Byron is responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this
chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements constitutes a
misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. Violations of this chapter can
occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a regulated
activity listed in this chapter.
   (E)   Definitions. Unless otherwise noted in this division (E), words and
phrases contained in M.S. § 342.01 and the rules promulgated pursuant to any of
these acts, shall have the same meaning in this chapter.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATION. A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis
plants within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to
mature plant, harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and label
immature plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis
businesses, transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the
same premises, and perform other actions approved by the office.
      CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES. A retail location and the retail location(s)
of mezzobusinesses with a retail operations endorsement, microbusinesses with a
retail operations endorsement, medical combination businesses operating a
retail location, lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
      CANNABIS RETAILER. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and
not for the purpose of resale in any form.
      DAYCARE. A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human
Services to provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child's own
home for gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a 24-hour day.
      LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. As defined under M.S. § 342.01, subd. 50.
      OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as “OCM” in this chapter.
      PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
      PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL. OCM pre-approval for a cannabis business
license for applicants who qualify under M.S. § 342.17.
      PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals;
nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
      RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. As defined under M.S. § 245.462, subd.
23.
      RETAIL REGISTRATION. An approved registration issued by the City of Byron
to a state-licensed cannabis retail business.
      SCHOOL. A public school as defined under M.S. § 120A.05 or a nonpublic
school that must meet the reporting requirements under M.S. § 120A.24.
      STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued by the State of Minnesota's
Office of Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 1-14-25)
§ 117.02 REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Consent to registering of cannabis businesses.
      (1)   No individual or entity may operate a state-licensed cannabis
retail business within the City of Byron without first registering with the
City of Byron.
      (2)   Any state-licensed cannabis retail business that sells to a
customer or patient without valid retail registration shall incur a civil
penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state shall not issue
a license to any cannabis business to operate in Indian country, as defined in
United States Code, Title 18, Section 1151, of a Minnesota Tribal government
without the consent of the Tribal government.
   (B)   Compliance checks prior to retail registration.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of a cannabis retail business registration, the
City of Byron shall conduct a preliminary compliance check to ensure compliance
with local ordinances.
      (2)   Pursuant to M.S. Ch. 342, within 30 days of receiving a copy of a
state license application from OCM, the City of Byron shall certify on a form
provided by OCM whether a proposed cannabis retail business complies with local
zoning ordinances and, if applicable, whether the proposed business complies
with the state fire code and building code.
   (C)   Registration and application procedure.
      (1)   Fees.
         (a)   The City of Byron shall not charge an application fee.
         (b)   A registration fee, established in the City of Byron's fee
schedule, shall be charged to applicants depending on the type of retail
business license applied for.
         (c)   An initial retail registration fee shall not exceed $500 or half
the amount of an initial state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever is
less. The initial registration fee shall include the initial retail
registration fee and the first annual renewal fee.
         (d)   Any renewal retail registration fee imposed by the City of Byron
shall be charged at the time of the second renewal and each subsequent renewal
thereafter.
         (e)   A renewal retail registration fee shall not exceed $1,000 or
half the amount of a renewal state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever
is less.
         (f)   A medical combination business operating an adult-use retail
location may only be charged a single registration fee, not to exceed the
lesser of a single retail registration fee, defined under this section, of the
adult-use retail business.
      (2)   Application submittal. The City of Bryon shall issue a retail
registration to a state- licensed cannabis retail business that adheres to the
requirements of M.S. § 342.22.
         (a)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the City of Byron. Said for shall include, but
is not limited to:
            1.   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
            2.   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant;
            3.   The address and parcel ID for the property which the retail
registration is
sought;
            4.   Certification that the applicant complies with the
requirements of local ordinances established pursuant to M.S. § 342.13.
         (b)   The applicant shall include with the form:
            1.   The registration fee as required in division (C)(1) of this
section;
            2.   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM
license pre- approval;
         (c)   Once an application is considered complete, the City
Administrator shall inform the applicant as such, process the application fees,
and forward the application to the City Council for approval or denial.
         (d)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
      (3)   Application approval.
         (a)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application shall not
be approved or renewed if the applicant is unable to meet the requirements of
this chapter.
         (b)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application that meets
the requirements of this section shall be approved.
      (4)   Annual compliance checks.
         (a)   The City of Byron shall complete at minimum one compliance check
per calendar year of every cannabis business to assess if the business meets
age verification requirements, as required under M.S. §§ 342.22, subd. 4(b) and
342.24.
         (b)   The City of Byron shall conduct at minimum one unannounced age
verification compliance check per calendar year at least once.
         (c)   Age verification compliance checks shall involve persons at
least 17 years of age but under the age of 21 who, with the prior written
consent of a parent or guardian if the person is under the age of 18, attempt
to purchase adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products, lower-
potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products under the direct
supervision of a law enforcement officer or an employee of the local unit of
government.
         (d)   Any failures under this division (C)(4) must be reported to the
Office of Cannabis Management.
      (5)   Location change. A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall be
required to submit a new application for registration under division (C)(2) of
this section if it seeks to move to a new location still within the legal
boundaries of the City of Byron.
   (D)   (1)   Renewal of registration.
         (a)   The City of Byron shall renew an annual registration of a state-
licensed cannabis retail business at the same time OCM renews the cannabis
retail business' license.
         (b)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall apply to renew
registration on a form established by the City of Byron.
         (c)   A cannabis retail registration issued under this section shall
not be transferred.
      (2)   Renewal fees. The City of Byron may charge a renewal fee for the
registration starting at the second renewal, as established in the City of
Byron’s fee schedule.
      (3)   Renewal application. The application for renewal of a retail
registration shall include, but is not limited to items required under division
(C)(2) of this section.
   (E)   Suspension of registration.
      (1)   When suspension is warranted. The City of Byron may suspend a
cannabis retail business' registration if it violates the ordinance of the City
of Byron or poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public.
The City of Byron shall immediately notify the cannabis retail business in
writing the grounds for the suspension.
      (2)   Notification to OCM. The City of Byron shall immediately notify the
OCM in writing the grounds for the suspension. OCM will provide the City of
Byron and cannabis business retailer a response to the complaint within seven
calendar days and perform any necessary inspections within 30 calendar days.
      (3)   Length of suspension.
         (a)   The suspension of a cannabis retail business registration may be
for up to 30 calendar days, unless OCM suspends the license for a longer
period. The business may not make sales to customers if their registration is
suspended.
         (b)   The City of Byron may reinstate a registration if it determines
that the violations have been resolved.
         (c)   The City of Byron shall reinstate registration if OCM determines
that the violation(s) have been resolved.
      (4)   Civil penalties. Subject to M.S. § 342.22, subd. 5(e), the City of
Byron may impose a civil penalty, as specified in the City of Byron’s fee
schedule, for registration violations, not to exceed $2,000.
   (F)   Limiting of registrations. If Olmsted County has one active cannabis
retail businesses registration for every 12,500 residents, the City of Byron
shall not be required to register additional state- licensed cannabis retail
businesses.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 1-14-25)
§ 117.03 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Minimum buffer requirements.
      (1)   The City of Byron shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within 1,000 feet of a school.
      (2)   The City of Byron shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within 500 feet of a daycare.
      (3)   The City of Byron shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within 500 feet of a residential treatment facility.
      (4)   The City of Byron shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within 500 feet of an attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field.
      (5)   Distances shall be measured from lot line to lot line for purposes
of determining minimum buffer zone.
      (6)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, subd. 1(e), nothing in this division
(A) shall prohibit an active cannabis business or a cannabis business seeking
registration from continuing operation at the same site if a school/daycare/
residential treatment facility/attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors moves within the minimum buffer zone.
   (B)   Zoning and land use. Zoning and land use requirements shall meet all
requirements established in the Byron zoning code.
   (C)   Hours of operation. Cannabis businesses are limited to retail sales of
cannabis, cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or
hemp-derived consumer products between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (D)   Advertising. Cannabis businesses are permitted to erect up to two
fixed signs on the exterior of the building or property of the business, unless
otherwise limited by Byron’s sign ordinances.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 1-14-25)
§ 117.04 TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   (A)   License or permit required for temporary cannabis events.
      (1)   License required. A license or permit is required to be issued and
approved by the City of Byron prior to holding a temporary cannabis event.
      (2)   Registration and application procedure. A registration fee, as
established in the City of Byron’s fee schedule, shall be charged to applicants
for temporary cannabis events.
      (3)   Application submittal and review. The City of Byron shall require
an application for temporary cannabis events.
         (a)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the City of Byron. Said form shall include,
but is not limited to:
            1.   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
            2.   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant.
         (b)   The applicant shall include with the form:
            1.   The application fee as required in division (B)(1) of this
section;
            2.   A copy of the OCM cannabis event license application,
submitted pursuant to M.S. § 342.39, subd. 2.
   (B)   The application shall be submitted to the City of Byron, or other
designee for review. If the designee determines that a submitted application is
incomplete, they shall return the application to the applicant with the notice
of deficiencies.
   (C)   Once an application is considered complete, the designee shall inform
the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward the
application to the City Administrator for approval or denial.
   (D)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
   (E)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that meets the requirements
of this section shall be approved.
   (F)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that does not meet the
requirements of this section shall be denied. The City of Byron shall notify
the applicant of the standards not met and basis for denial.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 1-14-25)
§ 117.05 LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS A CANNABIS RETAILER.
   (A)   The City of Byron may establish, own, and operate one municipal
cannabis retail business subject to the restrictions in this chapter.
   (B)   The municipal cannabis retail store shall not be included in any
limitation of the number of registered cannabis retail businesses under §
117.02(F).
   (C)   The City of Byron shall be subject to all same rental license
requirements and procedures applicable to all other applicants.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 1-14-25)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Regulations
   
130.01   Discharging firearm, air gun or bow and arrow within city prohibited
Curfews for Minors
   
130.15   Purpose
   
130.16   Definitions
   
130.17   Hours
   
130.18   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor
   
130.19   Exceptions
   
130.20   Duties of person legally responsible for minor
   
130.21   Duties of certain other persons
Social Host
   
130.35   Definitions
   
130.35   Prohibited acts and penalty
   
130.36   Exceptions
   
130.37   Authority
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 130.01 DISCHARGING FIREARM, AIR GUN OR BOW AND ARROW WITHIN CITY PROHIBITED.
   It is a misdemeanor for any person to discharge any firearm, air gun or bow
and arrow within the city or to cause a projectile therefrom to enter into the
city unless:
   (A)   By a police officer in the course of law enforcement;
   (B)   By a person protecting life of a person; or
   (C)   By a special permit of the City Council.
(Ord. 609, passed 12-18-96) Penalty, see §
130.99
CURFEWS FOR MINORS
§ 130.15 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The curfew for minors within the city is being implemented for the
following four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed after
the curfew hour;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail after the
curfew hour, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs after the
curfew hour; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   The City Council finds that residents and visitors have been harassed
while traveling on city streets and sidewalks by groups of minors; that minors
engaged in mimes while on the streets late in the evening; that minors have
been enticed to join organized gangs and have been victimized by gangs late in
the evening and that the Council believes that this curfew for minors will help
lessen the aforementioned problems.
(Ord. 260, passed 7-13-00)
§ 130.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's household.
This includes, but is not limited to, seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking
urgent assistance from law enforcement or Fire Department personnel and seeking
shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a utility company due to a
natural or man-made calamity.
   OFFICIAL CITY TIME. To be determined by reference to the master clock
contained in the console of the Dispatch Center at the Olmsted County/City of
Rochester Law Enforcement Center.
   PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. These places include but
are not limited to movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping malls, nightclubs
catering to minors, restaurants and pool halls.
   PRIMARY CARE or CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for providing food,
clothing, shelter and other basic necessities to the minor. The person
providing primary care or custody to the minor cannot be another minor.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
(Ord. 260, passed 7-13-00)
§ 130.17 HOURS.
   (A)   Minors under the age of 16. No minor under the age of 16 shall be in
or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds,
public places and public buildings, places of amusement, entertainment or
refreshment or vacant lots between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day, official city time.
   (B)   Minors ages sixteen to 18. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17 shall be
in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public
grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement, entertainment
or refreshment or vacant lots between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
of the following day, official city time.
(Ord. 260, passed 7-13-00)
§ 130.18 EFFECT ON CONTROL BY ADULT RESPONSIBLE FOR MINOR.
   Section 130.17 is not to be construed to give a minor the right to stay out
until the curfew hours designated herein if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor should it be construed to diminish or impair the control of the
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor.
(Ord. 260, passed 7-13-00)
§ 130.19 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of §
130.17 do not apply to the following situations:
   (A)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
   (B)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor;
   (C)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in §
130.17 in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful
business, trade, profession or occupation or to a minor traveling directly to
and from the location of such business, trade, profession or occupation and the
minors residence. Minors who fall within this section must carry written proof
of employment as well as the hours the employer requires the minor's presence
at work;
   (D)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling already to or from an
event which has been officially designated as a “school activity” by public or
parochial school authorities;
   (E)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of interstate
travel during the hours of the curfew;
   (F)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of the first amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly or freedom of religion. Minors who wish to exercise their
rights pursuant to this section must notify the City Clerk-Treasurer at least
24 hours in advance of the start of the gathering where these rights will be
exercised.
(Ord. 260, passed 7-13-00)
§ 130.20 DUTIES OF PERSON LEGALLY RESPONSIBLE FOR MINOR.
   No parent, guardian or other adult having the primary care or custody of any
minor shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 260, passed 7-13-00)
§ 130.21 DUTIES OF CERTAIN OTHER PERSONS.
   No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment or
refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or remain in such place during the
hours prohibited by this section, unless accompanied by the parent, guardian or
other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor.
(Ord. 260, passed 7-13-00)
SOCIAL HOST
§ 130.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings stated:
   ADULT. Any person 18 years of age or older.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, liqueur,
cordials, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process
produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains one-half of
one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes
either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
   EVENT OR GATHERING. Any group of three or more persons assembled or gathered
together for a social occasion or other activity.
   HOST or ALLOW. To aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control or
permit an event or gathering.
   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as a natural parent,
adoptive parent, stepparent, legal guardian, or a person to whom legal custody
has been given by order of the court.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals. A person does not include any city,
county or state agency.
   RESIDENCE, PREMISES, OR PUBLIC PROPERTY OR PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any location,
including a house, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other
dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, yard, field, park, or any other place
of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether
occupied as a dwelling or residence or specifically for a social or business
function, and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without permission
or compensation.
(Ord. passed 6-28-16)
§ 130.35 PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to host or allow for an event or
gathering at any residence, premises, or on any other public property where
alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present when the person knows or should
reasonably know that:
      (1)   Alcohol or an alcoholic beverage is being possessed or consumed by
an underage person; and
      (2)   The person failed to prevent such possession or consumption by an
underage person.
   (B)   It is a violation of section 1 if the person intentionally aids,
advises, hires, counsels or conspires with another or otherwise procures
another to commit the prohibited act.
   (C)   A person who hosts or allows an event or gathering does not have to be
present at the event or gathering to be in violation of this section.
   (D)   A violation of this policy falls under the Byron City Code of
Ordinances, §
10.99, General Penalties.
(Ord. passed 6-28-16)
§ 130.36 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter does not apply to conduct of an underage person
specifically authorized by their parent while present in the parent's house.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt
liquor licences, municipal liquor stores or bottle club permit holders who are
regulated by M.S. § 340A.503.
   (C)   This chapter does not apply to situations where underage persons are
lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and
scope of employment.
   (D)   This chapter does not apply to a landlord, mortgage, college,
university, hotel or motel owners or operators who has not actually
participated in hosting or allowing an event where alcohol is present.
(Ord. passed 6-28-16)
§ 130.37 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to M.S. §§ 145A.04(1) and (9) and 412.221,
subd. 32.
(Ord. passed 6-28-16)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this section for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A minor found to be in violation of §§
130.15 et seq. may be adjudicated delinquent and is subject to the disposition
alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260.185.
      (2)   Any adult person violating §§
130.15 et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99.
(Ord. 260, passed 7-13-00)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
152.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   [Reserved]
Building Safety Department
   
150.25   Establishment
   
150.26   Organization
   
150.27   [Reserved]
   
150.28   [Reserved]
   
150.29   Building code
   
150.30   Re-inspections
   
150.31   Additional provisions for sidewalks
   
150.32   Grading requirements
   
150.33   [Reserved]
   
150.34   Building permit fees for residential projects
   
150.35   Building permit fees for commercial projects
   
150.36   Grading permit fees
   
150.37   Sign permit fees
   
150.38   Mechanical and plumbing permit fees
   
150.39   Demolition permit fees
   
150.40   [Reserved]
   
150.41   Similar plans
   
150.42   Fee refunds
Codes
   
150.55   Adoption of the International Building Code
   
150.56   Adoption of the International Residential Code for One and Two Family
Dwellings
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 RESERVED.
BUILDING SAFETY DEPARTMENT
§ 150.25 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created the Department of Building and Safety. The
Department shall administer and enforce the city building code, housing code
and all codes or ordinances, which may be assigned to it by the City Council.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03)
§ 150.26 ORGANIZATION.
   The Department shall be composed of those divisions such as building
inspectors, plan reviewers and other supporting personnel that may be required
for effective enforcement of the various codes and ordinances which are
assigned to the Department by the City Council.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03)
§ 150.27 RESERVED.
§ 150.28 RESERVED.
§ 150.29 BUILDING CODE.
   The Minnesota State Building Code is applicable within the city. The City of
Byron will incorporate and apply the most recent version of the Code. This
chapter shall perpetually include the most current edition of the optional
appendix chapters; optional appendix chapters shall not apply unless
specifically adopted.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
§ 150.30 RE-INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   A re-inspection fee, set by the City Council annual fee resolution,
may be assessed for each inspection or a re-inspection when such portion of
work for which inspection is required is not complete or when required
corrections are not made. The decision to impose a re-inspection fee will be
based upon the criteria found in division (B).
   (B)   The following criteria will be considered in determining whether to
impose a re-inspection fee:
      (1)   Whether an inspection has been scheduled, is not cancelled and the
work to be inspected is clearly not ready for inspection;
      (2)   Whether, for new house framing inspections, certified truss
specifications are not present on the job for the inspection;
      (3)   Whether owner/builders require several partial inspections when a
professional contractor would normally require a single inspection; or
      (4)   Whether the circumstances indicate the inspection was scheduled not
because the work would be ready for inspection, but because of a desire to
avoid a time delay in obtaining the required inspection.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
§ 150.31 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued for the construction of new building on any
parcel of property not already served by a sidewalk unless the plans for such
building provide for the construction of sidewalks within and along the public
street right-of-way adjacent to the building site. Such sidewalks shall be
installed at the time of construction or within such reasonable period of time
thereafter not exceeding eight months as the City Building Supervisor may
specify on the permit.
   (B)   Upon application of the owner and recommendation of the City Building
Supervisor, the Building Supervisor when issuing a permit may waive the
requirements that sidewalks be installed at the time of construction of a new
building whenever it is determined either that sidewalks would be impractical
to install because of topographic conditions or that because of the present and
anticipated development of the area the installation of sidewalks at the time
herein required would serve no useful purpose.
   (C)   The recommendation of the City Building Supervisor and the granting of
a waiver by the Building Supervisor shall not in any way affect the authority
of the City Council to thereafter undertake a local improvement involving the
installation of sidewalks.
   (D)   The requirements of this section that sidewalks be installed when
constructing a new building shall not apply to the construction of accessory
buildings or the making of additions, alterations or repairs to existing
buildings.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03)
§ 150.32 GRADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Street rough grading. No permit shall be issued for construction of a
new building until the rough grading of public streets providing access thereto
has been completed, sewer and water construction in connection therewith has
been completed or is under construction, and the rough grading of planned
private streets and roadways within the project area has been completed. From
and after the commencement of building framing, the public streets and private
streets and roadways shall be maintained without obstruction and the rough
grading shall consist of at least an all-weather base construction sufficient
to provide adequate support at all times for emergency and fire protection
vehicles. The City Engineer or Building Supervisor may issue a stop order if
the streets and roadways are not maintained as required herein. Additionally,
the Building Supervisor may revoke building permits, and may deny the issuance
of additional building permits for the subdivision(s) served by such streets
and roadways, if the streets and roadways are not maintained as required
herein.
   (B)   Site grading.
      (1)   Rough grading of the site shall be such that the ground elevations
at property corners are in conformance with the property corner elevations
indicated on the approved plans;
      (2)   Temporary seeding or permanent cover in accordance with the
approved plans shall be complete in all site areas that have not been or will
not be worked for 45 days or that period indicated in any storm water permit
applicable to the site, whichever is less;
      (3)   All drainage easements on the site shall be graded in accordance
with the approved plans, and shall have permanent and temporary erosion and
sediment control measures in place as indicated on the approved plans;
      (4)   All storm water conveyance facilities located within easements and
right-of-way, through which storm water from the site flows, shall be complete
in accordance with the approved plans, and shall have permanent and temporary
erosion and sediment control measures in place as indicated on the approved
plans; and,
      (5)   All ponds and other storm water facilities to which storm water
from the site flows shall be complete in accordance with the approved plans,
and shall have permanent and temporary erosion and sediment control measures in
place as indicated on the approved plans.
   (C)   Waiver.  The city representative may waive one or more of the
requirements listed in division (B) when:
      (1)   An overall grading plan has been approved for the site;
      (2)   An interim/staged-grading plan, which depicts the proposed grading
and building, has been approved. The interim/staged grading plan shall show
that the proposed building is compatible with the overall grading plan of the
site and shall include interim erosion and sediment control measures acceptable
to the City Building Supervisor/City Engineer such that no lands outside of the
control of the developer are adversely impacted by drainage, erosion or
sediment from the proposed grading and building; and
      (3)   Sediment control measures indicated on the approved interim/staged
plan are in place. All erosion and sediment control measures indicated on the
interim/staged grading plan shall remain functional until site grading and
storm water facility requirements listed in division (B) have been completed.
   (D)   Building permits. Building permits issued following the City Building
Supervisor/City Engineer approval shall have attached to them a notation
indicating that permittee's work on the property is subject to the provisions
of the grading plan covering that property, including the appropriate temporary
erosion control measures.
   (E)   Grading violations. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall
perform any grading work without first receiving a grading permit as the same
may be required by the Building Code or any other provision of local ordinance.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation, whether the permittee under a
grading permit or otherwise, shall perform grading work in any manner that is
inconsistent with the conditions of a grading permit applicable to that site.
Additionally, no person, firm, partnership or corporation shall, after
initiation of a grading project, discontinue such project except with the
permission of the City Building Supervisor/City Engineer and subject to those
reasonable conditions that may be imposed by the City Building Supervisor/City
Engineer to prevent unsafe conditions, drainage, erosion and sediment problems
on adjacent public and private property. For the purpose of this subchapter, a
grading project shall be considered discontinued if no grading work has been
accomplished for 60 days excluding the period from November 15 to April 15
(inclusive), and the project is not complete in accordance with the approved
plans.
   (F)   Stop orders. The city representative may issue stop orders to stop
persons performing grading work in violation of this section, and correction
orders to gain compliance with the provisions of this section. Correction
orders shall identify the work to be performed and shall provide a reasonable
time in which to perform the work. Any violation of this section, any failure
to stop work as required by the provisions of a stop order issued by the city
representative, and any failure to take corrective action as required by a
correction order, is a misdemeanor. Violations of this section shall also be
considered a public nuisance and the City Attorney is authorized to initiate
any legal or equitable action in the District Court to abate such public
nuisance.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
§ 150.33 RESERVED.
§ 150.34 BUILDING PERMIT FEES FOR RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS.
   (A)    Permit fees. All building permit fees shall be changed by the City
Council by resolution. There are typically four fees collected for a
residential building permit in the city. The fees are:
      (1)   Building permit fee;
      (2)   Plan review;
      (3)   Zoning permit fee;
      (4)   Minnesota state surcharge fee; and
      (5)   All fees established by the City Council to be applicable with a
building permit application.
   (B)   Per Minn. Rules part 1300.0160 subp. 3 Fees: Permit valuation shall
include total value of all construction work, including materials and labor,
for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical,
plumbing equipment, and permanent systems. Building permit valuation shall be
set by the building official.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
§ 150.35 BUILDING PERMIT FEES FOR COMMERCIAL PROJECTS.
   (A)   Permit fees. There are typically four fees collected for a commercial
building permit in the city. The fees are:
      (1)   Building permit;
      (2)   Plan review;
      (3)   Zoning permit; and
      (4)   Minnesota state surcharge.
   (B)   Per Minn. Rules part 1300.0160 subp. 3 Fees: Permit valuation shall
include total value of all construction work, including materials and labor,
for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical,
plumbing equipment, and permanent systems. Building permit valuation shall be
set by the building official.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
§ 150.36 GRADING PERMIT FEES.
   All grading permit fees shall be set by the City Council annual fee
resolution.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
§ 150.37 SIGN PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   All sign permit fees shall be set by the City Council annual fee
resolution. The fees are:
      (1)   Sign permit; and
      (2)   Zoning permit.
   (B)   Per Minn. Rules part 1300.0160 subp. 3 Fees: Permit valuation shall
include total value of all construction work, including materials and labor,
for which the permit is being issued.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
§ 150.38 MECHANICAL AND PLUMBING PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   All mechanical and plumbing permit fees shall be set by the City
Council annual fee resolution. The fees are:
      (1)   Permit; and
      (2)   Minnesota state surcharge.
   (B)   Per Minn. Rules part 1300.0160 subp 3 Fees: Permit valuation shall
include total value of all construction work, including materials and labor,
for which the permit is being issued.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
§ 150.39 DEMOLITION PERMIT FEES.
   All demolition permit fees shall be set by the City Council annual fee
resolution. There are two fees collected for a demolition permit in the city.
The fees are for:
   (A)   Building permit; and
   (B)   Zoning permit.
   (C)   Per Minn. Rules part 1300.0160 subp. 3 Fees: Permit valuation shall
include total value of all construction work, including materials and labor,
for which the permit is being issued.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
§ 150.40 RESERVED.
§ 150.41 SIMILAR PLANS.
   (A)   The origination fee to establish a master plan for repetitive use is
the full normal plan review fee. The origination fee does not include the
issuance of a permit.
   (B)   The plan review fee for similar plans based on an approved master plan
is 15% of the building permit fee for IRC structures and 25% of the building
permit fee for all other structures.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03)
§ 150.42 FEE REFUNDS.
   (A)   The city representative may authorize refunding of any fee that was
erroneously paid or collected or if none of the work authorized by the permit
has been performed. An administrative fee may be charged for processing a
refund.
   (B)   The Building Safety Supervisor shall not authorize refunding of any
permit fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee
not later than 180 days after the date of permit issuance. Plan review fees,
IRC footing permit fees and application fees shall not be refunded.
(Ord. 03-08, passed 11-26-03; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 5-12-21)
CODES
§ 150.55 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Adoption.  The International Building Code, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code
of the City of Byron in the State of Minnesota; for the control of building and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division
(B).
   (B)   Amendments.
      (1)   Section 101.1 Insert: City of Byron
      (2)   Section 1612.3 Insert: City of Byron
      (3)   Section 1612.3 Insert: City of Byron
      (4)   Section 3409.2: Insert: City of Byron
(Ord. 03-11, passed 11-26-03)
§ 150.56 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE AND TWO FAMILY
DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Adoption. The International Residential Code § R102.5, 2000 edition,
as published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted as the code of
the City of Byron for regulating the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one and two-family dwellings
and townhouses not more than three stories in height in the city and providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part of hereof as if fully set out in this section.
   (B)   Amendments.
      (1)   Section R101.1 Insert: City of Byron
      (2)   Table R301.2(1) Insert:
(Ord. 03-12, passed 1-1-04)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Title
   
151.002   Purposes
   
151.003   Jurisdiction
   
151.004   Effective date and legal authority
   
151.005   Policy
   
151.006   Interpretation, conflict and severability
   
151.007   Enforcement
   
151.008   Definitions
Design Standards
   
151.020   General provisions
   
151.021   Blocks
   
151.022   Lots
   
151.023   Streets
   
151.024   Non-motorized connections
   
151.025   Utilities and easements
   
151.026   Soil protection
Improvements
   
151.040   General provisions
   
151.041   Required agreements
   
151.042   Construction observation and acceptance of improvements
   
151.043   Maintenance of improvements
   
151.044   Deferral or waiver of required improvements
Park Land Dedication
   
151.060   General provisions
   
151.061   Land dedication
   
151.062   Cash in lieu of land dedication
Administration and Procedures
   
151.075   General provisions
   
151.076   Conveyance by metes and bounds
   
151.077   Resubdivision of land
   
151.078   Concept plan
   
151.079   Preliminary plat
   
151.080   Final plat
   
151.081   Subdivision variance
   
151.082   Subdivision regulation amendment
 
   
151.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited, and referred to as the"
Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Byron, Minnesota" and may be referred to
as “this chapter.”
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.002 PURPOSES.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth the minimum requirements deemed necessary to
ensure and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
   (B)   More specifically, the provisions of this chapter are designed:
      (1)   To guide the future growth and development of the municipality, in
accordance with the Byron Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety
from fire, flood, and other danger and to prevent overcrowding of the land and
undue congestion of population;
      (3)   To protect the character and the social and economic stability of
all parts of Byron and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
the entire city;
      (4)   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout Byron and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land and to minimize the conflicts
among the uses of land and buildings;
      (5)   To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation, and other public requirements and facilities;
      (6)   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of
land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the municipality
having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and
highways and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses
of land and buildings and to provide for the proper location and width of
streets and building lines;
      (7)   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use
of land and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided
land;
      (8)   To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a
sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision;
      (9)   To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order
to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value
of the land;
      (10)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to
ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features;
      (11)   To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and
layout of the land, including the use of average density in providing for
minimum width and area of lots, while preserving the density of land as
established in the zoning code of Byron.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.003 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   These subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land,
as defined herein, located within the corporate limits of Byron.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, a subdivision of land is the
division of a tract of land into two or more parcels by platting, replatting,
conveyance, registered land survey, or other means.
   (C)   No land shall be subdivided within the corporate limits of the city
unless it has received approval from the Zoning Administrator or City Council
and it has been recorded with the county.
   (D)   For any parcel or plat of land that was created by subdivision after
the effective date of this chapter, no building permit shall be issued if the
project is not in conformity with the provisions of these subdivision
regulations.
   (E)   No excavation of land or construction of any public or private
improvement shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the
regulations.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.004 EFFECTIVE DATE AND LEGAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The effective date of this chapter is May 9, 2023. This chapter hereby
supersedes and replaces in its entirety,
Chapter 151 of the Byron, Minnesota Code of Ordinances on the effective date
hereof.
   (B)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to M.S. Chapter 462, including but
not limited to M.S. § 462.358, as well as other applicable state statutes and
rules as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.005 POLICY.
   (A)   It is declared to be the policy of the city to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as
subject to the control of the city pursuant to the Byron Comprehensive Plan for
the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of Byron.
   (B)   Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to public health or peril from
fire, flood, or other menace to property owners or the land resource and land
shall not be subdivided until public facilities and improvements are available
and proper provision has been made for drainage, water supply, sewerage,
protection of natural resources, and capital improvements such as parks,
recreation facilities, transportation facilities, and improvements.
   (C)   The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to the proposals shown in the Byron Comprehensive Plan and it
is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the Building Code,
Zoning Code and Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.006 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these
regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety and general welfare.
      (1)   Public provisions. The regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or
other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher
standards shall control.
      (2)   Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, or private agreement or
restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive or higher standards
than the requirements of this chapter or the determination of the Planning
Commission or the City Council in approving a subdivision in enforcing this
chapter and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this chapter or
determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and
supplemental to this chapter and determinations made thereunder.
   (B)   Use of graphics, illustrations, figures, photos, and cross-references.
      (1)   Graphics, illustrations, figures, and photos are provided for
illustrative purposes only and shall not be construed as regulations. Where a
conflict may occur between the text and any graphic, illustration, figure, or
photo, the text shall control.
      (2)   In some instances, cross-references between chapters, sections, and
subsections are provided that include the chapter, section, or subsection
number along with the name of the reference. Where a conflict may occur between
the given cross-reference number and name, the name shall control.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any part or provision
of these regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is
adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be
confined in its operation to the part, provisions or application directly
involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and
shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations
or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The City Council
declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even
without any such part, provision, or application.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.007 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator and City Clerk and their designees are
authorized to enforce these regulations. If the issue cannot be resolved
satisfactorily, the Zoning Administrator and City Clerk may request City
Council authorization to direct the City Attorney to address violations or lack
of compliance. The City Council may remand the issue to the Planning Commission
for a recommendation.
   (B)   No applicant for a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any
such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations and filed with the County Recorder.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms,
and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in
this section. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used
in the plural number include the singular; the word “herein” means in these
regulations; the word “regulations” means these regulations.
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity that applies for a building permit,
subdivision approval, or a permit to allow land disturbing activities.
   BLOCK. Any combination of land ownership bounded by streets, roads or
highways, or a combination thereof, or by a combination of streets, roads or
highways and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, streams, lakes,
or similar manmade or natural physical barriers.
   BUFFER. A strip of land, which may include vegetation, berms, fences, or
walls, intended to separate two different uses from one another.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and used
or built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel, or
property of any kind.
   BUILDING or STRUCTURE. Includes any part thereof.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or
periodically.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The licensed attorney designated by the governing body to
furnish legal assistance for the administration of these regulations.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body for the City of Byron.
   CITY ENGINEER. The licensed engineer designated by the governing body to
furnish engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.
   COMBINED ACCESS DRIVE. A driveway which provides access to more than one
lot.
   COMPLETE STREETS. The policy adopted by the city to encourage development of
a connected network of city roadways and facilities that accommodate every mode
of travel and which encourages Byron to enhance the safety, access and comfort
of all users of all ages and abilities, including pedestrians, bicyclists,
public transportation users, motorists and freight drivers, through the design,
operation, and maintenance of the transportation network.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A compilation of policy statements, goals, standards,
and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development, both
private and public, of the municipality and its environs and may include, but
is not limited to, the following: statements of policies, goals, standards, a
land use plan, a community facilities plan, a transportation plan, and
recommendations for plan execution. A Comprehensive Plan represents the City
Council's recommendations for the future development of the municipality.
   CONCEPT PLAN. A generalized plan indicating the boundaries of land intended
for development which identifies the proposed land use, development pattern,
and roadway alignment.
   COUNTY RECORDER. The County Recorder of Olmsted County.
   EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner for the use of a designated portion of land by the public, individuals,
groups, or corporations for specific purposes.
   ENCUMBRANCE. A claim against an asset by an entity that is not the owner.
Common encumbrances may include liens, easements, leases, mortgages, or
restrictive covenants.
   ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS. This term shall refer to the standards and
specifications listed in the city’s Engineering Standards for Public Works and
Standard Specifications and Details.
   EROSION CONTROL/PROTECTION. Methods employed to prevent erosion which may
include but are not limited to soil stabilization practices, limited grading,
mulch, temporary erosion protection or permanent cover, and construction
phasing.
   FINAL PLAT. The final map or drawing on which the applicant’s plan of
subdivision is presented to the City Council for approval and which, if
approved, shall be submitted to the County Register of Deeds or Registrar of
Titles.
   FRONTAGE. The lot line adjoining a public street as measured along the
street.
   GRADE. The slope of a road, street, or other public way, specified in
percentage terms.
   GROUNDWATER. All water below the water table or upper limits of saturation
and water below an apparent or perched water table as defined by the USDA SCS,
Soil Survey of Olmsted County, Minnesota.
   HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION. A formally constituted non-profit association or
corporation made up of the property owners and/or residents of a definitive
area; who collectively may take permanent responsibility for costs and upkeep
of commonly owned or designated community property.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water and
causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased
rate of flow than prior to development. Examples of impervious surface include
surfaces such as compacted sand, gravel, or clay as well as most conventionally
surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part of, is placed
upon, or is affixed to land.
   IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC. Any improvement for which the local government may
ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation or which may
affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
   INDUSTRIAL USE. Any use specified listed within the industrial category on
Table XX.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership or for development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c1fff79dfcc389b806b92a451f8f8c6ded08a054/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1371.png]
 
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on more
than one street.
   LOT, IRREGULAR. A lot with opposing property lines that are generally not
parallel, such as a pie-shaped lot or a multi-sided lot.
   LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE. A lot so subdivided as to have its side lot lines
coincide with the rear lot lines of adjacent lots on either or both sides of
the aforesaid reversed frontage lot.
   LOT LINE. A line dividing one lot from another lot or from a street or
alley.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The line separating the lot from the street right-of-way.
In the case of a corner or double frontage lot, it shall be the shortest
dimension on a public street or as designated by the original owner and filed
with the city.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and
most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear,
the rear lot line shall be that assumed line parallel to the front lot line not
less than ten feet long, lying parallel and most distantly from the front lot
line and wholly within the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c1fff79dfcc389b806b92a451f8f8c6ded08a054/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1373.png]
 
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front or a rear lot line. A side lot line
separating a lot from a street is called a corner side lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side lot
line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c1fff79dfcc389b806b92a451f8f8c6ded08a054/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1375.png]
 
   MONUMENT. Concrete and/or metal markers utilized to establish survey points
and lot boundaries.
   MULTI-USE TRAIL. A walkway or bikeway designed with a paved surface pathway
for travel by means other than by motorized vehicles.
   NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision whose intended use is other than
residential, such as commercial or industrial.
   OPEN SPACE. An area of land preserved from building development and intended
to provide light and air within a development. Open space may be used for
environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes.
   OUTLOT. An undevelopable parcel of land shown on a subdivision plat as an
outlot and designated for one of the following purposes:
      (1)   Land which is smaller than the minimum size permitted for lots and
which is thereby declared unbuildable until combined through platting with
additional land;
      (2)   Land that is part of the subdivision but is to be subdivided into
lots and blocks at a later date; or
      (3)   Land that is to be used for a specific purpose (i.e. parks, trails,
stormwater holding, etc.) as designated in a development agreement or other
agreement between the city and the applicant. This land may be part of a
homeowner’s association or some other similar entity approved by the city.
   OVERSIZING. Public utilities or infrastructure which is installed at a size
greater than necessary to serve the specific development in which it is located
in order to serve future or additional development outside of the development.
   PERSON.  Includes a corporation, a partnership and an incorporated
association of persons such as a club.
   PERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface maintained in its natural condition or covered
by a material that permits infiltration or percolation of water into the
ground.
   PHASING PLAN. A drawing submitted with the preliminary plat that shows the
order and anticipated timing of the final platting of the development.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. A governmental agency appointed by the governing body
according to M.S. §§ 462.352 and 462.354.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary map or drawing containing the applicant’s
plan of subdivision and including all elements and requirements set forth in
this chapter and the applicable zoning ordinance regulations.
   PUBLIC HEARING. A public meeting for which public notice has been given and
an opportunity for public testimony is provided.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land acquired by dedication, reservation,
prescription, or condemnation and occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, sidewalk, trail, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another
special use.
   SANITARY SEWER. All pipes, manholes, and other structures, appurtenances, or
courses, manmade or natural, which form a part of the sanitary sewer system of
the city.
   SETBACK. The minimum distance in linear feet measured on a horizontal plane
between a structure and a lot line, ordinary high water level, top of a bluff,
or right-of-way.
   SHALL is always mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. An improved surface that is typically located adjacent to a
roadway.
   SLOPE. The change in ground elevation between two points.
   SLOPE, STEEP. A slope exceeding 8%.
   SOIL EROSION. Any process that wears away the surface of the land by the
action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. Erosion can be accelerated by the
activities of people and nature.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. Water defined under Minnesota Rules 7077.0105(41)(b)
which includes precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snowmelt, and any other
surface runoff and drainage.
   STREAM. A perennial or intermittent waterway where excess water from rain,
snowmelt, or groundwater accumulates on the ground surface and begins to run
downhill.
   STREET. A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords primary
means of access to abutting property, whether designated as a street, highway,
arterial, collector, road, avenue, lane, place, or however otherwise described.
   STREET, CONTROLLED ACCESS. A roadway which restricts access to the right-of-
way.
   STREET, DEAD-END (PERMANENT). A street having one end open to traffic and
being permanently terminated by a turnaround for vehicles. A cul-de-sac is
considered a permanent dead-end street.
   STREET, DEAD-END (TEMPORARY). A street having one end open to traffic and
being temporarily terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
   STREET, EXISTING NEIGHBORHOOD COLLECTOR. An existing street designated in
the Comprehensive Plan which connects neighborhoods and local streets to
arterial streets. Access is controlled where possible to reduce conflicts with
private drives.
   STREET, FUTURE NEIGHBORHOOD COLLECTOR. A future street designated in the
Comprehensive Plan which is intended to connect neighborhoods and local streets
to arterial streets. Private access drives are limited on this street type.
   STREET, LOCAL. A street of limited continuity designated in the
Comprehensive Plan which is used primarily for access to the abutting
properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
   STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL. A street designated in the Comprehensive Plan and
primarily designed for vehicle mobility between and among large areas. Minor
arterial streets provide a quarter to half mile roadway access but do not allow
new private access drives.
   STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL. A street designated in the Comprehensive Plan
and primarily designed to carry large volumes of traffic and to provide for
vehicular movement between and among large areas. PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL STREETS
include very limited roadway access and no private access drives.
   STREET, PRIVATE. A private access way that connects abutting properties to a
public street. Private streets differ from private driveways in that the
private street is on a separate parcel from the structure(s) it serves, and
that it is owned and maintained by a homeowner’s association or some other
similar entity approved by the city.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. This
definition includes but is not limited to buildings, manufactured homes, sheds,
towers, detached garages, and other similar items.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract of land into two (2) or more parcels by
platting, replatting, conveyance, registered land survey, or other means.
   SUBDRAIN. Perforated pipe installed for draining groundwater. Formerly known
as subsurface water drainage.
   SURFACE DRAINAGEWAY. A waterway used for the drainage of surface water.
   TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT. Improvements built and maintained by an applicant
during construction of the subdivision and prior to final City Engineer
inspection and approval of all required improvements.
   TOPSOIL. The fertile, uppermost part of the soil containing significant
organic matter largely devoid of debris and rocks and often disturbed in
cultivation.
   USED or OCCUPIED. As applied to any land or building, shall be construed to
include the words “intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied”.
   UTILITY, PRIVATE. Utilities which are not subject to city acceptance for
operation or maintenance, including natural gas lines, electric power,
communication lines, their appurtenances, and any component part(s) thereof.
   UTILITY, PUBLIC. Utilities that are subject to city acceptance for operation
and maintenance, including water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, and their appurtenances and any component part(s) thereof.
   WALKWAY. Any sidewalk or trail intended for pedestrian use.
   WATERWAY. A channel or depression through which water flows year-round or
intermittently such as rivers, streams, or creeks.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The officer as appointed by the governing body to
administer the regulations of this chapter and to administratively assist other
boards and commissions.
   ZONING CODE.
Chapter 152 of this Code of Ordinances controlling the use of land as adopted
by the city.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 151.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conformance to applicable rules and regulations.
      (1)   The subdivision standards contained in this chapter exist to ensure
that the improvements, reservations and design of developments will conform to
minimum requirements while promoting the health, safety and general welfare of
the public.
      (2)   In addition to these regulations and to ensure that future
developments are consistent with land use goals, objectives, and policies of
the city, subdivisions shall conform to the Byron Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Code, Building Code, and Engineering Specifications.
      (3)   All subdivision plats also shall comply with all applicable
statutory provisions, rules and regulations of the State of Minnesota.
   (B)   Land suitability.
      (1)   Land which the City Council finds to be unsuitable for subdivision
or development due to flooding, severe soil erosion potential, improper
drainage, or other soil related problems or other features which will
reasonably be harmful to the safety, health or general welfare of the present
or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas shall not
be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the
applicant and approved by the City Council upon recommendation of the City
Engineer to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such
land shall be set aside for land uses that shall not involve such a danger.
      (2)   Flood prone areas.
         (a)   The City Council may, when it deems it necessary for the health,
safety or welfare of the present and future population of the area and
necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities,
prohibit the subdivision of any portion of land which lies within a flood prone
area as identified by an applicable engineering study or by Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRM) for the City of Byron prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) if available. These flood prone areas shall be
preserved from any and all destruction, damage, or alteration which restricts
flow or changes the direction of flow and substantially changes the location of
flooding, as required by the Zoning Code.
         (b)   All subdivisions shall have vehicular access both to the
subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below
an elevation established by an engineering study of the area or the regulatory
flood protection elevation if available.
         (c)   All buildable lots created within the flood prone area shall
contain a building site located above an elevation established by an
engineering study of the area or at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation if available.
   (C)   Exceptions to design standards. The City Council may authorize a
modification or exception to the design standards listed in this section in
order to permit reasonable subdivision of property as recommended by city staff
based on characteristics unique to the property. These conditions may include,
but are not limited to, natural features (topography, wetlands, floodplain,
etc.), presence of major utilities (high pressure gas main), and size of
subdivision.
   (D)   Self-imposed restrictions. If the applicant places restrictions on any
of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the
Zoning Code or these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto shall
be required to be submitted with the preliminary plat and in a document
attached to the final plat. The City Council shall require that restrictive
covenants be recorded with the County Recorder.
   (E)   Design statement. The city shall encourage site planning for
subdivisions and other development covered by this chapter that is well
organized and will be a livable and/or productive space that supports the needs
and activities of the people of each subdivision and the people of Byron.
      (1)   In order to accomplish such an objective, applicants will need to
follow a reasonable site planning process that includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Recognition of the need for responsible and sensitive site
planning;
         (b)   Collection of information regarding manmade and natural features
and analysis of the locality;
         (c)   Organization of the site and surrounding area, including land
use and density of development;
         (d)   Movement to, from and within the site;
         (e)   Appearance or attractiveness of the site plan-design;
         (f)   Analysis of the development when completed and occupied,
including streets, housing types and environmental conditions to see if it
works as envisioned; and
         (g)   Consideration of future site management.
      (2)   Finally, the subdivision design should reflect certain basic
elements of sound development, including:
         (a)   Preservation of the character of the land;
         (b)   Economy of construction;
         (c)   Inclusion of special facilities;
         (d)   Variation in design;
         (e)   Privacy and sociability; and
         (f)   Individual lot sizes that are practicable and desirable.
   (F)   Standards. In addition to the principles and standards listed in this
division, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the
applicant for a nonresidential subdivision shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the City Council that the street, lot, and block pattern
proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account
other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be
observed:
      (1)   Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and
dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated;
      (2)   Special requirements may be imposed by the city for street, gutter
and sidewalk design and construction and for the installation of public
utilities, including water, sewer, and storm water drainage.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.021 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be
permitted in blocks adjacent to arterial streets or frontage roads, railroads,
waterways, natural hazards, or sensitive areas.
   (B)   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but
block lengths in residential areas shall be a walkable block size generally
less than 600 feet in length. Walkable blocks are encouraged. If applicant
wishes to deviate from the walkable block size they must be able to justify
their rationale.
   (C)   On blocks exceeding 600 feet in length, the City Council may require
the reservation of an easement or dedication of a right-of-way through the
block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, and/or pedestrian traffic.
Walkways not less than ten feet wide may be required by the City Council
through the center of blocks more than 600 feet long where deemed essential to
provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation or other community facilities.
   (D)   Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width
as may be determined suitable by the City Council for prospective use.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.022 LOTS.
   (A)   Lot improvement. The lot arrangements shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography, grading, or other
conditions in securing site plan approval and building permits to build on all
lots in a manner which is compliant with these regulations and the zoning code,
and which provides reasonable driveway access to buildings from an approved
right-of-way. Where topographic and soils constraints are present on a lot or
area, subdivision design shall be suitable for development and will not create
unstable slopes and/or the potential for chronic soil erosion problems.
   (B)   Lot dimensions.
      (1)   Lots shall comply with the minimum dimensional standards of the
Zoning Code.
         (a)   Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for
erection of buildings observing the minimum yard requirements from both streets
as specified in the Zoning Code. Lots shall be large enough to minimize
grading, stormwater runoff, and soil erosion problems.
         (b)   Lots in residential districts that are adjacent to railroad
right-of-way shall include an additional 25 foot easement on that portion of
the lot adjacent to the right-of-way which shall be used as a buffer strip.
This buffer area shall be shown on the preliminary plat and attached as a
separate document and diagram with the final plat: "This easement is reserved
for buffering and screening. The placement of buildings hereon is prohibited."
      (2)   Where lots are more than double the minimum required area specified
for the applicable zoning district, the City Council may require that such lots
be arranged and sized so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of
future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots.
      (3)   All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing
a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, dedicated to the public, owned
with specified restrictions by a homeowner association or comparable
association, or dedicated as an outlot with specific restrictions.
      (4)   Irregular shaped lots are discouraged. Where such lots are
proposed, the development shall demonstrate to the city an ability to properly
place principal buildings and accessory structures on the site in a manner
which is compatible in size and character to the surrounding area.
      (5)   In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines
or radial to curving street lines unless a variation from the rule will give a
better street or lot plan, or unless topographic conditions necessitate a
different arrangement.
   (C)   Frontage.
      (1)   No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided
shall have frontage on and access from an existing street right-of-way, a
street that is an existing state, county, or township highway, or a street not
yet constructed but shown upon a plat approved by the City Council and recorded
in the County Recorder Office. Such street shall be suitably improved to allow
year-round safe access by residents of the area and all safety vehicles.
      (2)   Every lot shall abut on a public street to provide access for fire
protection, utilities and other services unless a subdivision has received
approval from the City Council for a private street or access easement.
      (3)   Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except
where necessary to provide separation of residential development from arterials
or higher level streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
   (D)   Access to arterial streets.
      (1)   Arterial streets are considered to be controlled access streets.
Therefore, where possible, lots shall not derive access exclusively from an
arterial street.
      (2)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the City Council may limit access to such streets by one of
the following means:
         (a)   The subdivision of lots shall be designed so that all lots to
back onto the arterial and front onto a parallel local street. No access shall
be provided from the arterial, and screening shall be provided in a strip of
land along the rear property line of such lots.
         (b)   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets or short loop streets
entered from and designed generally at right angles to a street parallel to the
arterial street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the
arterial when there are preexisting obstacles/conditions beyond the
applicant's/city's control, i.e., gas lines, railroad tracks, water/sewer
mains, etc.
         (c)   Where driveway access to and from an arterial street may be
necessary for several adjoining lots, such lots may be required to be served by
a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards.
         (d)   Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as
to avoid requiring vehicles to back onto arterial streets.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.023 STREETS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Proposed roads shall conform to the state, county, and/or city
plans as have been prepared, adopted, and/or filed as prescribed by law.
      (2)   Streets shall be designed to comply with the standards set forth in
the city’s Engineering Specifications.
      (3)   Any streets which are required to be oversized as a result of the
proposed development shall be the responsibility of the applicant to construct
according to city requirements.
      (4)   In accordance with the Byron Comprehensive Plan and the city’s
Complete Streets Policy, future streets shall be designed as complete streets
and where possible, aging streets shall be redeveloped to incorporate
components of complete streets.
      (5)   Where a subdivision borders an existing undersized street or when
plans indicate a need for realignment or widening of a street that would be
used by the land within the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to
dedicate at their expense such areas for widening or realignment of such roads
to the full width as required by this chapter.
      (6)   Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and spelling
from other city/county street names so as not to cause confusion. A street
which is or is planned as a continuation of an existing street shall bear the
same name. Where possible, all streets shall be numbered progressively.
      (7)   The city shall install all street signs and street regulatory signs
as deemed necessary or at appropriate times as a subdivision is developed.
   (B)   Street layout.
      (1)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of roadways and dedicated rights-of-way.
      (2)   Streets shall relate appropriately to the topography. All streets
shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible building sites at or
above the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as
possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves
shall be avoided.
      (3)   All collector streets shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools, places of worship,
and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing
and proposed land uses.
      (4)   Local streets shall be arranged to discourage use by through
traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the
minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to
property.
      (5)   The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of
streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for
convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, and for efficient
provision of utilities. The use of dead end streets shall be minimized.
      (6)   The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make
provisions for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by
carrying the new streets (both the right-of-way and pavement) to the boundary
lines of the new subdivision at appropriate locations unless prevented by
topography or other physical conditions, or unless the City Council determines
that such extension is not necessary or desirable for future development on
adjacent tracts.
      (7)   In nonresidential and multi-unit residential developments, streets
and other accessways shall be planned to minimize conflict of movement between
the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
   (C)   Treatment of dead-end streets.
      (1)   Dead end streets may be considered in those areas where such street
design serves as a way to preserve open space or protect the integrity of the
greenway system or where topography or other physical features do not permit
connecting streets.
      (2)   Dead end streets (temporary).
         (a)   If the property adjacent to a subdivision is undeveloped and the
street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be
extended to the property line.
         (b)   A turnaround shall be provided on all temporary dead-end
streets, with the notation on the preliminary plat and on a separate document
with the final plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall
revert to abutting property owners whenever the street is continued.
         (c)   The City Council may limit the length of temporary dead-end
streets in accordance with the standards in the Engineering Specifications.
         (d)   The temporary dead-end street shall be posted with signage
indicating that the road is a future through street to alert the public that
the road is planned to continue into the next development upon future
subdivision.
         (e)   A barricade shall be required to be placed across the end of the
temporary dead-end street, the length of the barricade shall be the minimum
required surface width as specified in the Engineering Specifications.
      (3)   Dead end streets (permanent).
         (a)   Where a street does not extend beyond the boundary of the
subdivision, and its continuation is not required by the City Council for
access to adjoining property, a permanent dead end street may be permitted.
         (b)   A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a
permanent dead-end street meeting the standards in the Engineering
Specifications.
         (c)   For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and
fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall be limited in length to 500
feet.
         (d)   The City Council may require the reservation of an appropriate
easement or right-of-way to accommodate drainage facilities, utilities or
pedestrian traffic.
   (D)   Private streets.
      (1)   Private streets shall only be allowed in compliance with the Byron
Comprehensive Plan and only for such roads which have no public interest for
traffic circulation. Private streets shall not create a conflict with adopted
road circulation plans or studies.
      (2)   The number, location, and width of private streets may be
controlled and limited by the City Council in the interests of public safety
and efficient traffic flow.
      (3)   Private streets are the responsibility of the applicant to
construct according to the standards listed in the Engineering Specifications,
including providing space for snow storage.
      (4)   Private streets shall provide facilities for non-motorized
connections as required for public streets in this chapter.
      (5)   Traffic signs and street signs that comply with applicable city
requirements shall be installed by the applicant at all intersections along
each private street.
      (6)   The city shall not maintain private roads or roadway signs. The
applicant shall ensure in writing the maintenance and repair of all private
streets and associated signage by a homeowner’s association or some other
similar entity approved by the city.
      (7)   The applicant for any subdivision including private streets shall
notify future property owners through deed restrictions and/or covenants which
streets in a development are private streets.
      (8)   The city will not accept the dedication of any private street until
it is brought into conformance with city street standards at the expense of
property owners.
   (E)   Intersections. Intersections shall be designed according to the city’s
Engineering Specifications.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.024 NON-MOTORIZED CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Walkways along roadways.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of any local street.
      (2)   Collector and arterial streets.
         (a)   Collector and arterial streets shall include provisions for non-
motorized connections on both sides of the street.
         (b)   Sidewalks shall be required along one side of any collector or
arterial street. The other side of the street may include a sidewalk, multi-use
trail, bike lane, or other type of connection at the city’s discretion.
         (c)   Where possible, the required sidewalk shall be located on the
same side of the street as previously existing sidewalks in the area to ensure
continuity and reduce the need for road crossings.
      (3)   Sidewalks shall be at least five feet in width and meet
specifications set forth by the Engineering Specifications, including
accessibility requirements.
      (4)   Multi-use trails shall be at least ten feet in width and meet
specifications set forth by the Engineering Specifications, including
accessibility requirements.
      (5)   Walkways must be placed in the public right-of-way or within an
easement in favor of the city.
   (B)   Trail linkages.
      (1)   All development, either at the time of platting or during site plan
approval, shall be required to demonstrate that the design of the proposed
development includes multi-use trail linkages pursuant to the City’s
Comprehensive Plan and Master Trail Plan.
      (2)   Unless otherwise directed by Council, blocks exceeding 900 feet in
any residential district shall be provided with trails or easements extending
between residential lots in locations deemed necessary to allow residents to
safely connect to neighboring streets or neighborhoods.
      (3)   Multi-use trails shall be at least ten feet wide and meet standards
set forth by the Engineering Specifications, including accessibility
requirements.
      (4)   Multi-use trail linkages must be placed within public right-of-way
or in an easement of suitable width in favor of the city.
   (C)   Additional pedestrian-oriented facilities, including outdoor seating,
proper lighting and safe crosswalks and separation of pedestrian ways from
vehicular traffic, where possible, may be required by the City Council.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.025 UTILITIES AND EASEMENTS.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Ownership.
         (a)   Sanitary sewer, water, storm sewer, and subdrain utilities shall
be publicly owned and maintained.
         (b)   All other utilities shall be privately owned and maintained.
      (2)   Location.
         (a)   All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas,
electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, shall be located underground.
Wherever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except where
existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed
underground. Underground service connections to the street property line of
each platted lot shall be installed at the applicant's expense. At the
discretion of the City Council, the requirement for service connections to each
lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single
ownership and intended to be developed for the same primary use.
         (b)   All utility facilities shall be located within a utility
easement or the street right-of-way provided adjacent to each lot within the
subdivision. Utility facilities shall be located in accordance with the city’s
Engineering Specifications.
         (c)   Utilities under private streets.
            1.   Where publicly-owned utilities are located under a private
street, the city shall be responsible for any street repairs necessitated by
repairs or maintenance of the public utility. Conversely, if full replacement
of the public utility is required, the entity responsible for maintenance and
ownership of the private street shall be solely responsible for the related
street replacement.
            2.   Privately-owned utilities under private streets shall be owned
and maintained by the entity responsible for ownership of the street. Any
street repairs necessitated by the maintenance of the privately owned utility
shall not be the responsibility of the city.
   (B)   Water facilities.
      (1)   The applicant shall install adequate water facilities, including
fire hydrants, subject to the city’s Engineering Specifications and the State
of Minnesota. If oversized water facilities are required, the city shall
reimburse the applicant for the difference in cost of these facilities as
specified in the development agreement.
      (2)   All water mains shall be publicly owned.
      (3)   Water main extensions shall be approved by the City Council.
      (4)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions
as specified in the Engineering Specifications.
   (C)   Sanitary sewer facilities.
      (1)   All sanitary sewer facilities shall be installed in a manner
prescribed by the city and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency construction
standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with
the rules, regulations, and standards of the city and the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency. Plans shall be approved by the City Engineer and City Council.
      (2)   If oversized sewer facilities are required, the city shall
reimburse the applicant for the difference in cost of these facilities as
specified in the development agreement.
      (3)   If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is
placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the owner thereof shall be
required to connect to said sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and it
shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain upon any such
property an individual sewage disposal system.
   (D)   Drainage and storm sewers.
      (1)   General requirements.
         (a)   All subdivisions shall make adequate provision for storm or
flood water runoff to an adequate surface drainage facility and system.
         (b)   Development shall not increase stormwater runoff from the
property being subdivided and later developed.
         (c)   The storm water drainage system shall be separate and
independent of any sanitary sewer system.
         (d)   Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed according to the
standards listed in the Engineering Specifications.
         (e)   Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away
from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the
general storm drainage pattern for the area.
         (f)   The drainage system shall be constructed and operational during
the initial phases of construction.
         (g)   Drainageways shall be constructed in such a way as to not cause
additional soil erosion or sedimentation during and after all phases of
construction.
      (2)   Natural drainage system.
         (a)   All lots shall be developed to maximize the use of the natural
drainage system of an area in order to minimize direct overland runoff from lot
to lot and into adjoining streets and water courses. Where necessary, the
natural surface drainage system shall be augmented by constructed surface
drainageways.
         (b)   Storm water runoff from roofs and other impervious surfaces
should be directed to pervious soil and into drainageways or onto terraces on
the lot when possible. This may be an additional element or an alternative to
the underground storm sewer system as required in this section and recommended
by the City Engineer.
         (c)   Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be
maintained in an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate dimension for
maximum potential volume of flow without causing soil erosion.
         (d)   Low-lying lands along waterways subject to flooding during storm
periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved
and retained in their natural state as drainageways.
      (3)   Subdrain.
         (a)   Each subdivision shall be required to provide drain tile meeting
all city specifications. The drain tile shall be located in the street right-
of-way or in a separate utility or drainage easement.
         (b)   The City Council may choose to waive this requirement if the
Council determines that there is no possible means to provide a proper outlet
for such drainage system due to existing development patterns and public
improvements.
         (c)   Connections from this drain tile to the lot line of every lot of
the subdivision shall be provided.
         (d)   Every lot owner shall be required to connect drain tile that
surrounds the residential building foundation and including sump pump
facilities to the drain tile located in the street right-of-way or a utility or
drainage easement at the time the residential is constructed. In accordance
with Code §
51.36, lot owners may not connect sump pump facilities to the sanitary sewer
system.
      (4)   Public storm sewers.
         (a)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall
install storm sewer facilities. If no outlets are within a reasonable distance,
adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm waters, subject to
the specifications of the City Engineer.
         (b)   Public storm sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the
subdivision and be conducted to an approved outfall when any of the following
occur:
            1.   Where natural drainage systems cannot adequately conduct water
runoff;
            2.   In residential subdivisions containing lots less than 15,000
square feet in area; or
            3.   In commercial and industrial districts.
         (c)   Inspection of public storm sewer facilities shall be conducted
by the City Engineer.
         (d)   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided
eventually, as recommended by the City Engineer, the applicant shall provide
for future storm water disposal by a public storm sewer system at the time the
plat receives final approval.
      (5)   Drainageway sizing and design. This subsection addresses design
requirements for any new or reconstructed drainageways:
         (a)   System sizing.
            1.   Drainage system elements, including culverts or natural
drainageways, shall be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from the
entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The
City Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on the
standards listed within the Engineering Specifications assuming conditions of
maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Zoning Code.
            2.   If the City Engineer determines that the drainage system must
be oversized to manage current or future storm water runoff, the applicant
shall be responsible for the costs of this oversizing.
         (b)   Constructed waterways shall follow the city’s Engineering
Specifications.
         (c)   The banks of the waterway shall be protected with permanent
vegetation.
         (d)   The bed of the waterway should be protected with turf, sod, or
concrete. If turf or sod will not function properly, rip rap may be used. Rip
rap shall consist of quarried limestone, field-stone (if random rip rap is
used), or construction materials of concrete. Construction materials shall be
used only in those areas where the waterway is not used as part of a city park.
         (e)   If the flow velocity in the waterway is such that erosion of the
turf sidewall will occur and said velocity cannot be decreased via velocity
control structures, then other materials may replace turf on the side walls.
         (f)   Development of housing and other structures shall be restricted
from the area on either side of the waterway required to channel a 100-year
storm.
   (E)   Easements.
      (1)   The applicant shall provide drainage and utility easements in
accordance with the city’s Engineering Specifications.
      (2)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation, an easement of land on both sides of existing waterways to a
distance to be recommended by the City Engineer.
      (3)   Drainage and utility easements may be combined into a single
easement if approved by the city at the time of review.
      (4)   Utility easements.
         (a)   Perpetual unobstructed easements shall be provided for public
utilities. Such easements shall be at least ten feet wide and centered on rear
lot lines and provided along all street rights-of-way. Proper coordination
shall be established between the applicant and the applicable utility companies
for the establishment of utility easements.
         (b)   Where topographic or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities along the rear lot lines, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side
lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. Easements
shall be indicated on the plat.
         (c)   Any site element, including but not limited to buildings,
fences, and shrubs and trees, which is placed within a utility easement is done
so at the property owner’s risk and must meet required setbacks to the utility
improvement.
      (5)   Drainage easements.
         (a)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a waterway, drainageway,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming
substantially to the lines of such waterway and of such width and construction
or both as will be adequate for the purpose.
         (b)   Where conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion
of drainage facilities within street rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed
easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be
provided across property outside the street lines and with satisfactory access
to the street. Drainage easements shall connect the street right-of-way to a
natural waterway or to other approved drainage facilities and shall be
designated on the plat.
         (c)   No site elements are permitted within a drainage easement.
         (d)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and
indicated on the preliminary plat and in a separate document attached to the
final plat.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.026 SOIL PROTECTION.
   (A)   Soil preservation. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots
or used as spoil, but, where necessary, topsoil shall be redistributed so as to
provide a minimum of six inches on the lots and shall be stabilized by sodding
or seeding for adequate soil erosion protection during the current growing
season (spring, summer, fall) or the first growing season following lot and/or
subdivision improvements, whichever comes first.
   (B)   Erosion and sediment control.
      (1)   All erosion and sediment control requirements shall conform to the
current requirements of NPDES construction stormwater general permit and the
Engineering Specifications.
      (2)   The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented
by topography and soil so as to limit development on steep slopes and create
the least potential for soil erosion.
      (3)   Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with
the different stages of construction. Appropriate measures shall be installed
prior to development when necessary to control erosion.
      (4)   Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that
adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any time.
When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of
time.
      (5)   Soil erosion and sedimentation shall not occur on public rights-of-
way or easements.
         (a)   Sediment shall be contained on the lot during and after
subdivision and lot development no matter what time of year development of any
type occurs.
         (b)   Where soil erosion or deposition has occurred on public right-
of-way or drainage easements and the applicant or property owner does not take
action to remedy the resulting situation, the city may take appropriate
remedial action and charge the applicant or property owner the city's costs for
such cleanup action.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 151.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The city may require the following improvements of any development:
      (1)   All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, road
intersection corners, and points of tangency and curvature shall be marked with
survey monuments meeting the minimum requirements of state law and the County
surveyor. All federal, state, county and other official bench marks, monuments,
or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position unless a relocation is approved by the controlling agency;
      (2)   Drainage system;
      (3)   Sidewalks and trails;
      (4)   Streets;
      (5)   Street lighting;
      (6)   Street name signs;
      (7)   Traffic control signs;
      (8)   Tree planting;
      (9)   Utilities;
      (10)   Over-sized utility trunk lines; and
      (11)   Other improvements not listed.
   (B)   All required improvements shall be made by the applicant or the city
as specified by the City Council.
      (1)   Where required improvements are completed by the applicant, the
improvements shall be furnished, installed, and inspected by the city at the
sole expense of the applicant.
      (2)   When required improvements are completed by the city:
         (a)   Each lot of a subdivision shall be assessed its fair share of
the total cost per the city’s assessment policy.
         (b)   Improvements shall be provided in accordance with city policy
and state law subject to the following:
            1.   The approved subdivision must abut upon a presently platted
and substantially developed area;
            2.   The total cost of required improvements shall be assessed
against the benefitted property within a reasonable period of time acceptable
to the City Council per the city’s assessment policy.
   (C)   All required temporary improvements shall be maintained for the period
specified by the City Council.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.041 REQUIRED AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   For all subdivisions, the applicant shall enter into a development
agreement to ensure that all improvements are furnished and constructed in
accordance with plans and specifications to be approved by the City Engineer.
      (1)   The applicant shall enter into this contract prior to the
development of construction plans and installation of required improvements,
and prior to proceeding beyond the grading stage.
      (2)   The contract shall stipulate, but not be limited to, who shall
construct the improvements, the type and extent of the improvements to be
constructed, the cost of construction, the construction time schedule, and the
city's authority to inspect the construction.
   (B)   Letter of credit. In addition to the development agreement, the city
shall require a letter of credit(s) from the applicant for any improvements
that the applicant is responsible for. The following requirements shall be met:
      (1)   Said letter of credit shall be equal to 110% of the estimated cost
of improvements to be completed plus administrative expenses.
      (2)   The letter of credit shall also secure all lot improvements on the
individual lots of the subdivision as required in these regulations.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide the letter of credit at the time of
application for final subdivision approval.
      (4)   Such letter of credit shall comply with all statutory requirements
and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and
manner of execution as set forth in these regulations.
      (5)   The period within which required improvements must be completed
shall be specified in the development agreement and shall be incorporated in
the letter of credit and shall not in any event exceed two years from the date
of final approval. Such letter shall be approved by the City Council as to
amount and surety and satisfactory conditions. The Planning Commission may,
upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the City Council extension of the
completion date set forth in such letter for a maximum period of one additional
year.
      (6)   In those cases where a letter of credit has been posted and
required improvements have not been installed within the terms of the
development agreement, the City Council may thereupon declare the applicant to
be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of
the extent of the building development at the time the applicant is declared to
be in default.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.042 CONSTRUCTION OBSERVATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   General procedure and fees. The City Council shall provide for
observation of required improvements during construction and confirm their
satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the city a construction
observation fee as specified in the city’s fee schedule. These fees shall be
due and payable upon demand of the city, and no building permits shall be
issued until all fees are paid. If construction observation fees exceed the fee
deposited, the developer shall be responsible for paying the bill sent by the
city for the excess. If the City Engineer finds upon observation that any of
the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the
city's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be
responsible for completing the improvements in accordance with construction
standards and specifications.
   (B)   Certificate of satisfactory completion. The City Council will not
accept dedication of required improvements until the City Engineer has
submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed and until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has
certified to the City Engineer, through submission of detailed record drawings
of the subdivision indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other
information required by the City Council or City Engineer, that the layout of
the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with
construction plans for the subdivision and that all public improvements are
ready for dedication to the city and are free and clear of any and all liens
and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation, the City Council shall
thereafter accept the improvements for dedication and initiate the warranty
period.
   (C)   Completion of improvements; issuance of building permits.
      (1)   All improvements as required in these regulations, specified in the
final subdivision plat, and/or approved by the City Council, shall be completed
in accordance with the City Council's decision and to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer prior to the approval and release of any building permits. These
improvements may include, but are not limited to, soil conservation and
stabilization, lot drainage, lawn-grass seeding or sodding, removal of debris
and waste, and all other lot improvements required by the City Council.
      (2)   The applicant shall dedicate all improvements to the city, free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property.
      (3)   The extent of street improvement shall be adequate for vehicular
access by the prospective occupants of buildings and by police and fire
equipment with the first layer of bituminous placed on all roads prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   The city or applicant shall provide final grading and placement of
subsurface material and curb and gutter as listed in the Engineering
Specifications following the installation of all utilities. Adequate provision
shall be made for culverts, drains, shoulders, and curves.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.043 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements on the
individual subdivided lots such as erosion control and provide for snow removal
on streets, if required, until acceptance of the improvements by the City
Council.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.044 DEFERRAL OR WAIVER OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Council may defer or waive the installation of the required
improvements at the time of final plat approval, subject to appropriate
conditions, when any or all such improvements, in the City Council’s judgment,
are not requisite in the interests of the public health, safety, and general
welfare, or which are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting
facilities.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
PARK LAND DEDICATION
§ 151.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   An applicant for subdivision shall be responsible for providing to the
city a minimum of public outdoor recreation resources either through a land
dedication or cash in lieu of land dedication.
   (B)   The City Council shall have the discretion to accept one or the other
method or a combination of both depending on the development size, site
characteristics, and concept plans, so long as each applicant meets the minimum
land dedication or deposit requirements set forth herein.
   (C)   The provisions of §§
151.060 et seq., Park Land Dedication, are minimum standards. None of the
paragraphs below shall be construed as prohibiting an applicant from reserving
other land for recreation purposes in addition to the requirements of §§
151.060 et seq., Park Land Dedication.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.061 LAND DEDICATION.
   (A)   The city may accept public park land dedication at the discretion of
the City Council.
   (B)   The land shall be reserved for public parks, trails, playgrounds, or
other recreation purposes in locations designated on the Byron Comprehensive
Plan or otherwise where such reservations would be appropriate.
   (C)   Private open space for park or recreation purposes shall not be
considered to fulfill the requirements of this section.
   (D)   When recreation areas are accepted by the City Council, it shall be
based on the standard of 3.5 acres of recreation area for every 100 dwelling
units.
   (E)   The City Council shall not be required to accept land for the purposes
of the applicant’s compliance with division (D) above which will not be usable
for parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, or open space.
Examples of unusable land include:
      (1)   Land which is not of a suitable size, location, dimension,
topography, or general character;
      (2)   Land which would require extensive expenditures on the part of the
public to make usable, including protected wetlands, floodplains, and steep
slopes;
      (3)   Land reserved for park and open space purposes which is less than
two acres in size, with any dimension being less than 200 feet; or
      (4)   Land which does not have adequate street access for the public
purpose envisioned by the City Council.
   (F)   As part of the subdivision approval, the applicant shall be
responsible for making certain improvements to dedicated park land, including,
but not limited to, finish grading, ground cover, construction of trails,
parking lots, and clearly identifying park and trail boundaries with city-
approved markers.
   (G)   As part of any dedication of park land, a survey at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet shall be provided with topographic data, based on city
datum, including contours at vertical intervals of at least two feet,
waterways, wetlands, marshes, rock outcrops, easements, utilities and
vegetative data. Portions of any park land dedication which will be used for
borrow and fill activities elsewhere in the development shall be clearly
identified.
   (H)   Where an applicant has chosen to dedicate park land in an amount less
than specified in division (D) above, the applicant shall also provide a cash
contribution equal to a fraction of the park dedication fee otherwise payable.
This contribution should be proportionate to the difference between the land
dedicated and the land required to be dedicated.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.062 CASH IN LIEU OF LAND DEDICATION.
   (A)   The City Council may accept a cash payment from the applicant in lieu
of land dedication.
   (B)   Contributions of cash payments in lieu of land dedication shall be
placed in a special fund which shall be held and used by the city to acquire
land for, or to improve, parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails,
or public open space. Cash payments shall not be used for ongoing operation or
maintenance activities.
   (C)   The cash contribution shall be required with all final plat fees.
   (D)   Cash contributions shall be paid according to the city’s adopted fee
schedule.
      (1)   If there is a dispute regarding the amount of the proposed cash
contribution in lieu of the land dedication, then the applicant may, at their
own expense, obtain an appraisal of the property to establish the fair market
value of the land. The appraisal shall be completed by an approved member of
the Appraisal Institute (MAI), or equivalent real estate society.
      (2)   If the city disputes an appraisal provided by the applicant, the
city may, at the applicant’s expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by an
approved member of the MAI, or equivalent real estate society.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
§ 151.075 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The requirements of §§
151.075 et seq., Administration and Procedures, shall apply to all subdivision
applications and procedures subject to development review under this chapter
unless otherwise stated.
   (B)   Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the State of Minnesota to the City of Byron. The applicant has the duty of
compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the City Council for design,
dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to
the physical and economic developments of the municipality and to the safety
and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the
community at large.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Subdivisions which meet the following circumstances are exempt from
the regulations of this chapter:
         (a)   Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or interests will
be 20 acres or larger in size and 500 feet in width for agricultural or
residential uses;
         (b)   Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or interests will
be five acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial uses;
         (c)   Creating cemetery lots; or
         (d)   Subdivisions resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a
lot line by the relocation of a common boundary.
   (D)   Authority to file applications. Subdivision applications for an
individual property may be initiated by:
      (1)   The owner of the property that is the subject of the application;
or
      (2)   An agent authorized by the owner of the property that is the
subject of the application, which may include a lessee of the property.
Evidence of such authorization shall be the signature of the property owner.
      (3)   If the property subject to an application is under more than one
ownership, all owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the
application.
   (E)   Any subdivision abutting upon any existing or proposed trunk highway,
county road or highway or county state-aid highway shall be subject to review
of the Minnesota Department of Transportation and/or County Highway Department
as specified in M.S. § 505.03 subd. 2. Written notice and a copy of the
proposed subdivision shall be filed with the Minnesota Department of
Transportation and/or County Highway Department for review and comment. Final
action on a subdivision shall not be taken until the minimum 30 day review
period has elapsed or until all referenced parties have signed off, whichever
first occurs.
   (F)   Application fees.
      (1)   All applications for subdivision approval shall be accompanied by a
processing and approval fee as determined in the city’s fee schedule.
      (2)   An escrow amount may be required by the city to pay for actual
costs incurred by the city during the review process.
   (G)   Coordination of applications.
      (1)   Depending on the requirements of this Code, multiple applications
may be required.
      (2)   City staff shall determine the order of application review based on
the City Code, including this chapter and state requirements. Where possible,
applications will be reviewed in tandem.
      (3)   Coordination with Planned Unit Development (PUD) applications.
         (a)   Subdivision review shall be carried out simultaneously with the
review of flexible zoning applications under the zoning ordinance.
         (b)   The plans required for PUD applications shall be submitted in a
form to satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations.
         (c)   The processing procedure shall be as outlined in §§
151.079 Preliminary Plat and
151.080 Final Plat.
         (d)   The decision of the City Council on the PUD application shall be
made prior to submittal of the final plat.
         (e)   Final plat. The decision of the City Council on the final plat
shall be consistent with the decisions made on the PUD application.
         (f)   No building permit shall be issued for the project until the
zoning application and final plat have been approved by the City Council, and
the final plat is recorded by the County Recorder as required by this chapter.
   (H)   Withdrawal of applications.
      (1)   Any request for withdrawal of an application shall be submitted in
writing to city staff.
      (2)   In all cases where the applicant has requested withdrawal of an
application, the associated fee paid and any costs incurred by the city in the
processing of the application shall not be refunded.
   (I)   Successive applications. No application which has been denied wholly
or in part may be resubmitted for at least one year from the date of its
submittal, unless substantial changes have been made which warrant
reconsideration, as determined by city staff.
   (J)   Appeals of City Council decisions. All decisions made by the city
regarding subdivision shall be final, except that any aggrieved person shall
have the right to appeal within 30 days after delivery of the decision to the
appellant, to the District Court in Olmsted County. Any person seeking judicial
review under this chapter must serve the city and all necessary parties,
including any landowners, within the 30-day period defined above.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.076 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.
   (A)   No conveyance involving a portion of a platted lot or involving
unplatted land, the conveyance of which is regulated by M.S. § 462.358, subd.
4b, shall be made unless approval is first obtained as follows.
   (B)   Portion of platted lot. Upon receiving a complete application, the
Zoning Administrator may approve a division of a portion of a platted lot under
the following circumstances if, in each instance, the new and residual parcels
of land which would result from the conveyance meet the frontage and area
requirements of the Zoning Code:
      (1)   When it is desired to detach a portion of a platted lot and add it
to an adjoining platted lot;
      (2)   When it is desired to divide a single parcel or rearrange a group
of parcels so as to create no more than one additional lot or parcel, where the
dedication of a general public utility or street easement or street right-of-
way is not involved.
   (C)   Unplatted land. Upon receiving a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator may approve a division of land by metes and bounds if it is
determined that all of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   That such division will not interfere with the purposes of the
subdivision regulations;
      (2)   That the dedication of public utility or street easements or street
rights-of-way is not involved;
      (3)   That such division involves the division of a parcel into not more
than two separate parcels; and
      (4)   That the new and residual parcels of land which would result from
the division meet the frontage and area requirements of the zoning code.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.077 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   For any change to an approved or recorded subdivision plat, the applicant
shall meet with city staff to determine the appropriate procedure for review.
Minor changes which do not impact the approved preliminary plat may be reviewed
following the same procedure as for a final plat.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.078 CONCEPT PLAN.
   (A)   When a proposed subdivision is located within a Neighborhood District
as identified in the Comprehensive Plan, a concept plan of all of the
properties shown in the Neighborhood District shall be prepared depicting the
possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and future
subdivisions.
      (1)   The concept plan shall address the overall land use, traffic
circulation, utility easement configurations, and general lot layouts of the
Neighborhood District.
      (2)   The signatures of each property owner included in the proposed
boundaries of the Neighborhood District shall be submitted with the concept
plan application. If any signatures are missing, the applicant for the concept
plan shall provide an explanation.
      (3)   If a concept plan already exists for a Neighborhood District, a
concept plan is not needed if the proposed subdivision is generally consistent
with the existing concept plan. If the proposed subdivision is not generally
consistent with the existing concept plan, a revised concept plan shall be
submitted for review.
   (B)   For proposed subdivisions located outside of a Neighborhood District,
the concept plan process may be initiated at any time by an applicant who
wishes to gain information and guidance from the Planning Commission and City
Council regarding a specific development concept before entering into binding
agreements, incurring substantial expense, proposing a planned unit
development, or filing a preliminary plat application.
      (1)   For more complex proposals, city staff may suggest that the
applicant participate in a concept plan review process before proceeding to a
preliminary plat application.
   (C)   Review process.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and concept
plan and refer them to city staff for review.
      (2)   The Planning Commission and the City Council shall review the
concept plan and provide feedback to the applicant.
      (3)   Discussions that occur as part of the concept plan process are not
binding on the city and do not constitute official assurances or
representations on the city.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.079 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Application procedure.
      (1)   The applicant may submit a preliminary plat application and
associated fee and escrow, together with all supplemental material as may be
specified by the Planning Commission and its reviewing agencies.
      (2)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, subd. 3b, an application for a
preliminary plat shall be approved or denied by the City Council within 120
days from the date of its official and complete submission, unless an extension
of the review period has been agreed to by the applicant.
      (3)   No preliminary plat shall be considered unless it is filed on an
official application form with the Zoning Administrator. The request shall be
considered as being officially submitted when all the information requirements
are satisfied.
      (4)   A preliminary plat shall conform to the requirements of this
chapter and all conditions set forth by the City Council, City Engineer and/or
city staff.
      (5)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to city staff and other applicable agencies for review.
   (B)   Planning Commission review.
      (1)   Following the submittal of a complete application, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat request.
      (2)   Not less than ten days prior to the date of the public hearing, the
city shall publish a notice of the hearing in the official newspaper and shall
mail written notice of the hearing to the applicant and the owners of record
listed in the office of the City Administrator of all land within 350 feet of
the outer boundary of the preliminary plat.
      (3)   The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or
defects in the notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings or any
action taken by the Planning Commission or the City Council.
      (4)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall provide
a recommendation to the City Council stating its reason(s) that the preliminary
plat be granted approval, be granted approval subject to certain conditions, or
that the preliminary plat be denied. The recommendation shall be forwarded to
the City Council and the applicant.
   (C)   City Council action; preliminary plat.
      (1)   Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission, the
City Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
preliminary plat application.
      (2)   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval
or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
      (3)   The applicant shall be informed by the city in writing of the City
Council's action, findings, and any conditions of approval.
      (4)   The applicant shall submit the final plat to the City Council
within one year of the approval of the preliminary plat or approval of the
preliminary plat shall be considered null and void.
         (a)   An applicant may request an extension of the preliminary plat
approval for up to one year. At least three weeks prior to the expiration of
the preliminary plat approval, the applicant may request an extension of the
approval from the City Council for up to one year.
         (b)   For preliminary plats that are not anticipated to be final
platted in full within one year, the applicant shall submit a phasing plan as
part of the preliminary plat process to show how final plats for the project
may be phased. If approved, the preliminary plat is valid for the time period
approved in the phasing plan, up to five years. At least three weeks prior to
the expiration of the phasing plan, the applicant may request an extension from
the City Council for up to three years. Any phasing plan requires the applicant
to enter into a development agreement with the city.
      (5)   Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
final plat.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.080 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, subd. 3b, an application for a final plat
shall be approved or denied within 60 days from the date of its official and
complete submission.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   Following approval of a preliminary plat, the applicant may prepare
a final plat and shall file an application and fee with the Zoning
Administrator for approval of the final plat.
      (2)   No final plat shall be considered unless it is filed on an official
application form with the Zoning Administrator within the effective period of
the approval of the preliminary plat.
      (3)   The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when
all the information requirements are satisfied.
      (4)   A final plat shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and
all conditions set forth in the approval of the preliminary plat.
      (5)   If the final plat is part of a phased preliminary plat or planned
unit development, all land not being final platted shall be shown as an outlot
unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Review process.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the final plat and, at their
discretion, may send the final plat to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendation.
      (2)   After review of the final plat by the Zoning Administrator, the
final plat and all associated recommendations shall be sent to the City Council
for review and final decision.
      (3)   If found acceptable, the final plat shall be approved by City
Council resolution, providing for the acceptance of all agreements for
improvements, public dedication, and other requirements as indicated by the
City Council. If disapproved, the grounds for any refusal to approve a plat
shall be set forth in the proceedings of the City Council and reported in
writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Special assessments. Upon written request by the applicant, any
existing special assessments which have been levied against the property
described shall be divided and allocated to the respective lots in the proposed
plat. The Zoning Administrator shall estimate the clerical cost of preparing a
revised assessment roll, filing the same with the County Auditor, and making
such division and allocation, and upon approval of the City Council of such
cost, the same shall be paid by the final plat applicant(s) before final plat
approval.
   (E)   Recording the final plat.
      (1)   The final plat of record, prepared in accordance with this chapter,
shall be filed by the applicant with the Olmsted County Property Records and
Licensing Department within 100 days after approval by the City Council.
      (2)   Failure to record the final plat within time specified causes the
City Council approval to be void, unless a request for a time extension is
submitted in writing prior to 100 days after approval by the City Council and
with adequate time to be discussed at the next City Council meeting. The City
Council will make a decision at their first meeting after staff is in receipt
of the request.
      (3)   No building permits shall be issued for construction of any
structure on any lot in said plat until the city has received evidence of the
plat being recorded by the county and the first layer of bituminous has been
placed on all roads unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer and
approved by the City Council.
   (F)   Recording final plats of multi-phased plats. If a preliminary plat is
final platted in stages, all stages must be final platted into lots, blocks,
outlots within two years of preliminary plat approval by the City Council
unless otherwise provided in the development contracts. All outlots must be
platted into lots and blocks within five years of the recording of the initial
final plat, unless otherwise approved by the City Council. Following the
expiration of the five-year period, or as determined by the City Council, the
preliminary plat for the development shall be void.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.081 SUBDIVISION VARIANCE.
   (A)   Subdivisions which do not meet the requirements in this chapter may
request, as directed by the Zoning Administrator, an exception to design
standards as described in §
151.020 General Provisions or a subdivision variance.
   (B)   A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the
applicant at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration
of the Planning Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the
application and all of the facts relied upon by the applicant.
   (C)   The variance application shall be reviewed using the same procedure
for preliminary plats identified in §
151.079.
   (D)   The City Council may grant a variance from strict compliance with the
subdivision regulations contained in this chapter when it finds that all of the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   That the requested variance is in harmony with the general purposes
and intent of this chapter;
      (2)   That the requested subdivision variance is consistent with the
Byron Comprehensive Plan and all other applicable city plans;
      (3)   That the authoring of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to the community health, safety or general welfare and will not
materially impair the purposes of the subdivision regulations or the public
interest;
      (4)   That the applicant has established that there are special
circumstances or conditions affecting the property, such as particular physical
surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions, such that a particular
hardship to the owner would result if the strict letter of these regulations
are carried out;
      (5)   That the intended use and conditions of the property forming the
basis for granting a variance are unique and not of so general or recurrent a
nature as to cause the formulation and adoption of a general subdivision
regulation for similar uses and conditions; and
      (6)   That the variance will not in any manner vary from the provisions
of the Zoning Code.
   (E)   In approving a variance, the City Council may require such conditions
as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards
or requirements of these regulations.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.082 SUBDIVISION REGULATION AMENDMENT.
   (A)   From time to time, the Planning Commission may, of its own motion,
upon petition, or at the direction of the City Council, cause to be prepared
amendments supplementing or changing regulations herein established.
   (B)   Before any proposed amendment can be acted on, a public hearing shall
be held by the Planning Commission with notice given in the official newspaper
at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
   (C)   Upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City
Council shall study the Planning Commission's recommendation and approve or
disapprove the amendment.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with or violates
any of these regulations in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished as provided in City Code §
10.99.
   (B)   Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity
to prevent any violation of these regulations to prevent unlawful construction
and to recover damages, to restrain, correct or abate a violation; and these
remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Purposes
   
152.003   Compliance required
   
152.004   Relief from personal responsibility
   
152.005   Interpretation of standards
   
152.006   Validity
   
152.007   Enforcement
   
152.008   Property not included; annexations
   
152.009   Nonconforming uses, lot, and structure
Definitions
   
152.020   Rules of construction
   
152.021   General definitions
   
152.022   Use definitions
Base Districts
   
152.030   Base zoning districts established
   
152.031   Zoning map
   
152.032   District boundaries
   
152.033   General zoning provisions
   
152.034   District intents
   
152.035   District uses established
   
152.036   District dimensional standards
   
152.037   Base zoning district standards
Overlay/Special Districts
   
152.050   Greenway Overlay District
   
152.051   Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
   
152.052   Flood prone area requirements
Use Standards
   
152.065   Principal use specific standards
   
152.066   Accessory use specific standards
Development Standards
   
152.080   Environmental performance standards
   
152.081   Clear vision areas
   
152.082   Parking and loading
   
152.083   Common elements
   
152.084   Fences, walls, and hedges
   
152.085   Buffering and screening
   
152.086   Soil erosion and sedimentation control
Administration and Procedures
   
152.100   Common procedures and requirements
   
152.101   Site plan review
   
152.102   Conditional use permit (CUP)
   
152.103   Interim use permit (IUP)
   
152.104   Zoning code amendment (text or map)
   
152.105   Variance
   
152.106   Planned Unit Development (PUD)
   
152.107   Appeal of zoning code interpretation
   
152.108   Administration
Signs
   
152.125   Purpose
   
152.126   Definitions
   
152.127   Prohibited signs
   
152.128   General provisions
   
152.129   Exempt signs
   
152.130   Temporary signs
   
152.131   Permanent signs
   
152.132   Nonconforming signs
   
152.133   Administration
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The city ordains this chapter, which shall be known and cited as the
"Zoning Code of the City of Byron" and is a chapter setting the minimum and
maximum standards for the height and size of buildings and other structures,
type of foundation, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the
density of population, the location and use of buildings or land for trade,
industry, residence, recreation, public activities, agriculture and other
purposes; using districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries
thereof; providing for changes in regulations, restrictions and boundaries of
such districts; defining certain terms used herein; providing for enforcement
and administration and imposing penalties for the violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The authority to adopt this chapter within the City of Byron is
derived from M.S. Chapter 462, including but not limited to §§ 462.357 and
462.358, as well as other applicable state statutes and rules. Whenever any
state laws or rules referenced in this chapter have been amended or superseded,
this chapter shall also be considered amended accordingly.
   (C)   The effective date of this chapter is May 9, 2023. This chapter hereby
supersedes and replaces in its entirety
Chapter 152 of the Byron, Minnesota Code on the effective date hereof. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development plans and permits
filed on or after the effective date. Plans on file before the effective date
shall be reviewed for compliance with the Zoning Chapter effective at the time
of filing.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.002 PURPOSES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority conferred by the State of Minnesota in §
462.357, Laws of 1965, as amended, and for the following purposes:
      (1)   Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the inhabitants of the city;
      (2)   Protect and conserve the character and social and economic
stability of residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, and other use
areas;
      (3)   Secure the most appropriate use of land and orderly development
throughout Byron;
      (4)   Prevent the overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of
population;
      (5)   Provide adequate light and air and reasonable access;
      (6)   Facilitate the provision of public services and facilities;
      (7)   Secure equity among individuals in the use of their property;
      (8)   Conserve the unique and other natural environmental features and
natural processes;
      (9)   Allow for the provisions of a safe, adequate supply of housing in
suitable residential environments;
      (10)   Promote the safe, rapid, and efficient movement of people and
goods;
      (11)   Encourage energy conservation and the use of solar energy;
      (12)   Carry out the spirit and intent of the land use policies of the
city.
   (B)   The city will only accept complaints from complainants who are
directly affected by an alleged violation of this chapter. The term "directly
affected" refers to complainants who own real property within 350 feet of the
allegedly offending property. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City
Council from acting on its own motion to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.003 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of all property owners, architects, contractors,
builders and other persons having charge of the erecting, altering, changing or
remodeling of any building or structure, including manufactured homes, before
beginning or undertaking any such work to see that such work does not conflict
with and is not a violation of the terms of this chapter, and any such property
owner, architect, builder, contractor or other person doing or performing any
such work of erecting, repairing, altering, changing or remodeling and in
violation of or in conflict with the terms of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a violation hereof in the manner and to the same extent as the owner
of the premises or the persons for whom such buildings are erected, repaired,
altered, changed or remodeled in violation hereof and shall be held accountable
for such violation.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.004 RELIEF FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Any claim based upon an act or omission of an officer or employee exercising
due care in the execution of any valid or invalid portions of this chapter, any
claim based upon the performance or the failure to exercise or perform a
discretionary function or duty, whether or not the discretion is abused, are
numerated as exceptions to M.S. § 466.02, as it may be amended from time to
time, and said section does not apply. The city shall defend, save harmless and
indemnify any of its officers or employees, whether elected or appointed,
against any tort claim or demand, whether groundless or otherwise, arising out
of an alleged act or omission occurring in the performance of duty in the
enforcement and administration of the Zoning Code, except as provided in M.S. §
466.07, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.005 INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of the Zoning
Code shall be held to be minimum requirements.
   (B)   Wherever the Zoning Code imposes a greater restriction than is imposed
or required by other provisions of law or rules or regulations or ordinances,
the provisions of the Zoning Code shall govern.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.006 VALIDITY.
   This chapter and the various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections and
clauses thereof are declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
section or clause is adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the
remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.007 ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Administrator designated by the City Council or his or her authorized
representative.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.008 PROPERTY NOT INCLUDED; ANNEXATIONS.
   Territory annexed to the city subsequent to the effective date of such
annexation shall become a part of the Low Density Residential (R-1) District.
The zoning shall be temporary and the Planning Commission shall recommend to
the City Council within a period of one year from the date of annexation on a
final zoning map for the annexed territory. The Commission may recommend such
final zoning map at the time of annexation.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.009 NONCONFORMING USES, LOT, AND STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Where the districts established by the Zoning Code contain structures,
lots, and uses of land and structures which were lawful or nonconforming before
this Zoning Code was passed or amended, but which are prohibited under this
chapter, it is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to
continue under specified conditions as outlined in the standards contained in
this section.
   (B)   All nonconformities shall be encouraged to convert to conformity
whenever possible.
   (C)   Continuation of nonconforming structure or use.
      (1)   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, a nonconforming
structure or use may be continued and maintained in reasonable repair, but
shall not be altered, extended, enlarged or moved in such a way as to increase
its nonconformity under this chapter. Alterations or modifications to
nonconforming structures which have the effect of not increasing their
nonconformity are permitted subject to zoning certificate approval and
compliance with all other applicable ordinance provisions. Additional
encroachment of existing structures or buildings into a required yard when a
portion of the existing structures already encroaches into that yard and the
proposed addition or alteration will not exceed the existing encroachment may
be permitted subject to zoning certificate approval where all other provisions
of this chapter are met or exceeded.
      (2)   Grain elevators, and other buildings in which operations are
conducted that are directly related to grain elevators, located in the downtown
industrial area and that do not meet the maximum building height limitations of
§
152.036 District Dimensional Standards shall be permitted to replace or rebuild
existing structures to their original height; furthermore, all new structures
shall be permitted to be constructed to the same height as other structures
already part of the industrial use. However, in no case, and at no time, shall
a building or structure exceed 90 feet in height in the downtown industrial
area.
   (D)   Continuation of nonconforming lots. Any conforming use or conforming
structure on a nonconforming lot of record may be enlarged, extended,
constructed, or moved so long as all other requirements of this chapter are
met.
   (E)   Discontinuance of nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use is
discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months, further use of the property
shall conform to this chapter. If a nonconforming use is replaced by another
use, the new use shall conform to this chapter.
   (F)   Destruction of nonconforming structure or use. If a nonconforming
structure or a conforming structure with a nonconforming use located therein is
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its market value at the
time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed or used except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. If the structure is destroyed to less than
50% of its market value, it must be restored to its original condition if said
restoration begins within 180 days from the date the damage occurred; otherwise
the structure shall be made conforming.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
DEFINITIONS
§ 152.020 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
   (A)   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
   (B)   The present tense includes the past and the future tenses, and the
future the present.
   (C)   The word "shall" is mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
   (D)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (E)   All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth
of a foot.
   (F)   For terminology not defined in this chapter, the City Code, or the
Minnesota State Building Code, the Webster's Dictionary shall be used to define
such terms.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.021 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ALLEY. Any dedicated public way providing a secondary means of ingress and/
or egress to land or structures thereon.
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity that applies for a building permit, land use
approval, or a permit to allow land disturbing activities.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a floor of a building which is wholly or one-half
or more below the average grade of the ground level adjoining the building.
   BUILDABLE AREA. That part of the lot not included within the required
setback and open space required by this chapter.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and used
or built for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or property of any
kind.
   BUILDING HEIGHT, ACCESSORY. The vertical distance measured from the average
ground level adjoining the building to the peak of the roof.
   BUILDING HEIGHT, PRINCIPAL. The vertical distance measured from the average
ground level adjoining the building to the bottom of the eaves.
   BUFFER. A strip of land, which may include vegetation, berms, fences, or
walls, intended to separate two different uses from one another.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The licensed attorney designated by the governing body to
furnish legal assistance for the administration of these regulations.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body for the City of Byron.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The long-range plan for the desirable use of land in the
city as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by the City
Council.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, building and other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, operations or storage of
materials or equipment.
   DISTRICT, ZONING. Any section of the incorporated area of the city within
which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations
thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter.
   ERECTED. Built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or any physical
operation on the premises related to the establishment of a structure;
excavation, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of ERECTION.
   FAMILY. Any number of persons living together and related by blood,
marriage, adoption or any unrelated person who resides therein as though a
member of the family.
   FLOOR AREA. The area within the exterior walls of the main building or
structure as measured from the outside walls at the ground floor level, not
including detached garages or unenclosed porches.
   FOOT CANDLE. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle.
   GLARE. The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort.
   GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES AND OFFICIALS.
      (1)   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. City of Byron Board of Adjustment appointed by
the Byron City Council.
      (2)   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The City of Byron Building Inspector or an
authorized representative.
      (3)   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of Byron, appointed by
the City Council and established under M.S. § 462.354, subd. 1, as amended.
      (4)   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Byron City Administrator or a designated
representative.
   GROUND LEVEL, AVERAGE. The average elevation of the finished grade at the
outside building wall that is adjacent to the front yard.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. A solid, liquid or gaseous material that may cause or
contribute to serious illness or death or that poses a substantial threat to
human health or to the environment when improperly managed. HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
may be identified by any of four characteristics. The four characteristics are
as follows:
      (1)   Ignitable. These materials may pose a fire hazard. Fires may
present immediate dangers of heat and smoke and may also spread harmful
particles over a wide area.
      (2)   Corrosive. These materials require special containers because of
their characteristic of corroding standard materials. They have an additional
characteristic of being able to dissolve toxic compounds.
      (3)   Reactive. These materials, when handled in a routine manner, may
react spontaneously and vigorously with air and/or water. They also may be
unstable to shock or heat. They may generate toxic gases or explode.
      (4)   Toxic. These materials, when improperly managed, may release
toxicants (poisonous material) in sufficient quantities to pose a hazard to
human health or to the environment.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space: on the same lot with a building or
contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts
upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership or for development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c1fff79dfcc389b806b92a451f8f8c6ded08a054/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1377.png]
 
      LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on
more than one street.
      LOT, IRREGULAR. A lot with opposing property lines that are generally not
parallel, such as a pie-shaped lot or a multi-sided lot.
      LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE. A lot so subdivided as to have its side lot lines
coincide with the rear lot lines of adjacent lots on either or both sides of
the aforesaid reversed frontage lot.
   LOT AREA. The total square footage or area on a lot.
   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percentage of the lot occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory buildings or structures.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The lot line adjoining a public street as measured along the
street.
   LOT LINE. A line dividing one lot from another lot or from a street or
alley.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The line separating the lot from the street right-of-
way. In the case of a corner or double frontage lot, it shall be the shortest
dimension on a public street or as designated by the original owner and filed
with the city.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and
most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear,
the rear lot line shall be that assumed line- parallel to the front lot line
not less than ten feet long, lying parallel and most distantly from the front
lot line and wholly within the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c1fff79dfcc389b806b92a451f8f8c6ded08a054/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1379.png]
 
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front or a rear lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from a street is called a corner side lot line. A side
lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side
lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c1fff79dfcc389b806b92a451f8f8c6ded08a054/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1381.png]
 
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision plat, the map of which
has been legally recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Olmsted
County or a lot described by metes and bounds, the deed to which has been
legally recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Olmsted County. Lots
not approved by the city through the subdivision code shall be considered
illegal and not lots of record.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines measured along a line
parallel to and at the minimum required front yard line.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot that does not comply with the minimum lot area or
frontage requirements of the district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure that does not comply with the bulk,
height, or setback regulations of the district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any use of a lot or structure which does not conform to
the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   PARKING SPACE. An area either public or private to be used for the temporary
storage or parking of motor vehicles by customers, residents, and guests. (Not
to include vehicle or implement sales or storage lots.)
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or other group acting as a unit. It also includes any executor,
administrator, trustee, receiver or other appointed representative.
   POOL. Any structure, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water
for swimming, diving, relaxation, or recreational use including special purpose
pools and wading pools.
   POOL, SPA. A hot water pool intended for seated recreational use with a
water agitation system in addition to the recirculation system.
   PORCH, UNENCLOSED. An entrance to a building which may include steps, a
landing, railings and a roof, but not enclosed either partially or completely
above the landing by windows, screens or siding.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Utilities that are subject to city acceptance for operation
and maintenance, including water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, and their appurtenances and any component part(s) thereof.
   SETBACK. The minimum distance in linear feet measured on a horizontal plane
between a structure and a lot line, ordinary high water level, top of a bluff,
or right-of-way.
   STATE BUILDING CODE. The Minnesota State Building Code, setting forth
standards for the construction, addition, modification and repair of buildings
and other structures for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and
general welfare of the public.
   STREET. A public or private right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords
primary means of access to abutting property, whether designated as a street,
highway, arterial, collector, road, avenue, lane, place, or however otherwise
described.
      STREET, COLLECTOR. An existing or proposed street designated in the
Comprehensive Plan which connects neighborhoods and local streets to arterial
streets. Access is controlled where possible to reduce conflicts with private
drives.
      STREET, LOCAL. A street of limited continuity designated in the
Comprehensive Plan which is used primarily for access to the abutting
properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
      STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL. A street designated in the Comprehensive Plan and
primarily designed for vehicle mobility between and among large areas. Minor
arterial streets provide a quarter to half mile roadway access but do not allow
new private access drives.
      STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL. A street designated in the Comprehensive Plan
and primarily designed to carry large volumes of traffic and to provide for
vehicular movement between and among large areas. Principal arterial streets
include very limited roadway access and no private access drives.
      STREET, PRIVATE. A private access way that connects abutting properties
to a public street. Private streets differ from private driveways in that the
private street is on a separate parcel from the
structure(s) it serves, and that it is owned and maintained by a homeowner’s
association or some other similar entity approved by the city.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. This
definition includes but is not limited to buildings, manufactured homes, sheds,
towers, detached garages, and other similar items.
      STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. Any structure which is not attached to the main or
principal building, including garages, sheds, carports, greenhouses, and other
similar structures.
      STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL. A structure housing the principal use on the
property.
      STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY. Any structure without foundation or footings which
is designed to be transportable and which is not designed for attachment to the
ground, to another structure or to any utility system on the same premises for
an undetermined length of time.
   STRUCTURE ALTERATION. Any changes in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in
the roof and exterior walls.
   USABLE OPEN SPACE. Outdoor space designed or intended for passive or active
recreation which is accessible and suited to the needs of the development’s
residents and/or employees, including but not limited to, parks, forests,
lakes, patios, plazas, and other such areas.
   USE. The purpose for which land or buildings thereon are designed, arranged
or intended to be occupied or used or for which they are occupied or
maintained.
      USE, ACCESSORY. A use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate
to and auxiliary to the principal permitted use of the premises.
      USE, CONDITIONAL. A use that would not be appropriate generally, but may
be allowed upon finding that specific conditions and criteria are met and
appropriate restrictions are placed on the lot structure or use such that the
use is compatible with the neighborhood and consistent with the Byron
Comprehensive Plan.
      USE, INTERIM. A temporary use of property until a particular date,
occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit
it.
      USE, PERMITTED. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
restriction applicable to that zoning district.
      USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary or predominant use of any lot.
   YARD. A required open space on the same lot as the principal building not
occupied by buildings or structures and unobstructed and open to the sky,
except as specifically provided for in this chapter.
      YARD, FRONT. A required yard extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the front lot line and principal building.
      YARD, REAR. A required yard extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building.
      YARD, SIDE. A required yard extending between the front and rear lot
lines or rear lot boundary and located between the side lot line and principal
building and attached buildings.
   ZONING CERTIFICATE. Document issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing
buildings, structures or uses consistent with the terms of the zoning code and
for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions.
   ZONING CODE. The zoning code of the City of Byron.
   ZONING MAP. A map or maps which are a part of this chapter which delineates
the boundaries of zoning districts and which is on display in the City Clerk-
Treasurer's office, being designated as a Zoning Map of the City of Byron with
all proper notations, references and other information shown thereon.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.022 USE DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions pertain to land uses within the city as shown in
Tables 152.1 and 152.2:
   ACCESSORY AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. An accessory structure meeting the
definition listed in M.S. § 326B.103, subd. 3.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A subordinate habitable dwelling unit which
has its own basic requirement of shelter, heating, cooking and sanitation,
added to or created within a primary residence or an accessory building.
   ACCESSORY OFFICE. An office located in the same tenant space or as part of
an integrated development that is incidental and accessory to a principal
business or sales activity within the same building or on the same lot.
   ACCESSORY RETAIL. The sale of goods or provision of services located within
the same building or on the same lot as the principal use and which supports or
is cohesive with the principal use.
   ACCESSORY STORAGE, INDOOR. The storage of business property incidental to an
approved principal use for a period greater than 24 hours within an enclosed
building.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Any business that is characterized by, or places a
significant emphasis on, providing its patrons with merchandise, services or
entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, exposing,
describing, or discussing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas." For purposes of this definition, ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
includes, without limitation, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters,
adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult saunas, adult
companionship establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty
businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels
or motels and adult body painting studios and other adult establishments.
      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business which
provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent
or nontransparent to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. A business engaging in the barter, rental or sale
of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tapes,
videotapes, or motion picture film, if such shop is not open to the public
generally but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by
reason of age or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. An establishment which provides dancing or other
live entertainment, if such establishment excludes minors by virtue of age or
if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on the performance, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENTS. A companionship establishment
which excludes minors by reason of age or which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an
employee of the establishment and a customer if such service is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (5)   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.
         (a)   A business engaged in any of the following activities or which
utilizes any of the following business procedures or practices either:
            (i)   Any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage
of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage there
at either by law or by the operators of such business;
            (ii)   Any other business which offers its patrons services or
entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing,
describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
         (b)   Specifically included in the term, but without limitation, are
adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture
theaters, adult massage parlors, adult saunas, adult companionship
establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses,
adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotel or motels and
adult body painting studios.
      (6)   ADULT HOTEL or MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are
specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (7)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor as required to
be licensed or a health club which restricts minors by reason of age and which
provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (8)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business premises within an
enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting
visual media material if such business as a prevailing practice excludes minors
by virtue of age or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
      (9)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment whose major business is the
provision to customers of figure models who are so provided with the intent of
providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who
engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas
while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers.
      (10)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (11)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS. A business premises within an
enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting
visual media material if said business as a prevailing practice excludes minors
by virtue of age or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
      (12)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business which has as a principal
activity the sale of devices which simulate human genitals or devices which are
designed for sexual stimulation.
      (13)   ADULT SAUNA. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age or
which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
bathing, relaxation or reducing utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (14)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Anatomical areas consisting of:
         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      (15)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Activities consisting of the
following:
         (a)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship and any of the following sexually-oriented actor conduct:
anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, picquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;
         (b)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
         (c)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation,
coitus or masturbation;
         (d)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts;
         (e)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude,
clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint or any such persons;
         (f)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
         (g)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.
   AGRICULTURAL SERVICES. Activities or establishments that perform services
that support or assist the agricultural community, such as soil preparation
services, crop services or farm management services. This category is intended
to apply where land is used for the building and other structures that provide
offices, warehouses and storage areas for these establishments.
   ANIMAL SERVICES. Activities or establishments that consist of veterinary and
related services for livestock, domestic pets and equines, including kennels,
housing, or boarding of pets and other domestic animals such as stables and
breeding services.
   ASSISTED CARE FACILITY. A residential facility which provides meals,
lodging, personal services, and/or nursing care to individuals who require
assistance due to illness, age, or infirmity. Facilities may include assisted
living facilities licensed by the state, nursing homes, rest homes, boarding
care homes, convalescent care, and transitional care facilities.
   BAR or DRINKING PLACE. Retail establishment selling, primarily, alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises.
   BREWERY, WINERY, or DISTILLERY. A facility that produces beer, ale or other
beverages made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half
of one percent alcohol by volume.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS.
      (1)   CANNABIS DELIVERY. Allows for transportation to the end consumer.
      (2)   CANNABIS MANUFACTURING. Processing and extraction is a group of
endorsed activated turning raw, dried cannabis and cannabis parts into other
types of cannabis products, e.g. edibles or topicals.
      (3)   CANNABIS RETAIL. An endorsed activity that allows a business to
sell cannabis and cannabis products directly to consumers.
      (4)   CANNABIS TRANSPORTATION. Allows a company to transport products
from one license type to another.
      (5)   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis plants, cannabis
flower, hemp plants or hemp plant parts.
      (6)   HEMP MANUFACTURING. A business that converts hemp into LPHE edible
products.
      (7)   WHOLESALE. An activity that allows a business to purchase from a
business growing or manufacturing cannabis or cannabis products and sell to a
cannabis business engaged in retail.
   CARPORT. A covered structure used to offer limited protection to vehicles,
primarily cars, from rain and snow. The structure can either be freestanding or
attached to a wall of a primary structure or accessory building.
   CAR WASH. An area of land and/or a structure with machine- or hand-operated
facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of
motor vehicles.
   CEMETERY. The permanent interment of people or domestic pet animals either
above or below ground level.
   CHILD CARE, FAMILY. A dwelling unit where a resident of the dwelling is
providing care under Minn. Rules 9502 for less than 24 hours at a time for up
to 14 children.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATION, INDOOR. Indoor facilities operated as a business and
which are open to the public for a fee which may include, but are not limited
to, billiard parlors, skating rinks, indoor swimming pools, bowling alleys,
movie theaters, arcades, health clubs, reception halls, and other similar
businesses but excluding target ranges and shooting or gun clubs.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATION, OUTDOOR. Land or outdoor facilities operated as a
business and which are open to the general public for a fee that shall include,
but is not limited to, golf courses, outdoor swimming pools, amusement parks,
and other similar businesses.
   CONSTRUCTION-RELATED TEMPORARY USE. A temporary use or structure related to
construction activities on the same site. This use may consist of construction-
related trailers, mobile structures used for construction offices and storage,
batch plans, and temporary offices to replace permanent facilities being
reconstructed.
   CONTINUING CARE SENIOR FACILITY. A residential facility or complex which
provides more than one type of living choice for adults over the age of 55,
from independent living to long-term care, with a goal of helping residents to
age in place.
   DAY CARE CENTER. A state licensed private or public establishment which for
gain or otherwise regularly provides one or more persons (children, adolescents
or adults) with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or
developmental guidance for periods of less than 24 hours a day in a building
other than a dwelling. (All day care facilities shall be licensed under the
State of Minnesota Public Welfare Licensing Act.)
   DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT. An accessory use, structure, or portion of a
principal structure where patrons may purchase products or receive service
without having to leave their motor vehicle (and enter a building).
   DWELLING, APARTMENT. A building consisting of six or more units designed
exclusively for occupancy by six or more families living independently of one
another, but sharing hallways and main entrances and exits.
   DWELLING, APARTMENT MIXED USE. A building designed for one or more dwelling
units as well as non-residential uses that are permitted in the zoning district
to be located on the ground story, with all dwelling units sharing a joint
entrance from the outside.
   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or
40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected, on site, is 320 or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained in it, and which complies with the manufactured
home building code (M.S. § 327.31, subd. 6).
   DWELLING, SINGLE-UNIT DETACHED. A site-built or factory-built (modular)
residential structure containing one dwelling unit on a single lot and which is
not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means, including roof, wall, or
floor. This definition includes farm dwellings.
   DWELLING, THREE TO FIVE UNIT. A single residential structure on a single lot
which contains three, four, or five separate dwelling units.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE or ROWHOUSE. A single dwelling unit which is located
within a larger residential structure containing three or more units and which
is separated from the adjoining dwelling unit(s) by a common wall. Each
dwelling unit may be located on its own individual lot or on a common lot
containing all of the attached units, and each dwelling unit shall have
separate and individual front and rear entrances.
   DWELLING, TWO-UNIT (DUPLEX). A single residential structure on a single lot
which contains two separate dwelling units.
   DWELLING, TWO-UNIT (TWINHOME). A residential structure designed to house a
single unit on a single lot which is attached by a common wall or walls to an
adjoining dwelling unit.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Communication facilities and local service for natural
gas lines, electric supply lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
water supply systems.
   EXTRACTION. Extraction of soil, stone, rock, gravel, sand or similar natural
products from the ground for commercial purposes.
   GENERAL AGRICULTURE. The production of crops, plants or trees or the
production, keeping, grazing or feeding of livestock for the sale of livestock,
livestock products or other animals and animal products. This use includes
incidental processing and retail sales of products grown or raised on a farm
but does not include feedlots, the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to
swine or other animals, soil surface application of sewage sludge, or open
uncontained storage. A farmyard shall be considered a part of this use
category.
   GREENHOUSE. A private building or structure constructed chiefly of glass,
glasslike or translucent material which is devoted to the protection or
cultivation of flowers or other tender plants.
   HEAVY INDUSTRY. Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products or establishments
that blend materials. Such uses include, but are not limited to, food and
kindred products preparation such as grain milling; lumber and wood products
such as sawmills, planing mills or hardwood veneer production and storage;
leather tanning and finishing; clay, glass and concrete products production;
fabricated metal products such as metal coating or engraving; manufacturing of
machinery or equipment; chemical manufacturing; related waste/refuse treatment
by such uses, excluding land fills or dumps; and uses of a similar character
and intensity.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for
gain or support as an accessory use entirely within a dwelling, or a structure,
which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the
premises and does not change the essential residential character of such
premises.
   INSTITUTIONAL USE. Uses and buildings which contain government offices of
legislative, judicial, administrative and regulatory activities of federal,
state or local governments, local schools, places of worship, clinics,
hospitals, excluding structures used for essential services and all activities
requiring related outdoor storage areas. This use includes related accessory
uses, structures, parks, and open spaces.
   JUNKYARD. A place maintained for keeping, storing or piling, whether
temporarily, irregularly or continually; buying or selling at retail or
wholesale any old, used or second-hand material of any kind, including used
motor vehicles, machinery and/or parts thereof; bottles, rubber, iron or other
metals or articles which from its worn condition renders it practically useless
for the purpose for which it was made and stored outdoors, not in buildings.
This shall include a lot or yard for the keeping of unlicensed motor vehicles,
construction and farm machinery or equipment or the remains thereof for the
purpose of dismantling, sale of parts, sale as scrap for storage, or
abandonment. This definition includes establishments that recycle any of the
above-mentioned materials and establishments that collect and sell scrap/waste
materials, especially different types of metals.
   LIGHT INDUSTRY. Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products or includes
establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products.
Such uses include, but are not limited to, recycling establishments located
completely inside a building, printing, publishing and allied industries;
bottling works; manufacturing of leather products from finished leather;
apparel products made from fabrics; furniture and fixtures, millwork, cabinet
and similar wood products production; sheet metal and welding shops; cut stone
and stone products production excluding quarries; manufacture of engineering,
laboratory, scientific or research instruments/equipment, measuring and
controlling instruments; and uses of similar character and intensity.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. An approved manufactured home park which has
underground utility service to each site and only permits independent
manufactured homes.
   MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATION. Facilities and activities operated on a membership
basis for the promotion of the interests of the members, including trade
organizations, political or labor organizations and civic, social and fraternal
associations, with the primary activities related to membership organization
functions, amusement/entertainment or services to the general public.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A food and beverage service establishment that is a
vehicle mounted unit, either:
      (1)   Motorized or trailered, operating no more than 21 days annually at
any one place, or operating more than 21 days annually at any one place with
the approval of the regulatory authority; or
      (2)   Operated in conjunction with a permanent business licensed under
M.S. Ch. 157 or Ch. 28A at the site of the permanent business by the same
individual or company, and readily movable, without disassembling, for
transport to another location.
   OFF-STREET PARKING OR LOADING FACILITY. A land surface or facility providing
off-street vehicular parking spaces with drives and maneuvering lanes so as to
provide access for entrance and exit. Parking facilities may include public
garages, parking ramps, surface parking lots, and other similar uses.
   OUTDOOR DINING. A specified outdoor area for dining which is accessory to a
principal restaurant or food service establishment use.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY. The arrangement of the products a business sells outside of
the building the business occupies excluding vehicles and farm implements.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The storage of personal or business property for a period
greater than 24 hours outside of an enclosed building.
   PERFORMANCE FACILITY. A facility used for the production, preparation, and
performance of dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances.
   PRODUCE STAND. A temporary booth, stall, or building from which farm
products are sold to the general public.
   RACING/TRACK ENTERPRISE. Facilities and activities that consist of outdoor
racing with, but not limited to, horses, cars, motorcycles and dogs, or track
facilities for vehicles and animals, including moto-cross courses.
   RECREATION FACILITY, PUBLIC. An indoor or outdoor public complex or
destination designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time
activities. This facility may include parks, playgrounds, swimming pools,
tennis courts, or other similar uses associated with a designated recreation
area. This use includes related accessory buildings and structures.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PRIVATE. A private area or facility intended to serve
the recreational needs of a specific residential population. PRIVATE
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES include but are not limited to: tennis courts, swimming
pools, basketball courts, or playground equipment.
   RESEARCH/TESTING. Primary activities consisting of research and development
laboratories. Such facilities carry on investigations in the natural or
physical sciences or engineering and development as an extension of
investigation with the objective of creating end products. Such primary uses
may include soils testing and engineering, medical research, agricultural
research and activities and facilities of a similar character and intensity.
   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. An in-home residential facility licensed by the
state which provides primarily nonmedical care to individuals who are in need
of personal assistance to manage the activities of daily life or for the
protection of the individual.
   RESTAURANT. Retail establishments selling, primarily, prepared foods and
secondarily, alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and also lunch
counters, refreshment stands, and fast food establishments.
   RETAIL AGRICULTURAL. Establishments that are primarily engaged in providing
services related to or conducting the sale at retail of horticulture and
floriculture products, including nurseries, greenhouses, lawn and garden
services. These enterprises typically produce their own stock, unlike a garden
center which imports from other establishments the products it sells at retail.
   RETAIL AND CONVENIENCE RETAIL TRADE. Establishments engaged in selling
merchandise for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of the goods. Such uses include, but are not limited to,
food, drug, clothing, sporting goods, hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper
stores, home improvement establishments, furniture stores, home furnishing
stores, florists, garden centers, retail butcher shops, variety or specialty
stores or establishments of a similar character and intensity.
   SECONDARY FARM DWELLING. A dwelling located on the same lot as a farm
dwelling used to house family members or person(s) employed on the farm.
   SERVICES, HIGH IMPACT. Activities involving personal or business services,
repair services and automotive repair services. Such activities include, but
are not limited to, commercial laundries, linen supply, industrial laundries,
outdoor advertising services with outdoor storage, cleaning, disinfecting,
extermination services, specialized repair shops needing outside storage,
equipment and vehicle rental/ leasing, parking lots, car washes, bus/taxi
depots and public garages.
   SERVICES, LOW IMPACT. Activities involving personal, financial, real estate,
insurance, health, legal or social services and business services that are
located solely within a building. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, household product repair services, coin operated laundries, beauty and
barber shops, funeral homes, advertising services, collection agencies, banks,
doctors offices, clinics, law offices and counseling services.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A development in which one or more principal buildings are
located on one or more lots of record that abut one another and the principal
building(s) contain two or more servicing, merchandising, leisure uses or
office uses and where each such use abuts the adjacent use located within the
principal building(s) and the development is under one ownership or management.
SHOPPING CENTERS have common on-site parking and have a building composition
that functions as an architectural unit.
   SHORT-TERM VACATION RENTAL. A dwelling, or portion thereof, that is used for
accommodations or lodging of guests paying a fee or other compensation for a
period of less than 30 consecutive days.
   SMALL-SCALE SOLAR ENERGY GENERATION SYSTEM. An accessory solar collector or
other device mounted on the ground or on a building, pole, or rack which is
directly connected to or designed to primarily serve the energy needs of the
principal use.
   SMALL-SCALE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM. An electrical generating facility
with 5,000 kW nameplate generating capacity or less that consists of a wind
turbine, feeder line(s), associated controls and may include a tower.
   TAPROOM. Taproom means an area for the on-sale consumption of malt liquor
produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of a brewery or an
abutting property in common ownership of the brewer, which may include sales of
malt liquor produced and packaged at the brewery for off-premises consumption
as allowed by Minnesota statutes, as may be amended.
   TEMPORARY OUTDOOR PROMOTIONAL OR SALES EVENT. A temporary outdoor
promotional or special event/sale directed toward the general public, including
grand opening sales, registration for day care, warehouse sales, tent sales,
sidewalk sales, craft shows, flea markets, inventory reductions, liquidation
sales and mechanical or animal rides.
   TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS. Establishments engaged in providing lodging or
lodging and meals for the traveling public, including hotels, motels, boarding/
rooming houses, and bed and breakfasts.
   TRANSIENT AMUSEMENT ENTERPRISE. Facilities and activities consisting of
temporary outdoor amusement enterprises, including circuses, carnivals and
fairs.
   TRANSMISSION/DISTRIBUTION. Establishments providing to the general public or
to other business enterprises: electricity, gas and other utility system
elements, including, but not limited to, electric, gas and other utility
substations, transformer stations, pumping stations, regulator stations and
broadcasting towers.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK OR CAMPGROUND. A lot or parcel of land occupied or
intended for occupancy by recreational vehicles or tents for travel,
recreational, or vacation usage for short periods of stay.
   VEHICLE DEALER. Retail dealers selling new and used automobiles, trucks and
other self-propelled vehicles, boats, recreational and utility trailers, motor
homes, motorcycles, or farm implements (including showroom and service
facilities).
   VEHICLE FUELING STATION. Any building or premises used for the retail sale
of products for the propulsion of motor vehicles, and including such products
as fuel oil, gasoline, diesel fuel, electricity, motor vehicle accessories,
convenience store goods, and other items customarily associated with the sale
of such products.
   WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITY. An establishment engaged in the storage
and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.
   WHOLESALING, HIGH IMPACT. Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers to industrial, commercial,
institutional, farm or professional business users; or to other wholesalers and
where outdoor storage may be a necessary part of the business. Uses in this
category include, but are not limited to, wholesaling of vehicles, lumber and
other construction materials (lumberyards), construction machinery, farm
machinery, industrial machinery, transportation equipment and related repair
and reconditioning activities or related shops, farm product raw materials and
product storage (such as grain elevators) and other wholesaling of a similar
character and intensity.
   WHOLESALING, LIMITED IMPACT. Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial,
institutional, farm or professional business users; or to other wholesalers.
Such primary activities or incidental activities shall not be conducted outside
of the primary buildings related to the activity. Uses in this category
include, but are not limited to, vehicle parts and supplies, furniture,
electrical goods, hardware, plumbing and heating supplies, drugs, apparel,
grocery products, alcoholic beverages, meat locker plants, trade shops related
to these establishments and other specialty wholesaling of a similar character
and intensity.
   WIRELESS USE. Any principal or accessory use or structure designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of wireless communication, transmission,
and distribution.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-14-25)
BASE DISTRICTS
§ 152.030 BASE ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following base zoning districts are provided in order to promote
and encourage the efficient economic development of land, buildings and all
usable structures.
   (B)   The incorporated area of the City of Byron, Minnesota is divided into
the following districts which shall be known by the following respective
symbols and names:
      (1)   R-1 Low Density Residential District;
      (2)   R-2 Mixed Low Density Residential District;
      (3)   R-3 High Density Residential District;
      (4)   C Commercial District;
      (5)   I Industrial District;
      (6)   AG Agricultural District.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.031 ZONING MAP.
   The areas comprising these zoning districts and the boundaries of said
districts as shown upon the map attached hereto and made a part of this
chapter, being designated as the “Official Zoning Map for the City of Byron”
with all proper notations, references, and other information shown thereon.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.032 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Except where referenced on said map to a street or alley line or other
designated line by dimensions shown on said map, the district boundary lines of
all districts shall follow the corporate limits of Byron, lot lines, or the
centerline of streets, alleys, lakes or rivers as they existed at the time of
the adoption of this chapter.
   (B)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of any district, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.033 GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Lot limitations.
      (1)   All lots shall be maintained and kept in a reasonably clean and
neat condition.
      (2)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, no platted parcel,
lot, or area of land recorded in the County Recorder's office shall have more
than one principal building located thereon.
   (B)   Substitutes for buildings. No substitute for principal building. It
shall be unlawful to place, erect, or maintain within the city any shipping
container, wagon, motor vehicle, semi-trailer, truck, tent, or similar
conveyance as a substitute for a principal building.
   (C)   Architectural projections.
      (1)   Outside stairways, fire escapes, fire towers, porches, platforms,
balconies, boiler flues, and other similar projections shall be considered as
part of the building and not allowed as part of the required space for yards,
courts, or unoccupied space.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to the following:
         (a)   One fireplace or one chimney not more than eight feet in
horizontal length and projecting not more than 24 inches into the side yard;
         (b)   Cornices not exceeding 16 inches in width;
         (c)   Bay windows;
         (d)   Shade control devices;
         (e)   Any part of a solar energy system;
         (f)   Platforms, terraces or steps below the first floor level;
         (g)   Unenclosed porches not over one story in height; and
         (h)   Other ground level unenclosed projections which may extend into
a front or rear yard not more than eight feet or into a side yard not more than
one third of the distance between the principal building and side lot line.
   (D)   Structures not included in height of building. The following
structures shall not be included in calculating the height of the principal
structure:
      (1)   Chimneys;
      (2)   Elevator;
      (3)   Bulk heads;
      (4)   Stacks;
      (5)   Water towers;
      (6)   Pumping towers;
      (7)   Monuments;
      (8)   Cupolas;
      (9)   Steeples;
      (10)   Radio or television towers;
      (11)   Satellite receiving dishes;
      (12)   Solar collectors;
      (13)   Wind energy conversion systems; and
      (14)   Mechanical appurtenances pertaining and necessary to the permitted
use of the district in which they are located.
   (E)   Easement encroachments and vacations.
      (1)   The City of Byron will consider an easement encroachment or
vacation under the following
circumstances:
         (a)   The encroachment or vacation is not located within the 100-year
water elevation of an existing storm water pond, wetland or drainage area.
         (b)   Site drainage will not be affected by the encroachment or
vacation of the easement.
         (c)   The property owner will create the encroachment at no expense to
the city.
         (d)   The property owner agrees to supply the city plans and drawings
in detail, illustrating the proposed encroachment.
         (e)   Any encroachment or vacation is done at the property owner's own
risk. If drainage and/or utility improvements on this easement are not properly
maintained or otherwise become a problem in the future, the property owner(s)
may be required by the city or utility to remove the easement encroachment
structure and regrade the easement, at the property owner(s) sole expense.
         (f)   All other requirements of the Zoning Code shall be enforced.
This agreement shall become a part of the permanent property record and apply
to all present and future property owners. The property owner shall provide a
scaled rendering of the structural encroachment/vacation that shall be attached
to and recorded with the application for encroachment.
         (g)   The encroachment or vacation does not constitute a traffic or
other hazard.
         (h)   The encroachment or vacation does not destroy or impair the
public's use of the land for its intended purposes or serves a public purpose
that cannot otherwise be accomplished without such minor impairment.
         (i)   The property owner agrees to save harmless the city from any and
all claims for damages, injury or death resulting from the continuation and
maintenance of said encroachment.
         (j)   Property owner agrees that the city or other utility may remove
any encroachment or portion thereof, at the property owners' expense, if it is
reasonably necessary to do so in order to construct, alter, maintain, repair or
replace any utility in said easement. Should a utility remove any such
encroachments, or portions thereof, the utility is not liable to the property
owner or its successors or assigns for any damages resulting by reason of such
removal. In no event shall the city or utility company be required to replace
the encroachment or any part thereof.
      (2)   Any encroachment located on a property line shall have a written
agreement from all property owners.
      (3)   A violation of this section would consist of any permanent
alteration of any kind to or on an easement prior to completing the vacation/
encroachment process. Any individual found in violation of any provision of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (4)   Easement vacations shall be processed following M.S. § 412.851.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.034 DISTRICT INTENTS.
   (A)   R-1 Low Density Residential District. The intent of the R-1 district
is to provide land area for residential uses on larger urban lots that include
and are compatible with single unit residential buildings. Furthermore, the
intent is to apply this district to those areas designated as Low Density
Residential in the Byron Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   R-2 Mixed Low Density Residential District. The intent of this
district is to provide land area for residential uses of an overall higher
density than the R-1 District and permitting a mixture of housing
types that will provide additional flexibility in development of housing and
housing choice in the city. The intent is to apply this district to those areas
designated as Medium Density Residential in the Byron Comprehensive Plan, and
in addition to be located in areas with immediate access to collector or higher
level streets and not located in the interior of neighborhoods zoned only as R-
1 according to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   R-3 High Density Residential District. The intent of this district is
to provide areas primarily for residential uses of a high relative density that
include multiple unit dwellings and manufactured home parks. This district
applies to the High Density Residential land use designation of the Byron
Comprehensive Plan.
   (D)   C Commercial District. The intent of this district is to provide land
area for land uses of a service or retail nature and other commercial uses of a
similar character and intensity. This district is intended to reflect the
commercial designation of the Byron Comprehensive Plan.
   (E)   I Industrial District. The intent of the I district is to provide land
area for land uses of an industrial nature including but not limited to
manufacturing, major transportation and communication facilities, utilities,
warehousing, wholesaling and uses of a similar character and intensity.
Furthermore, the industrial district will consist of a downtown industrial area
that recognizes existing industrial establishments and similar uses. The intent
is to apply this district to those areas designated as "industrial" (downtown
area and other) in the Byron Comprehensive Plan.
   (F)   AG Agricultural District. The intent of the AG district is to provide
for the continuation of certain lands along the peripheral areas of the city
used historically for agricultural purposes and activities and that will be
used for urban land use in the future.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.035 DISTRICT USES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   In any district, whenever a use is neither specifically permitted nor
denied, the use shall be considered prohibited. The Zoning Administrator may
determine if a proposed use is consistent by type, intensity, physical
characteristics, style, size, and purpose with any use listed in Tables 152.1
and 152.2.
      (1)   If found to be consistent with a listed use, the proposed use shall
be treated the same as the listed use.
      (2)   If the proposed use is not found to be consistent with any listed
use, the Council, Planning Commission, or property owner may request an
amendment to this chapter to provide for the proposed use.
   (B)   When a property is located within the boundaries of more than one base
or overlay district, the most restrictive use provision among the overlay and
base zoning districts shall apply.
   (C)   District uses.
      (1)   Tables 152.1 and 152.2 list categories of land uses and whether
they are permitted outright, permitted with standards, permitted under a
conditional use permit, permitted under an interim use permit, or prohibited
within each base zoning district. The land uses are defined in section 152.022
Use Definitions. The following definitions shall be referenced when using
Tables 152.1 and 152.2:
         (a)   Permitted uses – a “P” in a cell of the use table indicates that
the land use is allowed by right in the base zoning district.
         (b)   Permitted with standards uses – a “PS” in a cell of the use
table indicates that the land use is allowed when standards identified in §§
152.065 et seq., Use Standards are met. Uses permitted with standards are also
subject to all other applicable requirements of this chapter. Any request to
vary from the standards set forth for a permitted with standards use shall be
processed as a variance.
         (c)   Conditional uses – a “C” in a cell of the use table indicates
that the land use is allowed in the base zoning district only upon approval of
a conditional use permit as described in §
152.102 and in compliance with any use-specific standards identified in §§
152.065 et seq., Use Standards. Uses subject to a conditional use permit are
also subject to all other applicable requirements in the City Code.
         (d)   Interim uses – an “I” in a cell of the use table indicates that
the land use is allowed in the base zoning district only upon approval of an
interim use permit as described in §
152.103 and in compliance with any use-specific standards identified in §§
152.065 et seq., Use Standards. Uses subject to an interim use permit are also
subject to all other applicable requirements in the City Code.
         (e)   Prohibited uses – a blank cell in the use table indicates that
the land use is prohibited in that base zoning district.
      (2)   Table 152.1 Principal Use Table.
      (3)   Table 152.2 Accessory Use Table.
   152.1 Principal Use Table
Principal Uses Base Zoning Districts
               Ag Residential Commercial Industrial Use Specific Standards
Use Type       AG R-1 R-2 R-3 C          I
Residential Uses
Principal Uses        Base Zoning Districts                Use Specific
                      Ag Residential Commercial Industrial Standards
Use Type              AG R-1 R-2 R-3 C          I
Residential Uses
Dwelling, single-unit PS PS  PS                            See §
detached                                                   152.065
Dwelling,             PS PS  PS                            See §
manufactured home                                          152.065
Dwelling, two-unit       PS  PS                            See §
(twinhome)                                                 152.065
Dwelling, two-unit       P   P
(duplex)
Dwelling, three to           P   P
five unit
Dwelling, townhouse          PS  PS                        See §
or rowhouse                                                152.065
Dwelling, apartment          PS  PS                        See §
                                                           152.065
Manufactured home        C   C   C                         See §
park                                                       152.065
Dwelling, apartment                  PS                    See §
mixed use                                                  152.065
Assisted care                    PS  PS                    See §
facility                                                   152.065
Continuing care                  PS                        See §
senior facility                                            152.065
Residential care,
licensed in-home (6      P   P
or fewer persons)
Residential care,
licensed in-home (7-         P   P
16 persons)
Transient                            I
accommodation
Public, Social, or Health Care
Day care center                      I
Institutional use        P   P   P   I
Membership                           I
organization
Commercial Uses
Animal services       PS             I          I          See §
                                                           152.065
Bar or drinking place                P
Restaurant                           I
Retail/convenience                   P
retail trade
Services, low impact                 P
Services, high impact                I          P
Taproom                              I          I
Vehicle dealer                       I          I
Vehicle fueling                      I          I          See §
station                                                    152.065
Industrial Uses
Brewery, winery,                     I          P
distillery
Construction-related                            I
use
 
Proposed Principal Base Zoning Districts
Uses               Ag Residential Commercial Industrial Use Specific Standards
Use Type           AG R-1 R-2 R-3 C          I
Proposed Principal    Base Zoning Districts                Use Specific
Uses                  Ag Residential Commercial Industrial Standards
Use Type              AG R-1 R-2 R-3 C          I
Extraction            I
Heavy industry                                  I
Junkyards                                       I
Light industry                                  P
Research/testing                                P
Warehouse and                                   P
distribution facility
Wholesaling, limited                 I          P
impact
Wholesaling, high                               I
impact
Arts, Recreation, Entertainment
Adult entertainment                  I                     See §
                                                           152.065
Commercial                           I
recreation, indoor
Commercial                           I
recreation, outdoor
Performance facility                 I
Public recreation     P  P   P   P   I
facility
Racing/track          I
enterprise
Transient amusement   I                         P
enterprise
Travel trailer park                  I          I          See §
or campground                                              152.065
Agricultural Uses
General agriculture   P
Agricultural services P              I          P
Retail agricultural   I
Cannabis Business
Uses
Cultivation           PS             PS         PS         See §
                                                           152.065
Cannabis                             PS         PS         See §
manufacturing                                              152.065
Cannabis retail                      PS                    See §
                                                           152.065
Hemp manufacturing                   PS         PS         See §
                                                           152.065
Wholesale                            PS         PS         See §
                                                           152.065
Other Uses
Cemetery              I  I
Essential services    P  P   P   P   P
Wireless, principal   I                         I
 
   152.2 Accessory Use Table
Accessory Uses Base Zoning Districts
               Ag Residential Commercial Industrial Use Specific Standards
Use Type       AG R-1 R-2 R-3 C          I
Accessory Uses       Base Zoning Districts                Use Specific
                     Ag Residential Commercial Industrial Standards
Use Type             AG R-1 R-2 R-3 C          I
Accessory dwelling   PS PS  PS                            See §
unit                                                      152.066
Accessory retail                    P          P
Accessory office                P   P          P
Accessory storage,              P   P          P
indoor
Accessory structure  PS PS  PS  PS  PS                    See §
                                                          152.066
Accessory structure, P
agricultural
Car wash                            P
Child care, family   P  P   P   P
Construction-related P  P   P   P   P          P
temporary use
Drive-thru                          I
establishment
Hazardous material                             I          See §
storage                                                   152.066
Home occupation      PS PS  PS                            See §
                                                          152.066
Keeping of animals   PS PS  PS  PS                        See §
                                                          152.066
Mobile food unit                    PS                    See §
                                                          152.066
Off-street parking
and loading          P  P   P   P   P          P
facilities
Outdoor dining                      P
Outdoor display of                  I                     See §
retail items                                              152.066
Outdoor storage      PS                        PS         See §
                                                          152.066
Produce stand        PS             PS                    See §
                                                          152.066
Recreational         P  P   P   P
facility, private
Secondary farm       I                                    See §
dwelling                                                  152.066
Short term vacation  PS PS  PS                            See §
rental                                                    152.066
Small-scale solar    PS PS  PS  PS  PS         PS         See §
energy system                                             152.066
Small-scale wind                                          See §
energy conversion    PS I   I   I   I          P          152.066
system
Storage and parking
of recreational
camping vehicle,     P  PS  PS                         See §
utility trailer,                                          152.066
boat, or unlicensed
vehicle
Swimming pool or spa PS PS  PS  PS  PS                   See §
pool                                                      152.066
Temporary outdoor                                         See §
promotional sales or   PS  PS  PS  PS         PS         152.066
events
Wireless, accessory  P  P   P   P   P          P           
 
   (D)   Temporary family health care dwelling opt-out. Pursuant to authority
granted by M.S. § 462.3593, subd. 9, the city opts-out of the requirements of
M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary family health care
dwellings.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-14-25)
§ 152.036 DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   General. Land reserved for any street purposes may not be counted in
satisfying yard or area requirements of the Zoning Code, whether the land is to
be dedicated in fee simple or as an easement granted to the city.
   (B)   Lot dimensions.
      (1)   Minimum lot frontage; frontage modifications. Where curvilinear
streets and cul-de sacs are used in a subdivision or where other unconventional
lot shapes are used, a reduction in the lot frontage shall be permitted,
provided that:
         (a)   The lot width measured at the required front yard setback shall
equal the frontage required in this district; and
         (b)   The lot width measured at the front lot line shall not be less
than 40 feet in the R-1 district and 35 feet in the R-2 and R-3 districts.
      (2)   Table 152.3 Minimum Lot Dimensions.
   (C)   Site dimensions.
      (1)   Table 152.4 Site Dimensions.
   152.3 Minimum Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Districts Use Lot Area Lot Width/Frontage
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Districts Use                             Lot Area          Lot Width/Frontage
AG        General agriculture uses        15 acres          200 feet
          All other uses                  2 acres           150 feet
          Dwelling, single-unit detached  7,200 SF          60 feet
          Dwelling, manufactured home     7,200 SF          60 feet
R-1       Dwelling, two-unit (twinhome)   7,200 SF per unit 60 feet per unit
          Dwelling, two-unit (duplex)     8,400 SF          70 feet
          Cemetery                        0.5 acre          70 feet
          All other uses                  8,400 SF          80 feet
          Dwelling, single-unit detached  6,000 SF          50 feet
          Dwelling, manufactured home     6,000 SF          50 feet
          Dwelling, two-unit (twinhome)   6,000 SF per unit 50 feet
R-2       Dwelling, two-unit (duplex)     7,500 SF          60 feet
          Dwelling, three to five unit    3,750 SF per unit 80 feet
          Dwelling, townhouse or rowhouse 2,500 SF per unit 20 feet per unit
          Dwelling, apartment             2,000 SF per unit 60 feet
          All other uses                  7,500 SF          80 feet
          Dwelling, townhouse or rowhouse 2,500 SF per unit 20 feet per unit
R-3       Dwelling, apartment             2,000 SF per unit 60 feet
          All other uses                  5,000 SF          60 feet
          All uses (historic downtown)    2,000 SF          35 feet
C         1,2 
          All uses                        5,000 SF          50 feet
I         All uses (historic downtown) 1 5,000             50 feet
          All uses                        6,000             60 feet
1 The historic downtown area shall be determined as identified in the Byron
Comprehensive Plan Neighborhood Districts Map.
2 All buffering and screening requirements as specified in §
152.085 Buffering and Screening shall be complied with under these provisions
of this chapter. Where alleys exist, the rear yard measurement may include
one-half the width of the alley. All loading/unloading areas and storage area
requirements shall be complied with.
 
   152.4 Site Dimensions
             Minimum Setbacks                                   Maximum Lot
District Use Front1 Side1                   Rear Maximum Height Coverage

                    Least width Sum Corner2
                      Minimum Setbacks                                 Maximum
District Use                                              Maximum      Lot
                      Front1 Side1                 Rear   Height       Coverage

                             Least  Sum    Corner2
                             width
                                                          No height
                                                          restrictions
                                                          except where
                                                          located
                                                          within 200
                                                          ft of a
                                                          residential
                                                          zoning
                                                          district, no
AG       All uses     45 ft. 30 ft. 75 ft. 30 ft.  50 ft. building or     N/A
                                                          structure
                                                          shall have a
                                                          maximum
                                                          height of
                                                          more than 55
                                                          ft.
                                                          Residential
                                                          uses are 35
                                                          ft.
         Dwelling,
         single-unit  25 ft. 5 ft.  15 ft. 25 ft.  20 ft.
         detached
         Dwelling,
         manufactured 25 ft. 5 ft.  15 ft. 25 ft.  20 ft.
         home                                             30 ft.
         Dwelling,
R-1      two-unit     25 ft. N/A    15 ft. 25 ft.  20 ft.              35%
         (twinhome)
         Dwelling,
         two-unit     25 ft. 7 ft.  20 ft. 25 ft.  20 ft.
         (duplex)
         Cemetery     25 ft. 5 ft.  15 ft. 25 ft.  20 ft.
         All other    25 ft. 20 ft. 45 ft. 25 ft.  30 ft. 55 ft. 3
         uses
         Dwelling,
         single-unit  20 ft. 5 ft.  15 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft.
         detached
         Dwelling,
         manufactured 20 ft. 5 ft.  15 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft.
         home
         Dwelling,
         two-unit     20 ft. N/A    10 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft.
         (twinhome)
         Dwelling,                                        35 ft.
R-2      two-unit     20 ft. 5 ft.  15 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft.              40%
         (duplex)
         Dwelling,
         three to     20 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft.
         five unit
         Dwelling,
         townhouse or 20 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft.
         rowhouse
         Dwelling,    20 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft.
         apartment
         All other    25 ft. 20 ft. 45 ft. 20 ft.  30 ft. 55 feet3
         uses
         Dwelling,
         townhouse or 20 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft.
         rowhouse                                         35 ft.
R-3      Dwelling,    20 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft.              40%
         apartment
         All other    20 ft. 5 ft.  15 ft. 20 ft.  20 ft. 55 feet3
         uses
         All uses                                  15
C4       (historic    0 ft.  0 ft.  0 ft.  0 ft.   ft.6   35 ft.       100%
         downtown)5
         All uses     45 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 15 ft.  25 ft.              80%
         All uses
I 7,8    (historic    15 ft. 7 ft.  14 ft. 15 ft.  15 ft. 55 ft.       100%9
         downtown)5
         All uses     15 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 15 ft.  15 ft.              80%
1 This is the minimum front required for a lot abutting a local street. Where a
front or side yard of a lot abuts a major thoroughfare or frontage road to a
major thoroughfare, based on the Thoroughfare Plan, an additional 10 feet shall
be required for the adjacent front and side yard. This requirement does not
apply to nonresidential land uses. In the R-1 and R-2 districts, where existing
dwellings have a front yard of more than 20 feet, all new development shall be
required to have a minimum front yard that is equal to or greater than the
front yards of abutting lots that have front yards abutting the same street.
2 In the R-2 and R-3 districts, where all dwellings located along the side
street have a front yard less than the required 20 feet, the side street side
yard shall be permitted to be reduced to the front yard but in no case shall
the side street side yard be less than 10 feet.
3 Any building in the R-1 district greater than 30 feet in height shall be set
back from all lot lines 1 foot for each foot the building is greater than 30
feet. Any building in the R-2 or R-3 districts greater than 35 feet in height
shall be set back from all lot lines 1 foot for each foot the building is
greater than 35 feet.
4 All buffering and screening requirements as identified in §
152.085 Buffering and Screening shall be complied with under these provisions
of this chapter.
5 The historic downtown area shall be determined as identified on the Byron
Comprehensive Plan Neighborhood Districts Map.
6 The minimum rear yard may be reduced to zero where a commercial establishment
has a part of its business located on an abutting lot which is located only
within the commercial or industrial districts.
7 Where the use abuts a residential zoning district or a federal, state or
county highway, a 45 foot setback shall be required.
8 Where an industrial establishment abuts a railroad right-of-way, the abutting
side or rear yard may be reduced to zero. The minimum side or rear yard may be
reduced to zero where an industrial establishment has a part of its business
located on an abutting lot which is located only within the Commercial or
Industrial District.
9 This percentage refers to 100% of the area available for building. This area
is the area remaining after providing the minimum area or more for yard
requirements, buffer and screen requirements, parking area and loading/
unloading requirements where required.
 
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.037 BASE ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS.
Commercial District (C)
   (A)   All commercial activities shall be conducted within a building.
Exceptions to this requirement include activities using designated loading
spaces and temporary waste storage.
   (B) No building customarily used for night operation shall be located closer
than 100 feet to any residential district.
   (C)   Public streets, alleys, or parking areas shall not be used for
commercial vehicle storage or parking on a temporary or permanent basis.
   (D)   Storage of all materials or machinery related to any principal use
shall be stored in buildings. There shall be no outside storage, with the
exception of vehicles used as part of the on-site commercial use.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
OVERLAY/SPECIAL DISTRICTS
§ 152.050 GREENWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The Greenway Overlay District is intended to protect natural
resources and allow for the development of a connected, city-wide greenway
recreational trail network.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   The Greenway Overlay District shall apply to any parcel that
contains areas identified on the Greenway Overlay District Zoning Map.
         (a)   The Greenway Overlay District is generally intended to include
any wetland, stream, or Decorah formation and a 50 foot buffer around said
natural feature or as otherwise identified by the City Council.
         (b)   The Greenway Overlay District also includes 50 foot wide
greenways which connect natural features on a site or to the parcel boundary
when natural features are located beyond the parcel under development.
      (2)   Interpretation of the exact boundary shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator based on publicly available data, such as the national wetland
inventory and public waters inventory, as well as information from the property
owner which is prepared and signed by a licensed professional (engineer,
surveyor, etc.).
      (3)   The Greenway Overlay District shall be used with any underlying
base zoning district as shown on the Zoning Map.
      (4)   Unless otherwise exempted, the regulations of this chapter shall be
required when any land is subdivided or significant grading of a site is
proposed.
   (C)   Uses allowed. Uses are allowed based on the underlying base zoning
district.
   (D)   Required preservation.
      (1)   Natural areas, natural area buffers, and greenway connections
identified on the Greenway Overlay District Zoning Map shall be, at the
discretion of the City Council, either:
         (a)   Dedicated to the city; or
         (b)   Preserved within an outlot owned by the homeowners association
established as part of the development. The outlot must include an easement
that preserves the greenway area and allows for the development of a public
recreational trail.
      (2)   No construction activity shall be allowed within the designated
preservation areas, including grading, excavation, or stockpiling of fill
materials whether to provide for a building site, on site utilities or
services, or for any roads or driveways. In addition to any construction
activities specifically allowed by the City Council, the following activities
are permitted:
         (a)   Construction of multi-use trails;
         (b)   Restoration of previously disturbed or degraded areas to their
natural state;
         (c)   Enhancement of the habitat or natural resource value of the
natural area;
         (d)   Construction needed for emergency public safety; or
         (e)   Installation of utilities when such installation cannot
reasonably occur in other areas and when conducted with sensitivity to natural
features.
   (E)   Required development.
      (1)   Each development within the Greenway Overlay District shall include
a ten foot public multi-use trail.
      (2)   The multi-use trail shall be located adjacent to or along natural
features to the maximum extent possible given site conditions. The trail shall
be outside of any required natural resource buffers.
      (3)   The multi-use trail shall be designed to connect to multi-use
trails located immediately adjacent to the proposed development or to align
with locations where future trail extensions may occur on adjacent properties.
   (F)   Credit for preservation.
      (1)   The portion of the preservation area that shall be credited towards
the development’s park dedication requirement is the area that is preserved for
the development of a recreational trail. This area shall include the trail
corridor. Land required to be preserved based on federal, state or local
requirements, including, but not limited to wetlands, streams, steep slopes,
and associated buffers shall not be counted towards park dedication.
      (2)   For the purposes of calculating density as identified in the Byron
Comprehensive Plan, the portion of the preservation area that was not credited
towards park dedication shall be included as part of the lot area. This
calculation shall not include any area that is otherwise required to be
preserved based on federal, state or local requirements, including, but not
limited to wetlands, streams, and steep slopes.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.051 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of the PUD district is to:
      (1)   Encourage developments offering greater creativity, alternative
development styles, and flexibility in site plan design than is provided under
the strict application of zoning regulations, while at the same time preserving
the health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the
City of Byron. The PUD district may allow deviations, under appropriate
circumstances, to underlying ordinance provisions if it is proven that public
benefits are provided to mitigate any deviations.
      (2)   Allow for and facilitate the potential mixture of uses in an
integrated and well-planned area when such mixing of land uses could not
otherwise be accomplished under this Code.
      (3)   Ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas, and to
protect and preserve the natural features and resources of a site.
      (4)   Facilitate the efficient provision of streets and public utilities.
   (B)   Overall density.
      (1)   Within a PUD, overall density for residential developments shall be
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   Individual buildings or lots within a PUD may exceed those
standards, provided that density for the entire PUD does not exceed the
permitted standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Uses permitted in a PUD shall include those uses considered to be
in conformance with the general land use shown for the area on the Byron
Comprehensive Plan. The city may permit up to 25% of the gross floor area of
all buildings in a PUD to be used for land uses for which the site is not
designated in the Comprehensive Plan if the City Council finds that such use is
in the best interests of the city and is consistent with the requirements of
this section.
      (2)   A PUD may not contain uses which, according to the city’s
underlying districts, are not allowed anywhere in the city.
      (3)   Uses permitted in a PUD may consist of one or a mixture of land
uses clearly designated by type on the approved final development plan. Mixed
uses may occur among or within buildings as long as the uses are compatible
with each other and with planned and existing uses surrounding the planned unit
development. Any change in the list of uses presented in the development stage
PUD plan will be considered an amendment to the PUD and shall follow the
procedures specified in §
152.106.
   (D)   District standards. The district standards shall be as follows:
      (1)   Minimum PUD area. Ten acres of contiguous land in single ownership
or control. A land use of less than ten acres may qualify if one or more of the
following conditions exist:
         (a)   The PUD is to include two or more principal land uses;
         (b)   Natural features of the land are such that development under
standard zoning regulations would not be appropriate in order to conserve such
features;
         (c)   The land is adjacent to or across the street from property which
has been developed as a PUD and is to be developed in relationship to such
prior development;
         (d)   The land is located in the city’s historic downtown;
         (e)   The land is an existing developed site which is proposed for
redevelopment; or
         (f)   The PUD process is desirable to ensure compatibility and careful
consideration of the effect of a development on surrounding land uses.
      (2)   Determining standards. Standards such as lot size, coverage,
setbacks, building height, parking, and screening shall be governed by the
standards of the zoning district most similar in function to the proposed PUD
use(s), as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council. Deviation
from those standards may be permitted only if such deviation is consistent with
the total design of the development, encourages a desirable living environment,
and is not detrimental to the welfare of the city.
         (a)   More than one principal building may be constructed on each
platted lot within a PUD as long as the buildings are separated by at least 15
feet.
      (3)   Access.
         (a)   All land uses shall abut on a public street or have adequate
access to a public street by means of a private street or drive. All streets
and drives must tie in effectively with the city's existing street system and
with those arterial and collector streets proposed in the Byron Comprehensive
Plan.
         (b)   All sidewalks and trails within the PUD shall be public.
      (4)   Architectural style. The architectural style of individual
structures shall be compatible with other structures in the PUD, with the
overall site design, and with surrounding land uses.
      (5)   Open space.
         (a)   Open space shall include all areas of the development with
physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and
areas containing significant historic sites.
         (b)   Usable open space shall be required for each PUD.
            (i)   Usable open space shall be of a size, shape, and location
suitable for its intended purpose.
            (ii)   PUDs with residential uses shall provide at least 10% of the
development as usable open space.
            (iii)   PUDs with non-residential uses shall provide central area
(s) or feature(s) such as a patio with seating, pedestrian plaza with benches,
water feature(s), and/or other designated areas or focal points as approved
through the PUD approval process that are openly accessible to the public. The
size of this area shall be no smaller than 5% of the total PUD area. The
central area(s) or feature(s) shall be designed with materials compatible with
the building and remainder of the site and shall be maintained over the life of
the development.
            (iv)   For PUDs with a mix of residential and non-residential uses,
subsection (ii) shall apply to the residential portion of the PUD while
subsection (iii) shall be used to calculate the appropriate amount of open
space for the non-residential portion.
         (c)   Whenever possible, open space shall be linked to the open space
areas of surrounding developments.
         (d)   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public
dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means shall
be provided to ensure long term preservation and maintenance of open space for
its intended use as specified in the Final Development Plan.
      (6)   Homeowners association. Membership in a homeowner’s association or
similar organization approved by the city shall be mandatory for all residents
of the planned unit development. The homeowner’s association shall own and
maintain all common open space and private interior roadways.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.052 FLOOD PRONE AREA REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of these requirements is to guide development in
the flood prone area consistent with the flood threat in order to minimize
adverse effects on the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DRAINAGEWAY, NATURAL. Any naturally occurring watercourse, trench, ditch,
swale or similar depression in which surface water or groundwater is collected
and flows during any part of a year.
      FLOOD LEVEL, MAXIMUM. The elevations at which flooding is recorded by the
flood prone soils in a natural drainageway, for example, or the elevation of
flood prone soil boundaries in undeveloped watersheds.
      FLOOD PRONE SOILS. Based on the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service Soil
Survey of Olmsted County, Minnesota, alluvial soils or soils deposited by
surface water runoff that indicate areas of land that are flooded temporarily.
Any land area on which the following soils are located are subject to flooding
and are flood prone soils:
 
Map Symbol Soil Name
19         Chaseburg
467        Sawmill
468        Otter
1846       Kato
 
   (C)   Uses in the flood prone area. All uses located within the flood prone
area shall be permitted only after a conditional use permit has been issued by
the city.
   (D)   Development standards. The deposition of any fill or spoil from
dredging or sand and gravel operations, the construction of any structure or
the grading or paving of any area shall require certification by a registered
professional engineer or hydrologist that the following conditions have been
met. The City Engineer also shall review all permit applications to determine
that the following conditions have been met:
      (1)   Fill deposited in the flood prone area shall be no more than the
minimum amount necessary to conduct the use. Where any permanent building or
structure is planned to be located fill shall be at a minimum of one foot above
the maximum flood level;
      (2)   No net loss of capacity for surface storage of flood waters shall
result from the activity. The cumulative effect of fill within the flood prone
area shall cause no increase in upstream flood levels. Compensatory storage
shall be provided to offset the storage lost through filling;
      (3)   The cumulative effect of fill shall not cause an increase in the
velocity of flood waters;
      (4)   The effect of such activities in the flood prone area shall not
result in an increase in erosion potential on the site or in the flood prone
area downstream of the fill site;
      (5)   In no event shall an increase in the maximum flood level be
permitted if it would affect any existing building;
      (6)   Fill shall consist of soil or rock materials only;
      (7)   All fill areas shall be stabilized with material which will ensure
and protect against erosion, undercutting and undermining.
   (E)   Engineering studies. In developing proper hydrologic and hydraulic
studies, the following conditions shall be addressed:
      (1)   Consideration of the effects of a proposed use shall be based on a
reasonable assumption that there will be an equal degree of encroachment
extending for a significant reach on both sides of the natural drainageway;
      (2)   The maximum flood level is calculated based on the location of
alluvial soils and is therefore an historic record, not a reflection of the
potential flooding once urban development occurs in the watershed or a portion
thereof. Engineering studies shall address this difference, and, where the
studies indicate that the maximum flood level, as defined, is at a lower
elevation than the flooding elevation based on hydraulic studies of a
developing watershed, then the flooding elevation of the hydraulic studies
shall be used to determine all further development standards under this section
of this chapter.
   (F)   Flood prone soils location. The location of flood prone soils shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator by scaling the location from the soils
map covering the Byron area in the Soil Survey of Olmsted County, Minnesota.
Otherwise, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to determine flood
prone soils locations as part of the required engineering study carried out by
a registered professional engineer or hydrologist.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
USE STANDARDS
§ 152.065 PRINCIPAL USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   (A)   Adult entertainment.
      (1)   Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion
picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult saunas, adult companionship
establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses,
adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels or motels
and adult body painting studios and other adult establishments may locate not
less than 700 feet from:
         (a)   Any existing residential zoning district;
         (b)   Any areas designated for future residential development in the
Byron Comprehensive Plan;
         (c)   Any place of worship, school or youth facility;
         (d)   Any licensed daycare center; or
         (e)   Any other adult establishment.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, this distance shall be a
horizontal measurement from the nearest existing residential district boundary,
place of worship, school, youth facility or another adult establishment to the
nearest boundary of the proposed adult establishment.
   (B)   Animal services. In the AG district, no cage or pen housing such
animals shall be located nearer than 100 feet to any lot line.
   (C)   Assisted care facility.
      (1)   The use shall be required to meet the specifications of buffering
and screening Class B as indicated in the table set forth in §
152.085 Buffering and Screening, with the exception of buffering and screening
in the minimum side yards (five feet). Where the side yard is less than 10 feet
as indicated on a proposed site plan, the requirement for shrubs shall be one
per three feet.
      (2)   A permanent common open space area for passive group outdoor
recreation activities shall be provided with a size of not less than 5% of the
lot area:
         (a)   The area shall be landscaped with shade trees and shrubbery for
the purpose of protection from the sun, screening and visual interest.
         (b)   Such an outdoor living area shall be properly drained, located
for convenience and optimum use, and shall be walled, fenced, or planted to
provide reasonable privacy.
         (c)   This area may be surfaced to provide an area for garden
furniture. It may also be roofed in whole or in part, provided that it is open
on all sides and meets the requirements for location of accessory buildings in
its designated zoning district.
      (3)   All buildings shall have a common room open for use by all of the
residents of the building. The common area shall meet the occupancy and space
requirements for common rooms as outlined in the Uniform Building Code.
   (D)   Cannabis business uses. All standards for cannabis businesses uses
shall follow standards outlined in
Ch. 117, Cannabis Businesses, of this city code.
   (E)   Continuing care senior facility. A continuing care senior facility may
include several uses within a single development, including townhouse or
rowhouse dwellings, apartments, or assisted care facilities. Each use within
the development shall be required to meet the standards specific to that use
listed in this section.
   (F)   Dwelling, apartment. In the R-2 district, no more than 12 units shall
be allowed per building.
   (G)   Dwelling, apartment mixed use. 
      (1)   Dwelling units (apartments) shall be located above the ground
floor.
      (2)   Buildings in the historic downtown area as identified in the Byron
Comprehensive Plan Neighborhood Districts Map shall be permitted where adequate
on-site parking is available.
   (H)   Dwelling, single-unit detached (including manufactured homes).
      (1)   All such dwellings shall be constructed upon a permanent foundation
which is located under the entire length of all exterior walls of the dwelling
and is approved according to the Uniform Building Code (State Building Code).
All post-frame structures are prohibited for dwellings.
      (2)   The minimum width of the dwelling shall be 20 feet, measured
between nonintersecting exterior walls along a straight line perpendicular to
both walls. The requirement shall not apply to any additions made subsequent to
the original construction of the dwelling.
      (3)   All manufactured homes shall be equipped with an anchoring system
approved by the Minnesota Department of Administration (Building Code
Division).
   (I)   Dwelling, townhouse or rowhouse. In the R-2 district, no more than 10
units shall be allowed per building.
   (J)   Dwelling, two-unit (twinhome).
      (1)   The applicant shall record a covenant and deed restriction on all
properties which will abut the common lot line. Said covenants and deed
restrictions shall:
         (a)   Provide access to the abutting property for the adjacent
property owner and/or his or her representative for the purpose of
construction, reconstruction, repair, and maintenance of either side on the
total property;
         (b)   Provide for necessary encroachments for footings, eaves, and
special structures; and
         (c)   Provide for restrictions to limit color, material, and design of
the building as to be compatible with the attached unit.
      (2)   The twinhome structure shall be located at least 15 feet from all
other principal structures and ten feet from all accessory structures.
      (3)   The wall of the dwelling shall be placed upon said property in a
manner not to encroach upon another lot.
      (4)   Water runoff from building roofs shall not drain onto abutting
property but shall be required to drain onto only the lot on which the building
is located.
   (K)   Manufactured home park.
      (1)   Manufactured homes shall comply with the applicable State of
Minnesota laws and regulations on manufactured housing and manufactured home
parks including, but not limited to, M.S. Chapter 327 and any applicable rules
and regulations of the Minnesota Department of Health.
      (2)   Permit required. Prior to the development and operation of a
manufactured home park a conditional use permit and site design review approval
are required.
      (3)   Park size. A manufactured home park shall contain not less than 25
lots for manufactured homes.
      (4)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Uses permitted within the park shall include only manufactured
homes, storm shelters, recreational facilities, and accessory uses to the
manufactured homes, including common laundering facilities and activities
necessary for the operation and maintenance of the park.
         (b)   Accessory uses not listed in (a) may be allowed by conditional
use permit.
         (c)   There shall be no outdoor camping anywhere in the manufactured
home park.
      (5)   Only one manufactured home shall be located on an individual lot or
space.
      (6)   Yard requirements.
         (a)   An open area shall be provided on each manufactured home lot to
ensure privacy, adequate natural light and ventilation to the home and to
provide sufficient area for outdoor uses essential to the manufactured home.
The minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet. The maximum lot coverage for
the manufactured home, carport, accessory structures, and driveway shall be
50%.
         (b)   Manufactured homes shall be no closer than 25 feet to adjacent
manufactured homes in the side yard area and not less than 25 feet in the rear
yard area. A front yard area of 20 feet shall be required between the paved
roadway and manufactured home. Each lot shall be clearly defined by permanent
markers located in the ground.
         (c)   No manufactured home shall be located closer than 50 feet to the
right-of-way line of T.H. 14, C.S.A.H. 3, and C.S.A.H. 5 and 25 feet from the
right-of-way line of all other public highways, roads, or streets. A
manufactured home shall be located no closer to the park boundary than 20 feet.
         (d)   A buffer with a hedge or fence and landscaping shall be provided
within the setback along all exterior boundary lot lines and along lot lines
that are abutting a county, state, or federal highway. No buffer is required
along lot lines abutting local streets.
      (7)   Building height. Except for public, community, and utility
structures, the maximum height of principal and accessory structures shall not
exceed one and one-half stories or 20 feet, whichever is less.
      (8)   Park site improvements.
         (a)   Streets shall be provided within the park. The internal street
system shall provide convenient and safe circulation and access to each lot.
These internal streets shall be private streets.
         (b)   The minimum street width (pavement surface) shall be as follows:
   Table 152.5. Parking Street Width
 
Local Street1
                  Parking On-Street2
Traffic Direction One Side Both Sides No Parking
One-way           18 feet  26 feet    10 feet
Two-way           28 feet  36 feet    20 feet
1 Travel lanes shall be 10 feet in width and parking lanes eight feet in
width
2 Where no parking on-street is permitted, proper signing shall be required
to indicate that no parking is permitted. Where no parking is permitted on-
street, additional off-street parking shall be required at one additional
parking space per lot.
 
         (c)   Streets shall be paved to city construction standards for
surface and subsurface materials and construction methods. Streets shall be
maintained in good condition.
         (d)   A common sidewalk system shall be provided and maintained on all
streets and between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such
sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet.
         (e)   A municipal sanitary sewer and municipal water system shall be
installed in accordance with city specifications. All public and private
utilities serving each manufactured home lot shall be placed underground. Fire
hydrants shall be located in accordance with generally accepted practices
listed in the city’s Engineering Specifications.
         (f)   The ground surface of all parts of every manufactured home park
shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe and efficient
manner without risk or erosion or flooding of lots within the park or to lands
adjoining or in the vicinity of the manufactured home park.
         (g)   There shall be provided within each manufactured home park
suitable storm shelter facilities constructed completely below ground level and
outside all flood prone areas and shall provide a minimum of ten square feet of
shelter floor area for each lot in the park.
         (h)   An area shall be set aside for long-term storage for such items
as boats, boat trailers, hauling trailers, and other equipment not generally
stored within the manufactured home and/or a utility building on the
manufactured home lot. This storage area shall be screened with a fence, wall,
or berm and landscaping so as to not be visible from adjacent properties.
         (i)   Trash and garbage disposal shall be in common disposal areas
with adequately sized bins in a walled or fenced area and be located within 150
feet of each lot and meet all Olmsted County Health Department regulations.
Individual garbage cans shall not be permitted.
         (j)   There shall be provided within each manufactured home park, open
space for play lots and recreation facilities for the exclusive use of the park
occupants. Such open space area shall be a total of 20,000 square feet for each
50 manufactured home lots or an equal proportion thereof. Play lots shall be a
minimum of 500 square feet in area and recreational areas shall be a minimum of
10,000 square feet in area. These open space areas shall be of appropriate
design and provided with appropriate recreational equipment.
      (9)   Manufactured home and lot improvements.
         (a)   All manufactured homes shall be kept in good repair, shall
remain in a sanitary and structurally sound condition, and shall conform to the
requirements of MN Statutes and U.S. HUD.
         (b)   No manufactured home shall be erected on a lot except upon a
manufactured home pad that shall meet all applicable Uniform Building Code
(city building code) standards. Each pad shall have a minimum dimension equal
to the dimensions of the manufactured home to be placed on the lot.
         (c)   All manufactured homes shall be equipped with an anchoring
system approved by the Minnesota Department of Administration (Building Code
division). The frame, wheels, crawl space, storage areas, and utility
connections of all manufactured homes shall be concealed from view by skirting
made of durable all-weather construction material that is consistent with the
exterior of the manufactured home. Installation of the skirting must be
completed within 60 days of the placement of the manufactured home on the pad.
No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of plumbing and
electrical facilities.
         (d)   Dwelling units of conventional construction shall not be
permitted on a manufactured home site, except for a manager’s office and
residence.
         (e)   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided to minimize the
disruption of traffic movement. Driveway area shall not be located on the lot
such that the remaining open space area of each lot is substantially reduced in
size. Each lot shall be required to have two off-street parking spaces. These
spaces may be provided on the individual lot or in parking bays within 100 feet
of the lot they are intended to serve. Parking bays shall not be permitted to
be located on any public street within the park. On-lot spaces may be provided
in tandem.
         (f)   No building or structure shall be attached to the manufactured
home other than one removable cabana or awning. One carport and one utility
shed shall be permitted on a manufactured home lot. Tuck under garages where
the appropriate foundation walls are provided shall be permitted.
         (g)   All recreational vehicles, trailers, and other similar equipment
shall be required to be parked in an area designated for such use on the
manufactured home park plan. No on-street parking of recreational vehicles
shall be permitted. This storage area shall be screened with a fence, berm, or
trees and landscaping.
   (L)   Travel trailer parks and campgrounds.
      (1)   The park shall abut a paved public highway or street and have safe
access onto such public roadway;
      (2)   A buffer shall be required along the entire property boundary
perimeter as specified in §
152.085 Buffering and Screening;
      (3)   Each travel trailer parking site or camping site shall be within
200 feet of a community building which shall provide separate toilet facilities
for each sex. Drinking water outlets shall be provided throughout the park or
campground;
      (4)   Interior streets or paths for safe vehicle circulation shall be
constructed in a manner so as to be useable during any time of the year and
kept in a dust-free condition. Recreational travel trailer or other
recreational vehicle parking areas shall be similarly constructed so as to be
useable and dust free during any time of year;
      (5)   The park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in
a safe and efficient manner, without risk of erosion or flooding of lands
adjoining or in the vicinity of the park. All surface area, excluding paved
areas, shall be required to maintain vegetative cover of grasses, herbs or
similar vegetative material on the entire park;
      (6)   Proper waste disposal methods shall be used that meet Olmsted
County Department of Health standards and State Department of Health standards;
      (7)   The applicant shall be required to provide an accurate scaled
drawing of the design of the planned park or campground. Information on all
requirements of this chapter shall be included on the application by the
applicant;
      (8)   All State of Minnesota laws and regulations and Olmsted County
Department of Health regulations shall be complied with.
   (M)   Vehicle fueling station. Vehicle fueling stations shall be located
adjacent to an arterial or higher-level street or to the frontage road adjacent
to a higher-level street.
   (N)   Wireless use.
      (1)   Purpose. Establish regulations that protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the community for the siting, construction, and
maintenance of Wireless Communication Towers (WCT) and similar facilities
within the city. This does not pertain to amateur radio.
      (2)   Objectives. The regulations of this subchapter are intended to:
         (a)   Maximize the use of existing approved structures for siting new
antennas in order to reduce the number of new towers needed to serve the
community.
         (b)   Provide for the appropriate location and development of antennas
and towers within the city.
         (c)   Minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communications
towers through siting standards.
         (d)   Utilize standard structural and setback requirements to avoid
potential damage to adjacent properties from antenna and tower failure.
      (3)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         ANTENNA. Any device or equipment used for the transmission or
reception of electromagnetic waves, which may include omni-directional antenna,
directional antenna or parabolic antenna.
         CO-LOCATION. The location of more than one antenna or set of antennas
on the same wireless communication tower or structure.
         ENGINEER. Any person practicing as a professional engineer shall be
duly licensed and certified under the guidelines stipulated in M.S. Ch. 326, as
may be amended from time to time, for their particular field.
         FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
         FCC. Federal Communication Commission.
         HEIGHT. The distance measured from the ground level at the base of the
tower or structure to the highest point on a tower or structure.
         TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, e.g., monopoles and similar
structures.
         TOWER ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Any structure located at the base of a
tower for housing receiving or transmitting equipment.
         WIRELESS COMMUNICATION. Any personal wireless service as defined in
the Federal Communications Act of 1996, including FCC licensed commercial
wireless telecommunications services such as cellular, personal communication
services (PCS), paging and similar services that currently exist or may be
developed.
      (4)   Interim use. Wireless communication towers and similar facilities
are an interim use within the zoning districts as identified in Tables 152.1
and 152.2 subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, place, replace or structurally repair any
wireless communication tower or adjoining/accessory buildings without first
making application to the Zoning Administrator and securing appropriate permit
approval. Building permits are not required for adjustment or replacement of
the elements for an antenna array affixed to a tower or antenna. All
applications shall be accompanied by a coverage/interference and capacity
analysis, including a technical evaluation of existing and proposed
transmissions indicating all potential interference problems including, but not
limited to, residential broadcast reception and public safety communications.
All applications must demonstrate compliance with all existing FCC, FAA,
Uniform Building Code and other pertinent regulations. As regulations change,
wireless communication operators must demonstrate continued compliance at their
expense. All subsequent co-locators must apply for individual building and
conditional use permits in conformance with this section.
         (b)   Permitted locations.
            (i)   No wireless communication tower shall be erected in the city
unless the applicant demonstrates that the equipment planned for the purpose of
the proposed wireless communication cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower, building, or structure within one mile search radius of the
proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
               a.   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of the existing or approved structure, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer; and the existing or approved structure cannot
be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost.
               b.   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or
building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
               c.   Existing or approved wireless communication towers and
buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at
a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer.
               d.   Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate
the planned equipment upon an existing or approved structure.
            (ii)   Wireless communications towers are permitted with a
conditional use in areas with the following uses:
               a.   Industrial, manufacturing, commercial, and agricultural;
               b.   Parks and public open space when sited and designed to be
compatible with the nature of the site;
               c.   Government, school and public utility structures; and
               d.   Places of worship.
      (5)   Design standards. All applications must meet the following minimum
requirements.
         (a)   All towers and antennas shall comply with all FCC and FAA rules
and regulations. Wireless communication towers attached to a building or
existing structure shall comply with the setbacks of the zoning district and
shall not exceed 20 feet in height beyond the top of the primary structure.
Freestanding towers shall be set back one foot from any property line or
building for each one foot of structural height. Freestanding towers shall not
be located in a front yard, nor shall any part of the antenna or tower extend
across or over any part of the public right-of-way, street, highway or walkway.
         (b)   Towers should be located in areas that provide the maximum
possible amount of natural or existing structural screening for off-site view.
         (c)   Towers shall be self-supporting without the use of wires,
cables, beams or other means, the design should utilize an open framework or
monopole configuration that is designed to collapse in on itself in the event
of structural damage. Design and installation of towers and antennas shall
comply with all applicable federal and state standards, including FCC and FAA
standards and the current Uniform Building Code, and shall be approved and
stamped by a licensed professional structural engineer.
         (d)   Towers shall be designed to allow the future co-location of
equipment at varying heights. Tower operators are required to accept co-
location of communication equipment and shall not make co-location economically
unfeasible. Towers over 150 feet in height shall be designed for co-location of
at least three additional antennas. Towers of 125 feet to less than 150 feet
shall be designed for co-location of at least two additional antennas. Towers
of 100 feet to less than 125 feet shall be designed for co-location of at least
one additional antenna. Subsequent co-locators are subject to the same
provisions and procedures as the primary conditional use applicant.
         (e)   Towers shall only be illuminated by artificial means if such
light is required by federal (FAA) or state regulations; or if the lighting is
used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots or similar areas; or if said
artificial illumination is used for crime prevention purposes.
         (f)   The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than required
warning or equipment information is prohibited. All buildings and structures
accessory to a tower shall:
            (i)   Be constructed of a material on the exterior of the building
similar to the surrounding residential area when located in or adjacent to a
residential zoning district.
            (ii)   Be buffered and screened from adjoining uses as established
in the requirements of the underlying zoning district.
            (iii)   Meet the height and setback limitations as established for
each zoning district.
         (g)   A tower shall have only one accessory building, which shall be
immediately adjacent to the tower. The accessory building shall contain only
electronic equipment that is necessary for the functioning of the
telecommunications system.
         (h)   The ground level perimeter may be required to be screened with
pre-approved landscaping and/or fencing at the owner’s expense. The tower shall
be reasonably protected against unauthorized access and vandalism.
         (i)   All construction, installation, wiring and maintenance of towers
shall not create a safety hazard or damage to the property of others, nor
interfere with public safety communications.
         (j)   Owners or operators shall remove abandoned or unused towers and
similar facilities within 12 months of the cessation of operations and shall
restore the site to its original condition. Should the owners or operators of
abandoned or unused towers and similar facilities fail to abide by this
provision, the city shall remove the structure and shall assess the costs to
the property, owner, or operator.
         (k)   All wireless communication facilities that are in existence to
date may continue to operate, but may not be replaced or structurally altered
without complying in all respects to this section. Routine adjustment or
replacement of the primary or co-location antennae shall not constitute a
replacement or structural alteration of a wireless communication facility.
         (l)   When the owner of property upon which a wireless communication
facility is located requests preliminary plat approval or requests the issuance
of a building permit, any and all wireless communication facilities which fail
to conform to this section shall be removed prior to preliminary plat approval
or building permit issuance, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-14-25)
§ 152.066 ACCESSORY USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   (A)   Accessory dwelling units (ADUs).
      (1)   No more than one ADU shall be allowed on a lot.
      (2)   No more than 25% of the lots within a subdivision may include an
ADU within five years of final plat approval.
      (3)   Either the principal dwelling or the ADU shall be owner-occupied,
and both dwelling units shall be under unified ownership.
      (4)   Dimensional standards for all ADUs.
         (a)   Unit size.
            (i)   An ADU shall be at least 300 square feet in size.
            (ii)   An ADU shall be the lesser of 33% of the principal dwelling
footprint or 750 square feet.
         (b)   No ADU shall be permitted if the building coverage on the lot
exceeds, or will exceed with the addition of the ADU, the maximum lot coverage
defined in the district requirements.
         (c)   Maximum occupancy of an ADU shall be limited to two people.
         (d)   An ADU shall include a maximum of one bedroom.
         (e)   Setback requirements. All ADUs shall meet the standards for
principal buildings and accessory structures set forth in the City Code.
         (f)   Maximum height of an ADU, including one built above a garage,
shall not exceed the standards for principal or accessory buildings, as
applicable.
      (5)   Parking.
         (a)   A property shall be required to add one more additional
conforming, off-street parking space to the required parking regulations set
forth in § 152.082 Parking and Loading.
         (b)   Conversion of garage space to an ADU is prohibited unless the
parking space requirement is able to be met without any additional permissions.
      (6)   Design standards for attached ADUs. The appearance or character of
the principal building shall not be significantly altered so that its
appearance is no longer that of a single unit dwelling;
      (7)   Design standards for detached ADUs.
         (a)   The exterior finish material shall match, in type, size, and
placement, the exterior finish material of the principal dwelling unit.
         (b)   The roof pitch shall match the predominant roof pitch of the
principal dwelling unit.
         (c)   Trim shall match the trim used on the principal dwelling unit.
Projecting eaves shall match those of the principal dwelling unit.
         (d)   Windows shall match those in the principal dwelling unit in
proportion (relationship of width to height) and orientation (horizontal or
vertical).
         (e)   The primary residence and ADU shall be connected to municipal
sewer and water but shall be served by only one service line from the street to
the primary residence.
      (8)   Permit required. A lifetime, non-transferable ADU occupancy permit
shall be required from the city to allow an ADU. In order to rent the ADU, or
to rent the principal dwelling unit while the owner occupies the ADU, all of
the city's rental registration requirements shall be met, in addition to
receiving an ADU occupancy permit.
         (a)   Application. The owner of the property on which an ADU is
proposed shall file a completed permit application with supporting
documentation, as set forth on the application, and pay a fee set by the City
Council in an annual resolution. The city will review the application to
determine whether the application is complete and the subject property is
eligible to receive the requested ADU permit.
         (b)   Notification. Upon the determination that a completed
application has been submitted and that the property is eligible to receive the
requested ADU permit, property owners within a radius of 350 feet shall be
notified in writing by the city of the application.
            (i)   If there are objections received within 10 days of mailing
the notices, the permit application must be forwarded for consideration by the
Planning Commission with final approval by the City Council.
            (ii)   If there are no objections received within ten days of
mailing the notices, the permit application will be processed by city staff.
         (c)   Conditions. The city may impose conditions on the issuance of an
ADU permit. Such conditions must be directly related to, and must bear a rough
proportionality to, impacts created by the ADU.
         (d)   Revocation. If a permitted ADU or the property for which an ADU
permit has been issued should fail to meet the requirements of the permit, and/
or if a property for which an ADU permit has been issued should become
ineligible for such permit, the issued ADU permit may be revoked due to the
noncompliance and/or ineligibility issue(s) not being resolved. If an ADU
permit is revoked, occupation of the ADU by a person or persons shall cease
within 60 days of the date of revocation.
   (B)   Accessory structure.
      (1)   No accessory building or structure shall be erected or constructed
prior to the erection or construction of the principal or main building but may
be erected simultaneously. No accessory building shall be occupied unless the
principal building on the lot is also occupied.
      (2)   In cases where an accessory building is attached to the principal
structure, including carports, it shall be made structurally a part of the
principal building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
this chapter applicable to the principal building. A breezeway, for the purpose
of this chapter, is an attachment between the garage or carport and the
principal building and shall be considered a part of the principal building.
      (3)   Unenclosed porches and decks shall be considered part of the
principal or accessory building(s) and shall be required to meet the minimum
requirements of this section.
      (4)   Placement.
         (a)   Attached accessory structures shall meet all principal structure
setbacks for the district in which it is located.
         (b)   Detached accessory structures shall be located:
            (i)   No closer to the front property line than the front building
line of the principal structure.
            (ii)   At least 20 feet from a side street lot line (measured at
the eaves).
            (iii)   At least three feet from any rear or interior side lot line
as measured from the eaves.
            (iv)   Accessory structures within the AG District shall not be
located closer than 25 feet to any side or rear lot line.
      (5)   Detached accessory structure dimensional requirements.
         (a)   The size limits listed in this subsection shall not apply to
structures accessory to residential uses with three or more units which are
required to provide parking spaces listed in § 152.082 Parking and Loading,
maintenance buildings, or structures containing common amenities.
         (b)   One structure shall not occupy more than 10% of the lot area.
Buildings in excess of 200 square feet shall not be of pole/post type
construction.
         (c)   Within the R1 and R2 districts, no detached accessory structures
or any combination of detached accessory structures shall exceed 1,000 square
feet in area. In addition, the total square footage of a detached and attached
accessory structure shall not be greater than the footprint of the principal
structure.
         (d)   In addition to the structure listed above, one structure no
larger than 200 square feet is permitted.
         (e)   No structure shall exceed 15 feet in height as measured to the
peak.
         (f)   No accessory structure shall be permitted if the building
coverage on the lot exceeds, or will exceed with the addition of the accessory
structure, the maximum lot coverage defined in the district requirements.
      (6)   Cloth, canvas, plastic sheeting, tarps, or similar material, as
well as corrugated roofing or siding, are not allowed as primary building
material on an accessory structure. This limitation shall not apply to a
greenhouse or building used for agricultural purposes in the AG District.
      (7)   Accessory buildings for two-unit (twinhome) dwellings may be
located on an abutting lot in the buildable area and/or in the rear yard of a
lot, provided that the applicant records a covenant and deeds restriction on
the property which will abut the common lot line (zero lot line). Said
covenants and deed restrictions shall:
         (a)   Provide access to the abutting property for the adjacent
property owner and/or his or her representative for the purpose of
construction, reconstruction, repair, and maintenance of either side on the
total property; and
         (b)   Provide for necessary encroachments for footings and eaves for
said building.
      (8)   Substitutes for accessory structure.
         (a)   On residentially-zoned land, it shall be unlawful to place,
erect or maintain any shipping container, wagon, motor vehicle, railroad car,
trailer, semi-trailer, truck or similar conveyance which has not been
manufactured for use exclusively for mobile recreational purposes as a
substitute for an accessory building.
         (b)   On lands within a non-residential zoning district, it shall be
unlawful to place or erect any semi-trailer or similar conveyance as a
substitute for an accessory building used exclusively for storage purposes
after May 31, 2002 with the following exceptions:
            (i)   Mobile medical diagnostic equipment. Mobile units that
contain medical diagnostic equipment for medical clinics or medical facilities.
            (ii)   Tents. When erected in accordance with applicable state and
local codes, tents may be used as an accessory building or for the conducting
of retail sales for a period not to exceed 21 days in each calendar year.
            (iii)   Temporary retail sales. Retail sales directly from semi-
trailers or trucks may be permitted for a period not to exceed 72 consecutive
hours per placement and no more than three such placements in aggregate per
address, location or parcel in any one calendar year.
            (iv)   General requirements.
               a.   When permitted. A right-of-way permit may be issued by the
City Council to allow semi-trailers, shipping containers and other similar
conveyances used exclusively for storage to be placed for a maximum aggregate
period of 60 days within any one calendar year if determined by the City
Council that such placement is not contrary to the provisions of this code. The
permit fee for such semi-trailers and similar conveyances shall be established
in the annual fee schedule. Applications for a permit shall be submitted on
forms provided and shall include other information as required by the City
Council.
               b.   All such semi-trailers or similar conveyances shall be
located at least 25 feet from all lands zoned for residential use excluding any
street or alley right-of-way and at least ten feet from any other building or
structure excluding fences.
               c.   Vertical stacking of shipping containers or similar
conveyances shall not be permitted.
               d.   Such semi-trailer or similar conveyance shall be kept in
good repair and condition so as not to constitute a nuisance or unsightly
condition.
               e.   Revocation of permits. Any permit granted under this
section may be revoked or rescinded by the granting or issuing authority,
should there be any violations of this section or the conditions of any such
permit.
   (C)   Hazardous material storage.
      (1)   Industrial and commercial establishments and the buildings,
structures, and land used by
such establishments shall be required to comply with all requirements in the
State Building Code that may provide protection against accidents and the
results of accidents or improper treatment of actual or potential hazardous
materials.
      (2)   Storage areas for actual or potentially hazardous materials shall
be protected from unauthorized or forced entry. Storage areas shall be fenced
and locked and buildings and structures shall be locked or otherwise protected
from unauthorized entry.
      (3)   Property, buildings, or structures on which actual or potential
hazardous materials are stored shall be required to control potential runoff of
hazardous substances in the case of an accident.
      (4)   All industrial or commercial establishments handling actual or
potential hazardous materials shall be required to report to the Byron
Volunteer Fire Department and Olmsted County Sheriff's Department on a periodic
basis and at least one time each year the actual or potential hazardous
materials to be located on this property. This requirement should allow the
Fire Department and Sheriff's Department to react to accidents in a timely
fashion and in a manner that will protect to the fullest extent possible fire
and police personnel and citizens of Byron.
      (5)   The City Council may require that concentrations of actual or
potential hazardous materials in storage be limited to safe levels where, if
accidents occur or materials are improperly managed, the impact of hazardous
materials will be minimal to the surrounding properties and permit safety
personnel to control such impacts.
      (6)   Gas/service stations shall be exempt under this section of this
chapter. However, such uses shall be required to meet state laws and
regulations and all other requirements of this chapter, including § 152.080
Environmental Performance Standards.
      (7)   All related Minnesota and federal laws and regulations addressing a
hazardous material shall be complied with.
   (D)   Home occupations.
      (1)   In general, a home occupation shall be conducted such that the
average neighbor under normal circumstances would not be aware of its existence
other than for a name plate or sign as permitted in this division.
      (2)   Application. All home occupations shall be further defined to
distinguish permitted home occupations from interim home occupations. Home
occupations which are not specifically prohibited and fail to satisfy the
permitted home occupation criteria, listed in division (6) below, shall require
an interim use permit, as provided for in this section.
      (3)   Prohibited home occupations uses. The following uses have a
tendency to be too intense for or potentially disruptive for home occupations
and thereby adversely affect residential areas. The following uses are
specifically prohibited as home occupations:
         (a)   Animal kennels.
         (b)   Business that rents vehicles or equipment, such as trailers.
         (c)   Handicraft and/or artisanal services which routinely produce
objectionable light, glare, noise or vibration.
         (d)   Dispatch where persons come to a site and are dispatched to
other location.
         (e)   Excavating.
         (f)   Firearm training or instruction.
         (g)   Funeral chapel.
         (h)   Large volume sales, wholesaling, storage and warehousing.
         (i)   Medical/dental office which require the disposal of biohazardous
waste.
         (j)   Repair or painting of motorized vehicles, trailers, boats, or
lawn equipment.
         (k)   Tow truck.
         (l)   Welding or machine shop.
      (4)   Family child care is not considered a home occupation.
      (5)   General home occupation standards. All standards of the zoning
district shall apply. The following specific standards shall apply to all home
occupations (both permitted and interim):
         (a)   There shall be no mechanical equipment or machinery used for the
home occupation other than is usual, customary, and incidental to the residence
for domestic or hobby purposes.
         (b)   The use shall not create odor, dust, noise, electrical
disturbances, glare, vibrations or other hazards or nuisances noticeable
outside of the dwelling.
         (c)   The home occupation shall occur primarily indoors. Any outdoor
activity related to the home occupation shall be limited to the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
         (d)   There shall be no outside storage of material or equipment or
display of merchandise.
         (e)   Commodities may be sold as part of the home occupation but shall
be only a minor and insubstantial part of the total home occupation.
         (f)   The home occupation shall meet all applicable building and fire
codes.
      (6)   Permitted home occupation requirements. In addition to the
requirements of division (5), above, the following additional requirements
shall apply to all permitted home occupations:
         (a)   No person other than those who customarily reside on the
premises shall be employed.
         (b)   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the
principal dwelling and shall not be conducted in attached garages or accessory
buildings. No more than 25% of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling
shall be used for the home occupation.
         (c)   The use shall not require substantial interior or external
alterations or involve construction features not customarily found in
dwellings.
         (d)   The operation of any wholesale or retail business shall not be
permitted unless:
            (i)   It is conducted entirely by telephone, mail or electronic
medium;
            (ii)   The business operation does not include the sale of
equipment or delivery of merchandise to the premises.
         (e)   The home occupation shall not create a parking demand of more
than two vehicles at one time.
         (f)   The home occupation shall not create a demand for on-street
parking. All parking associated with the home occupation shall be off-street
and shall be accommodated within the garage and the existing driveway area.
         (g)   There shall be no exterior display or signs which are visible
from outside the building.
      (7)   Interim use home occupations requirements. Home occupations which
are not specifically prohibited by division (3), above, and fail to satisfy the
permitted home occupation criteria of division (6) above, shall require an
interim use permit and shall comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   The conditions of division (5), above, shall be satisfied.
         (b)   All activity on the premises associated with the home occupation
shall not cause any adverse changes to the residential character of the
neighborhood.
         (c)   Any exterior changes necessary to conduct the home occupation
are sufficiently screened, properly designed, or separated by distance so as to
be consistent with the existing adjacent residential uses and compatible with
the residential occupancy.
         (d)   Any interior changes necessary to conduct the home occupation
shall comply with all building, electrical, mechanical and fire codes governing
the use of the use in a residential occupancy.
         (e)   Traffic generated by the home occupation shall involve vehicle
types and volumes that are typically associated with single unit residences and
such traffic shall not constitute a nuisance or safety hazard.
         (f)   No sign shall be allowed other than one unilluminated sign
measuring not more than one and one-half square feet in area attached to the
principal building or near the dwelling entrance.
         (g)   Any wholesale or retail sales must be incidental to the home
occupation or low volume sales restricted by appointment.
         (h)   An attached or detached accessory structure may be used for the
home occupation provided the use does not occupy required parking.
      (8)   Non-conforming uses. Any existing home occupation that is
discontinued for a period of more than 30 days, or is in violation of the
provisions, under which it was initially established, shall be brought into
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Keeping of animals. See Chapter 94 of the City Code.
   (F)   Mobile food unit.
      (1)   The mobile food unit shall obtain written approval from the
property owner on whose property the MFU is to be parked. If the mobile food
unit will be located on property owned by the city, approval by the City
Council is required.
      (2)   Mobile food units may be operated on private property only for the
purpose of catering private events.
         (a)   The mobile food unit shall only provide or sell food and/or
beverage to people attending the private event.
         (b)   The food truck shall be located entirely on the property owned
by the person or persons holding the event.
      (3)   Placement.
         (a)   No portion of the mobile food unit shall extend onto any right-
of-way.
         (b)   Mobile food units shall not park in or in any way block or
infringe on drive aisles, sidewalks, access to loading/service areas, emergency
access, fire lanes, or driveways serving adjacent properties.
      (4)   Licensing. All mobile food units shall obtain the required state
and/or county licensing and permits for operation.
   (G)   Outdoor display of retail items.
      (1)   Outdoor display of retail items shall not be permitted in the
public right-of-way.
      (2)   Outdoor display areas shall not be located so as to block
pedestrian walkways, doorways, parking stalls, or drive aisles (including
access for emergency services). Five feet is the minimum width required to
maintain pedestrian access.
      (3)   Outdoor display areas shall be limited to products for sale and
shall not serve as a storage area for inventory.
   (H)   Outdoor storage.
      (1)   Outdoor storage shall not be located in the front yard.
      (2)   The outdoor storage of lumber, coal, or other combustible material
shall be not less than 25 feet from an interior lot line.
      (3)   The outdoor storage use shall be completely screened. Outdoor
storage of junk, wrecked vehicles to be dismantled or other salvage materials
shall be enclosed by an eight-foot permanent fence or combination of fence and
other structures that entirely blocks the view of the storage area from the
public and adjacent property owners located in other than the Industrial
District.
      (4)   No material shall be piled on open ground.
   (I)   Produce stand.
      (1)   One temporary building for the incidental sale of agricultural
produce shall be located not less than 20 feet from the front lot line and not
less than 25 feet from a residential district and provided that the required
number and space for patron parking 20 feet from said front lot line is
provided.
      (2)   A transient merchant permit shall be obtained from the city for any
produce stand use located within the Commercial District.
   (J)   Secondary farm dwelling.
      (1)   A secondary farm dwelling in the form of a manufactured home shall
be permitted if located on the same lot as the farm dwelling of a farm. The
secondary farm dwelling shall house only family members or person or persons
employed on the farm.
      (2)   The dwelling shall adhere to Olmsted County Health Department
regulations pertaining to the sewage system or shall meet all city requirements
for connecting with the city sewer system.
   (K)   Short term vacation rental (STVR).
      (1)   The maximum number of overnight guests will be limited to two times
the number of bedrooms rented plus one.
      (2)   Dwelling requirements.
         (a)   The dwelling must be connected to sewer and water.
         (b)   Rooms used for sleeping shall have an egress window and
functioning smoke detectors.
         (c)   The guest(s) must have access during their entire stay to a full
bathroom, including sink, toilet, and tub or shower.
      (3)   Parking.
         (a)   All STVR parking must be accommodated on improved surfaces on
the premises. No on-street parking is allowed for guests.
         (b)   Where the property owner resides on the premise, additional off-
street parking shall be provided to accommodate both the principal use and the
STVR use.
      (4)   If not residing on the property, the property owner or manager/
representative must be located within 30 miles of the property. The property
owner shall maintain with the city the contact information for the local
contact or managing agent for the property.
      (5)   A guest record must be maintained, including the name, address,
phone number, and vehicle license plate information for all guests. This record
must be provided to the city within 48 hours of a request for the guest record.
      (6)   Guest disclosures. The property owner must disclose in writing to
their transient guests the following rules and regulations. This disclosure
shall be conspicuously displayed in the home:
         (a)   The name, phone number and address of the owner, operating
lessee or managing agent/representative;
         (b)   The maximum number of guests allowed at the property;
         (c)   The maximum number of vehicles allowed at the property and where
they are to be parked;
         (d)   City nuisance ordinances requirement that noise levels be
reduced between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and midnight to 7:00 a.m.
on weekends and that this will be enforced by the Olmsted County Sheriff’s
Department; and
         (e)   Property rules related to use of outdoor features, such as
decks, patios, grills, recreational fires, saunas, and other recreational
facilities.
      (7)   All garbage must be kept in rubbish containers issued by a
contracted collection service.
      (8)   No sign shall be allowed other than one unilluminated sign
measuring not more than one and one-half square feet in area attached to the
principal building or near the dwelling entrance.
   (L)   Small-scale wind energy conversion systems (WECS). The location,
design, and maintenance of WECS shall be governed as follows:
      (1)   Applicants requesting a building permit for a WECS shall furnish
such scale drawings and information as the city deems necessary. This
information shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A site plan of the premises involved showing lot lines;
         (b)   The accurate location of all buildings or structures on the
premises and on each adjacent lot;
         (c)   The location of proposed tower and all guy wires, poles, or
anchors; and
         (d)   A sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the
proposed tower and its relationship to structures on adjacent lots.
      (2)   The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be determined in one
of two ways:
         (a)   A ratio of one to one between the distance from the closest
property line to any part of the WECS tower to the height of the tower;
         (b)   A maximum of 100 feet in the agricultural and industrial
districts and 50 feet in residential and commercial districts. The shortest
height of the two above mentioned methods shall be used in determining maximum
height. Height shall be measured from the surrounding grade to the rotor hub or
top of the tower whichever is higher.
      (3)   No part of the WECS shall be located within or above any required
front, side, or rear yard.
      (4)   No part of the WECS shall be located such that it could potentially
affect or come into contact with any telephone, TV cable, or electrical lines
on the same adjacent properties.
      (5)   All WECS shall be designed to meet the following minimum standards:
         (a)   The tower and tower footing be engineered to withstand wind and
icing loads for this geographic area;
         (b)   The WECS shall have an automatic braking device capable of
halting operation in conditions of imbalance or excessive wind speeds (40
m.p.h. or greater);
         (c)   The WECS shall be designed, constructed, and operated so as to
not cause radio and television interference;
         (d)   The WECS blade design and materials shall be adequate to ensure
safe operation in an urban area:
         (e)   The wind turbine and the tower shall be compatible;
         (f)   The WECS shall be operated and maintained in a condition which
will not exceed the noise level prescribed by Minnesota State Regulation NPC 1
and 2 Noise Standards and any amendments thereto;
         (g)   The WECS shall be guarded against unauthorized climbing. The
first 12 feet of the tower shall be unclimbable by unauthorized persons by
design or be enclosed by a 6-foot high, non-climbable fence with a secured
access;
         (h)   The WECS shall be designed and installed to withstand natural
lightning strikes;
         (i)   The WECS electrical equipment and connections shall adhere to
all state and local government, as well as power company regulations and
standards.
      (6)   Any WECS not in operation for 12 consecutive months shall be
dismantled.
      (7)   The city shall require liability insurance to be maintained on the
WECS by its owner.
      (8)   In order to ensure adequate wind access, the city does encourage
the use of private easements and restrictive covenants as a means to protect
wind access.
   (M)   Solar energy systems.
      (1)   Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be considered part of the
roof and shall meet all applicable requirements.
      (2)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be considered as
accessory structures and shall meet all requirements except as provided below:
         (a)   Use of solar energy systems is subject to the constraints
imposed by the topography and any existing vegetation or tall structures on
adjacent and nearby lots at the time of adoption of this chapter.
         (b)   Such systems may be located closer than six feet to the
principal building which the system serves.
         (c)   Solar energy systems shall be exempted from lot coverage
restrictions; however, in all residential districts, if the total surface of
the solar energy systems is equal to or more than 10% of the lot area, then a
conditional use shall be required prior to construction of any system elements.
         (d)   After placement of a solar energy system on a lot, all new
vegetation on public lands, including rights-of-way, shall not interfere with
the proper and efficient operation of existing solar energy systems on adjacent
and nearby private property.
         (e)   As a general policy, reasonable care should be taken to protect
the opportunity for the utilization of solar energy systems at all locations
where solar energy is available.
         (f)   The city encourages the use of private easements and restrictive
covenants as a means to protect access to sunlight. All such documents should
be recorded with the Olmsted County Recorder.
         (g)   Where a solar energy system is installed on a lot, a statement
to that effect shall be filed and recorded with the Olmsted County Recorder and
the date of installation shall be the date of recordation. Furthermore, as a
means of evidencing conditions, the owner of a solar energy system may file
notarized photographs of the affected area with the city prior to installation
of said system.
   (N)   Storage and parking of recreational camping vehicle, utility trailer,
boat, or unlicensed vehicle.
      (1)   All recreational vehicles shall be required to be parked off of any
public right-of-way, and no part of the recreational camping vehicle shall
extend into the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Vehicles which are partially dismantled or do not have a valid
state license shall not be stored more than 10 days in a front yard or side
yard on an established driveway or more than 30 days in a rear yard.
      (3)   Side yard parking may be permitted where only one side yard is used
for recreational vehicle parking, and where a vehicle is parked between the
side lot line and the principal building, the vehicle shall be no closer than
three feet to the side yard line.
      (4)   Front yard parking may be permitted where the vehicle is not parked
between the principal building and the front lot line.
      (5)   In PUDs, there shall be provided a separate area to be used for
parking, indoors or outdoors, of the occupant's recreational vehicles. Such
storage shall have the parking spaces marked and be suitably landscaped so as
to be harmonious with the rest of the development.
      (6)   In twinhome developments, parking in the side yard shall be
permitted only in an area that is a minimum of 15 feet from the side lot line
and meets the requirements of provision (4) and the parking area shall be
suitably landscaped so as to be harmonious with the rest of the development.
   (O)   Swimming pool; spa pool.
      (1)   Application. This section applies to any pool or spa pool which is
in excess of 48 inches in depth and over 100 square feet in surface area.
      (2)   Public pool.
         (a)   A public pool shall be defined as any pool other than a private
residential pool that is:
            (i)   Open to the public generally, whether for a fee or free of
charge;
            (ii)   Open exclusively to members of an organization and their
guests;
            (iii)   Open to residents of a multi-unit apartment building,
apartment complex, residential real estate development, or other multifamily
residential area;
            (iv)   Open to patrons of a transient accommodation facility; or
            (v)   Operated by a person in a park, school, licensed child care
facility, residential care home, membership organization, manufactured home
park, or political subdivision with the exception of swimming pools at family
daycare homes.
         (b)   A person/business wishing to operate a public pool must meet all
state and county licensing requirements.
      (3)   Private residential pool.
         (a)   A private residential pool shall be defined as a pool connected
within a single-unit or two-unit dwelling, located on private property under
the control of the homeowner, the use of which is limited to residents or the
residents’ invited guests. A private residential pool is not a pool used as
part of a business.
         (b)   Exclusive private use.  The pool or spa pool is intended to be
used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal building of the
property upon which it is located and their guests.
         (c)   Distance requirements. Swimming pools or spa pools may be
located in the buildable area or required rear yard but shall not be closer
than 10 feet to any property line on which they are located, provided that pump
installations shall be located not closer than 20 feet to any property line.
         (d)   Validity. Any permit issued becomes invalid if the work
authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for more than 180 days. The
180 days commences the first day work is suspended or abandoned.
         (e)   Fencing and access control.
            (i)   Below grade swimming pool or spa pool. The pool or spa pool
shall be enclosed by a fence of a type which effectively controls the entrance
by children to the pool or spa pool area, said fence to be at least six feet in
height.
            (ii)   Above grade swimming pool or spa pool.
               a.   The pool or spa pool shall be equipped with an
automatically retractable type ladder, a retractable ladder or removable
ladder, or shall be fenced in accordance with (i) above. Said ladder is to be
removed or retracted when the pool is not being attended.
               b.   If access to the pool or spa pool is via a deck or porch,
then no access from the ground is permitted to the deck area unless the
property or the ground access to the deck is fenced in accordance with (i)
above.
            (iii)   Maintenance.
               a.   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner upon
where said pool or spa pool is located to maintain all fences, gates, and
closure devices in good operating condition.
               b.   Failure to maintain fences, failure to have gates closed,
or failure to either remove or retract the ladder access to the pool or spa
pool shall constitute a violation of this chapter and therefore be subject to
the penalties contained in §
152.108 Administration.
            (iv)   All fences shall be constructed so as not to be easily
climbable, and generally to prevent children from gaining uncontrolled access.
Property owners that opt for chain link fencing must utilize at least a number
eleven gauge woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant material.
            (v)   Fence posts must be decay or corrosion-resistant and must be
set in concrete bases or other suitable material.
            (vi)   Fences shall be constructed so as not to have openings,
holes, or gaps larger than four inches in either vertical or horizontal
direction.
         (f)   Gates and doors.
            (i)   All fence openings and points of entry onto a pool shall be
equipped with gates or doors. All gates or doors shall be equipped with self-
closing and self-latching devices placed at sufficient height so as to be non-
accessible to small children.
            (ii)   If the gate latch is mounted less than 54 inches from the
bottom of the gate, it must be mounted on the pool side of the gate, a minimum
of three inches down from the top of the gate and have no space greater than ½
inch within 18 inches of the latch.
            (iii)   Gate latches 54 inches or greater above the bottom of the
gate may be mounted on the outside of the gate.
   (P)   Temporary outdoor promotional sales or events.
      (1)   No sale or event shall be held without first obtaining a permit.
         (a)   The applicant shall show that when the event is held, adequate
parking area will continue to exist, even though a portion of required parking
spaces may be used to celebrate the event.
      (2)   The businesses in all Commercial and Industrial zoning districts as
well as each public and institutional conditional use in residential districts
shall be allowed six temporary outdoor promotional or sales event special
events per calendar year.
      (3)   Event duration
         (a)   Each special event shall not exceed 10 days and shall not be
extended for more than three consecutive time periods for each business.
         (b)   Once the time period has expired for the special event, the
business shall wait the same number of days for which the permit was issued to
start a new special event.
      (4)   Outdoor signage for the temporary sale or event shall be allowed as
specified in §
152.130 Temporary Signs.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23; Ord. 2025-02, passed 1-14-25; Am. Ord. 2025-10,
passed 9-9-25)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 152.080 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Compliance required. Unless otherwise allowed, or not expressively
prohibited, by the Zoning Code, no land or building in any district shall be
used or occupied in any manner so as to create any:
      (1)   Dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosion, or other hazard;
      (2)   Noise;
      (3)   Vibration;
      (4)   Smoke, dust, fumes, odors, or other forms of air pollution;
      (5)   Heat;
      (6)   Glare;
      (7)   Liquid or solid wastes; or
      (8)   Other substance, condition or element in such a manner, or in such
amount, as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises.
   (B)   Use restrictions. All uses shall be subject to the environmental
performance standards.
   (C)   Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator shall investigate any purported
violation of performance standards and, if there are reasonable grounds for the
same, shall serve the owner with a written notice of violation thereof. Where
the State of Minnesota environmental regulations address a purported violation,
the Zoning Administrator may report the same to the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency or any other responsible state agency. If it should become necessary for
the city to employ the services of any qualified expert to advise in
establishing a violation, the fee shall be paid by the violator if said
violation is established, otherwise it shall be paid by the city.
   (D)   Performance standards.
      (1)   Fire and explosive hazards. All activities involving and all
storage of flammable and explosive materials shall be provided at any point
with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and
adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in
the industry or commercial uses and that meet or surpass all minimum building
code requirements. Burning of waste materials in open fires shall be prohibited
at any time. The relevant provisions of state and county laws and regulations
shall also apply.
      (2)   Noise. All sound sources, including nonconforming uses, shall
comply with the state noise regulations, as administered by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.
      (3)   Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible
without instruments at the property line of said use.
      (4)   Smoke. No emission shall be permitted at any point from any chimney
or any other emission point of visible smoke greater than 20% opacity for any
measured time or a 40% opacity for any four minutes per one hour time period
for existing uses and not greater than 20% opacity for any measured time for
new uses. Opacity should be measured using U.S. E.P.A. Method 9. All Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency regulations shall be met or exceeded.
      (5)   Dust, fumes, vapors and gases. The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash,
fumes, vapors, or gases which can cause any damage to human health, to animals,
to vegetation, or to property, or which can cause any soiling or staining of
persons or property at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the
emission, is herewith prohibited. All Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
regulations shall be met or exceeded.
      (6)   Odor. No use other than agriculture-related activities shall emit
odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at
any point on or beyond its lot lines. All applicable Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency regulations shall be met or exceeded.
      (7)   Glare.
         (a)   In the Industrial District (I), no direct or sky reflected
glare, whether from flood lights or from high temperature processes such as
combustion or welding or other activities shall cause illumination in excess of
0.5 footcandles at the property line.
         (b)   In all other districts, no operation or activity producing glare
shall be conducted so that any glare, whether direct or reflected, is visible
at the property line.
         (c)   All solar energy systems using a reflector to enhance solar
production shall minimize glare from the reflector affecting adjacent or nearby
properties.
      (8)   Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible with instruments beyond
its lot lines.
      (9)   Waste.
         (a)   All waste materials shall be removed and disposed of in a manner
adequate to meet all federal, State of Minnesota, and Olmsted County Health
Department regulations and other requirements of this chapter.
         (b)   Waste materials incidental to the principal operation shall be
kept in neatly stored containers screened from public view and at least 25 feet
from all interior lot lines.
         (c)   Storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, or other waste products shall
be enclosed within a building or structure.
         (d)   No waste shall be piled on open ground.
         (e)   Dumping and disposal of solid or liquid waste material.
            (i)   The use of land for the dumping or disposal of scrap iron,
junk, garbage, rubbish, sludge, or other refuse, or of ashes, slag, or other
industrial wastes or by-products, is not permitted in any district.
            (ii)   The dumping of dirt, sand, rock, or other material excavated
from the earth is permitted in any district, provided the surface of such
material is graded within four months of the initiation of dumping activities
in a manner preventing the collection of stagnant water which leaves the ground
surface in a stable condition suitable for growing of turf that will not be
subject to erosion and is useable for other land uses permitted in the
district.
            (iii)   No discharge is permitted at any point into any public
sewer, stream, or into the ground except in accord with federal or state
pollution control standards of any materials of such nature or temperature as
can contaminate any water supply or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous
or offensive elements to occur.
            (iv)   Where hazardous wastes covered by the State of Minnesota and
federal regulations are produced, stored, or otherwise located on a site, the
hazardous wastes shall be stored and disposed of in a manner that meets all
state and federal hazardous waste disposal regulations.
            (v)   No open burning of liquid waste material shall be permitted
within city limits. Furthermore, no open burning of solid waste material or
refuse shall be permitted within the city limits unless the location for such
action is at least 600 feet from any residential building and a Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency permit is obtained.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.081 CLEAR VISION AREAS.
   (A)   A clear vision area shall be maintained on the corners of all property
at the intersection of two streets or a street and a railroad.
   (B)   A clear vision area shall be a triangular shaped area with two sides
following lot lines; the clear vision area shall extend along both curb lines
for a distance of not less than 25 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c1fff79dfcc389b806b92a451f8f8c6ded08a054/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1389.png]
 
   (C)   The clear vision area shall contain no planting, fence, wall,
structure, or temporary or permanent obstruction exceeding 36 inches above the
adjacent street grade, except for trees with branches and foliage removed to a
height of eight feet above the ground and open wire fencing that does not
obscure sight.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.082 PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Parking requirements. The following off-street parking requirements
shall be provided for each use listed in this section unless otherwise
specified:
      (1)   Location and improvements of parking facilities.
         (a)   Single-unit, two-unit (twinhome), and two-unit (duplex)
dwellings shall have provided parking stalls on the same lot as the dwelling
and may occupy all or part of any required rear yard and shall not be located
in the front yard unless on an established driveway that is not located between
the principal building and the front lot line. An established driveway and
garage may be used to meet the minimum parking requirements for detached
single-unit dwellings where the driveway and garage meets the minimum parking
space dimensions in (f) below.
         (b)   Residential uses with three or more units shall have off-street
parking which may include a community garage on lands owned by the same owner
of the building and land and located within 200 feet of the building they are
intended to serve. Tandem parking (one vehicle behind another), including or
not including a garage, shall not be permitted in order to meet the minimum
parking requirements of this section.
         (c)   Parking in non-residential districts.
            (i)   In any nonresidential district, off-street parking may occupy
that part of a front yard to within seven feet of the front lot line and in the
case of a corner lot that part of a side street side yard to within seven feet
of the side street side lot line. This said seven feet of front or side street
side yard shall be suitably landscaped with canopy trees, deciduous and
coniferous bushes or hedges and grasses or other materials and graded to
control surface water runoff from the paved and landscaped area. A site design
plan shall be submitted as part of the application for a zoning permit. In no
case shall off-street parking be permitted within clear vision areas.
            (ii)   Commercial uses.
               a.   A conditional use permit shall be required for any
commercial use when:
                  i.   The commercial use is located in the downtown commercial
area, as established in the Byron Comprehensive Plan;
                  ii.   The commercial building has over 3,500 square feet of
floor area; and
                  iii.   The commercial use cannot meet the minimum parking
requirements as set in this section.
               b.   Recommendations by the Planning Commission and decisions by
the City Council shall be based on the type of commercial use under
consideration.
            (iii)   Parking shall not be permitted within the setback
requirements for any property within the Industrial District.
         (d)   There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and egress to all
parking areas. Said access drive shall not be less than eight feet in width in
the case of single- and two-unit dwellings and not less than 18 feet in width
for residential dwellings with three or more units, commercial and industrial
uses; provided, however, that a one-way access drive for nonresidential uses
may be reduced to not less than ten feet in width. All parking areas for more
than four vehicles shall be designed so that no vehicle must back out onto any
highway, street or road. Aisles between parking spaces within parking lots
shall not be less than 20 feet in width.
         (e)   Necessary curbs or other protection against damage to abutting
properties, roads, and sidewalks shall be provided and maintained. Necessary
curbs and other structures shall be provided at all ingress and egress areas to
clearly delineate such areas.
         (f)   All parking spaces shall be 9 ½ feet in width and 18 feet in
length and shall be clearly marked. Small car spaces shall be a minimum of
eight feet in width and 16 feet in length. The length of small car spaces shall
be increased by 15% when parallel parking is utilized.
         (g)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the principal use
or of the property to ensure that the parking area is maintained in a dust free
and safe condition.
         (h)   When calculations for required parking spaces result in a
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of less than ½ shall be
disregarded and fractions of ½ or more shall require one parking space.
         (i)   Shopping centers shall have off-street parking on the same lot
or lots on which the principal building(s) are located and shall meet the
minimum requirements listed in (2) below.
         (j)   Artificial lighting which may be provided shall be deflected so
as not to shine directly onto adjoining dwellings or other types of living
units and so as not to create a hazard to public use of a street.
         (k)   Parking areas, aisles, and turnaround areas shall be paved with
concrete, asphaltic, or comparable surfacing on all commercial and residential
uses requiring six or more parking spaces within one year of the date of
initiation of construction on any portion of the lot or any approved structure.
      (2)   Table 152.6. Required Parking Spaces.
Use Parking Spaces
Use                                     Parking Spaces
Residential use                         Two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Board/rooming house                     One parking space for each living unit.
                                        One parking space per guest room and
Hotels and motels                       one parking space for each employee
                                        during the largest work shift.
Retail commercial and shopping centers  One parking space per 200 square feet
                                        of gross floor area.
Restaurants (including outdoor seating  One parking space for every four seats
areas)                                  and one parking space for every two
                                        employees.
                                        One parking space for every four
Bar or lounge (eating and drinking      persons based on the maximum building
establishments)                         capacity as specified within the State
                                        Building Code and one parking space for
                                        every two employees.</ce>
Medical/dental office                   Five parking stalls per principal
                                        medical professional.
Offices, banks and public               One parking space for every 400 square
administration                          feet of gross floor area.
Furniture store, plumbing, supply,      One parking space for every 800 square
wholesale store, laundry, motor vehicle feet of gross floor area.
sales showroom or similar large uses
Bowling alley                           Two parking stalls for each bowling
                                        lane.
Service station, car repair and car     Five parking spaces per stall or repair
washes                                  bay.
                                        One parking space for every five seats
Funeral homes                           or 50 square feet of floor area in
                                        public portions of the building.
Continuing care senior facility         1 1/4 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
All other commercial uses               One parking space for every 300 square
                                        feet of gross floor area.
                                        One parking space for every employee;
                                        and for high schools, one additional
Schools, nurseries and day care centers parking space for each three students.
                                        One additional parking stall for each
                                        classroom.
Assisted care facility                  One parking space for every four beds.
Library                                 One parking space for every 500 square
                                        feet of gross floor area.
Lodges and meeting halls (no fixed      One parking space for every five
seating)                                persons, based on the maximum capacity
                                        of the building.
Institutional use or performance        One parking space for every five seats
facility (with fixed seating)           or ten feet of bench seat or pew space.
Industrial/warehousing                  One parking space for every employee of
                                        the largest work shift.
                                        One parking space per employee of the
                                        largest work shift; and plus parking
Self-service storage                    space for each 200 storage units, one
                                        per 3,000 square feet of exterior
                                        storage.
                                        One parking stall per three patrons
Outdoor recreation facility             expected at capacity/Golf course: 1
                                        spaces per hole.
                                        One parking stall per three patrons
Indoor recreation                       based on maximum capacity or building
                                        capacity.
Indoor athletic facility                One parking stall per 100 square feet
                                        of floor area.
 
      (3)   Additional standards.
         (a)   For all existing and new permitted commercial uses located in
the downtown commercial area, as identified by the Byron Comprehensive Plan, no
off-street parking shall be required.
         (b)   Residential uses located on the same lot as the principal
commercial use in a commercial district shall be required to have one off-
street parking space for each dwelling unit.
         (c)   A proportion of the total spaces in a parking lot may be
designed and marked for small car use according to the following:
 
Total Spaces Required Maximum percentage of spaces for small cars
5-99                  30%
100 or more           40%
 
      (4)   Buffers or screening shall be required for all parking areas used
by commercial or industrial uses that are adjacent to or abutting a residential
district as specified in §
152.085 Buffering and Screening.
   (B)   Joint parking requirements. Two or more uses may provide required off-
street parking spaces in a common parking facility where the total number of
spaces provided is less than the sum of the total required for each use if the
following conditions are satisfactorily met:
      (1)   The proposed joint parking space is within 500 feet of the use it
will serve.
      (2)   The applicant shall demonstrate that there is not substantial
conflict in the principal operating hours of the two or more buildings or uses
for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.
      (3)   A properly drawn legal instrument approved by the City Council and
executed by the parties concerned for shared use of off-street parking
facilities shall be filed with the City Clerk. Said instrument may be a three
party agreement, including the city and all private parties involved. Such
instrument shall first be approved by the City Attorney.
   (C)   Proof of parking requirements. The city may allow reductions in the
number of required parking spaces to be installed via an interim use permit if
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Applicant has demonstrated that the unique characteristics of the
proposed use are such that it will generate a need for less parking than the
ordinance standard.
      (2)   All requests for reductions in the amount of required parking to be
installed shall be accompanied by a plan showing where the total amount of
parking spaces required by this chapter can be added on the lot, if necessary,
without requiring a variance.
   (D)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading requirements as specified below
shall be provided.
      (1)   Dimensions and locations. Each loading space shall not be less than
10 feet in width and 25 feet in length and shall be on the same lot as the
principal use it serves. Such space may occupy all or any part of any required
side or rear yard, except the space shall not be located in the side yard along
the side street in the case of a corner lot. In no event shall any part of a
required front yard be occupied by such loading space. Each loading space shall
have adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services in order to
avoid any interference with public use of the roads or alleys or sidewalks.
      (2)   Table 152.7 Loading Requirements.
 
Use                                     Loading Spaces
Multiple unit residential (buildings    One loading space.
with 20 or more dwelling units)
                                        Under 20,000 square feet in floor area
Motels and hotels                       shall require one loading space: over
                                        20,000 square feet, one additional
                                        loading space.
Schools                                 One loading space.
Assisted care facility                  One loading space for each 20 beds.
Servicing, merchandising, leisure uses, For any building of over 5,000 square
and office uses                         feet in gross floor area, one loading
                                        space.
                                        Under 10,000 square feet of gross floor
                                        area shall require one loading space:
Industrial or warehousing               over 10,000 square feet shall require
                                        one additional loading space per each
                                        20.000 square feet of gross floor area.
 
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.083 COMMON ELEMENTS.
   (A)   Common open space ownership. At the time of development review, the
city shall require dedication of common open space and may obtain such open
space, if the city determines that a public purpose will be served by providing
open space within the area of the city. Common open space shall remain in
private ownership unless the City Council determines that it is in the best
interest of the city to obtain the open space and make it available to the
public.
   (B)   Ownership and maintenance of common improvements.
      (1)   All developments involving common open space area and other common
improvements shall meet the requirements herein set forth, and no development
application shall be approved until compliance with this section is
established.
      (2)   The applicant or developer shall provide for and establish a non-
profit organization or other legal entity under the laws of Minnesota for the
ownership, care, and maintenance of common landscaped areas, recreational
areas, private streets, parking lots, or other commonly owned facilities.
      (3)   Such organization shall be created by covenants and restrictions
running with the land and shall be composed of all persons having ownership
within the development. Such organization shall be responsible for the
perpetuation, maintenance, and function of all common lands, uses, and
facilities.
      (4)   If the common areas are deeded to a homeowner's association, the
proposed documents governing the association shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. Such documents shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The homeowner's association must be established before any
residences are sold;
         (b)   Membership in the association must be mandatory for each
residence owner;
         (c)   Common area restrictions must be permanent and not for a period
of years;
         (d)   The homeowner's association must be made responsible for
liability insurance, taxes, and maintenance of recreational and other
facilities;
         (e)   The association must have the power to levy assessments which
can become a lien on individual premises for the purpose of paying the cost of
operating and maintaining common facilities;
         (f)   The governing board of any such association shall consist of at
least three members who shall be owners of property in the development.
      (5)   All lands and improvements shall be described and identified as to
location, size, use, and control in a restrictive covenant, and such covenant
shall set forth the method of assessment for the maintenance of such land.
      (6)   Such restrictive covenant and organization shall continue in effect
so as to control the availability of the facilities and land thereby provided
to maintain the land and facilities for their intended function on and to
protect the development from additional and unplanned densities of use. Such
organization shall not be dissolved nor shall such organization dispose of any
common open space, unless that land is dedicated to the city.
      (7)   In the event the organization established to own and maintain
common open spaces, recreational areas, communally owned facilities, and
private streets, or any successor organization shall at any time fail to
maintain the common facilities in responsible order and condition in accordance
with the approved plan, the City Council may cause written notice to be served
upon such organization or upon the owners of property in the development
setting forth the manner in which the common facilities have failed to be
maintained in reasonable condition. Such notice shall include the demand that
the deficiencies noted be cured within 30 days thereafter and shall state the
date and place of a hearing to be held within 14 days of the notice. At the
time of hearing, the City Council may modify the terms of the original notice
as to deficiencies and may extend the time within which the same may be cured.
If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or modifications are not
cured within the time set, the City Council, in order to preserve the taxable
values of properties within the development and to prevent the common
facilities from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon such common
facilities and maintain the same for a period of six months. Such entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any right to use the common facilities
not dedicated to public use. Before expiration of such six months, the City
Council shall, upon its own initiative, or upon the written request of the
organization theretofore responsible for maintenance, call a public hearing and
give notice of such hearing to the organization responsible for maintenance or
the property owners of the development. At such hearing, the organization
responsible for maintenance and/or the residents of the development may show
cause why maintenance by the city should not be continued for a succeeding six
months. If the City Council determines that it is not necessary for the city to
continue such maintenance, the city shall cease such maintenance at the time
established by the City Council. Otherwise, the city shall continue maintenance
for the next succeeding six months subject to a similar hearing and
determination at the end of each six months thereafter. The cost of maintenance
by the city shall be a lien against the common facilities of the development
and the private properties within the development. The City Council shall have
the right to make assessments against properties in the development on the same
basis that the organization responsible for maintenance of the facilities could
make such assessments. Any unpaid assessment shall be a lien against the
property responsible for the same, enforceable the same as a mortgage against
the property. The city may further foreclose its lien on the common facility by
certifying the same to the County Treasurer for collection of general property
taxes.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.084 FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   A fence, wall, column, peer, post, or any similar type structure, or any
combination of such structures, may be permitted in the required yards of the
various districts, subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to locate all
property lines;
   (B)   No fence, hedge, or wall may extend beyond or across a property line
unless in joint agreement with the abutting property owner;
   (C)   No fence, hedge, or wall shall be closer than 18 inches to any public
sidewalk;
   (D)   Fences and walls shall not exceed seven feet in height above the
elevation of the surface of the ground at any point, except:
      (1)   That in instances where public safety or security necessitate, the
Zoning Administrator may authorize fences and walls to have a maximum height of
not to exceed 10 feet above the elevation of the surface of the ground at any
point. Fences of this height are required to obtain a building permit and
certification from the City Engineer;
      (2)   Where the grade of buildings on adjacent lots is greater than that
of buildings on the applicant's lot, the fence may exceed the height
limitations, but in no case shall it exceed the grade of the adjacent building
by more than five feet;
      (3)   Where used for private open space requirements in cluster or
planned residential development; or
   (E)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall not interfere with solar energy access
to existing solar energy systems located on adjacent lots.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.085 BUFFERING AND SCREENING.
   (A)   Purpose. Buffering and screening serves to soften the outline of
buildings, to screen glare and noise, and to create a visual and/or physical
barrier between conflicting land uses. Buffering and screening are required
between specified lots in different zoning districts and between land
developments and along existing streets. The extent of buffering and screening
required shall be determined by the type of use proposed and the adjacent uses
and/or zoning surrounding the proposed development. The impact of the proposed
use on adjoining properties is the basis for establishing buffering and
screening standards.
   (B)   Required buffering and screening. All buffering and screening required
by this chapter shall conform to the regulations set forth in this section of
this chapter. Buffering and screening that conforms to the requirements of this
section shall be required as specified in the table set forth below or
provisions (D)(1) through (4). The applicant proposing the new land use,
rezoning, or major structural change or expansion shall be responsible for
meeting the requirements of this section of this chapter.
   (C)   Determination of buffering and screening class.
      (1)   The table set forth in this section specifies the buffering and
screening that shall be required. For each property boundary, the applicant
shall determine the adjacent zoning district(s). Then, the applicant shall
match the proposed land use, whether the land is vacant or there is an existing
use that is proposing a major structural change or expansion or rezoning with
the identified adjacent zoning district(s) in the table below. The letter
indicates the buffer class. After determining the buffer class from the table,
the applicant shall select a planting option from the table set forth in
provision (E) of this section.
      (2)   A major structural change or expansion, for the purposes of this
section, shall be considered to be an expansion of the existing building floor
area or land area used by 40% or more.
   Table 152.8 Buffering and Screening Required.
Adjacent Zoning
Proposed Land
Use: Rezoning,
Major          Agricultural Low/Mixed                Commercial Industrial
Structural
Changes,
Expansion
                            Low Density High Density (Downtown  (Other,
                            Residential Residential  Other)     Downtown)
Adjacent Zoning
Proposed Land
Use: Rezoning,
Major          Agricultural Low/Mixed                Commercial Industrial
Structural
Changes,
Expansion
                            Low Density High Density (Downtown  (Other,
                            Residential Residential  Other)     Downtown)
Agricultural   -            -           -            -          -
Low/Mixed Low
Density        -            -           B            A          C
Residential
High Density   -            B           -            A          C
Residential
Commercial
Downtown       -            A           A            -          A
Other          -            B           B            -          A
Industrial
Other          -            D           D            -          -
Downtown       -            A           A            -          -
 
      (3)   Where a street or alley is located between the proposed and
adjacent land uses, the required Class (A-D) shall be reduced to the next less
restrictive class, such as from Class C to Class B, except industrial uses
which shall be required to use the same classes as indicated on the table
above.
   (D)   Special planning option requirements.
      (1)   Buffering and screening shall be required to be located along the
perimeter of all parking areas of nonresidential uses located in residential
districts. The buffering and screening planting option required shall be Class
B.
      (2)   Buffering and screening shall be required around the perimeter of
parking areas serving dwelling uses with three or more units located in the
Mixed Low Density Residential (R-2) District. The buffering and screening
planting required shall be one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet and one
understory tree per 40 feet or a hedge planted on three-foot centers and
meeting all other requirements of this section.
      (3)   Low- or High-Density Residential uses proposed for development
adjacent to arterial streets, as designated in the Byron Comprehensive Plan or
railroad right-of-way shall be required to provide buffering and screening to
the level specified in planting options, Class B.
      (4)   Where a railroad right-of-way is located between the proposed
industrial/commercial and adjacent residential uses/zoning, no buffer or
screening shall be required adjacent to the railroad right-of- way.
   (E)   Planting options.
      (1)   The options below indicate the amount of plant material and fencing
that is required. Unless specified, plantings are not required to be aligned on
property or right-of-way boundaries, but may be sited in any required yard on
the property for buffering and screening purposes. The Planning Commission and
City Council may permit staggering or grouping of plant materials if a
satisfactory buffer is achieved. Determination of the total number of plants
shall be made by dividing the dimensions of the area where buffering and
screening is required by the specification of the tables set forth in this
section.
   Table 152.9 Planting Options
Class Option
Class Option
      10 feet wide with one hedgerow on lot line (plants on 3-foot centers) and
A     one canopy tree per 50 feet.
      7 feet wide with 6-foot-high fencing on lot line and one canopy tree per
      50 feet.
      10 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 50 feet and one shrub per
      4 feet.
      15 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet and one
B     understory tree per 40 feet.
      20 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet and one
      understory tree per 50 feet.
      20 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet and one
      coniferous tree per 80 feet.
      10 feet wide with one canopy tree per 40 feet, one understory tree per 20
      feet, one shrub per 15 feet and 6-foot-high fencing on lot line.
      15 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet, one coniferous
      canopy tree per 40 feet, one understory tree per 30 feet and one shrub
C     per 20 feet.
      20 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet, one coniferous
      canopy tree per 50 feet, one understory tree per 40 feet and one shrub
      per 30 feet.
      25 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet, one coniferous
      canopy tree per 60 feet and one understory tree per 40 feet.
      25 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 60 feet, one coniferous
D     tree per 40 feet, one understory tree per 50 feet and one hedge on
      boundary (hedge plants on 3-foot centers).
     25 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 60 feet, one coniferous
      canopy tree per 30 feet and one berm averaging 4 feet in height.
     30 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 60 feet, one coniferous
      canopy tree per 50 feet and one understory tree per 30 feet.
      20 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet, one coniferous
     tree per 30 feet, one understory tree per 40 feet and one coniferous
      shrub per 10 feet or one deciduous shrub per 5 feet.
      10 feet wide with one deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet, one coniferous
     canopy tree per 40 feet, one understory tree per 30 feet, one shrub per
      10 feet and 6-foot-high fencing on lot line.
 
      (2)   All shrubs shall be planted in groupings of shrubs or shrubs and
understory trees. Shrubs may be coniferous or deciduous unless otherwise
specified.
      (3)   Fencing shall be visually solid and constructed of weather
resistant materials kept in good repair and permanently anchored in the ground.
   (F)   General requirements.
      (1)   All existing deciduous and coniferous trees larger than two inches
in diameter, six inches above ground level, and/or six feet in height may be
considered to contribute to the required buffering and screening. Where the
amount of existing plant material of that size or greater equals or contributes
to the required number of plants under the appropriate class, an equivalent
reduction may be taken in the number and type of required plants. In all cases,
existing plant material of the above diameter and height shall be preserved in
any buffer yard, except where clearance is required to ensure adequate sight
distance. Any removal shall, where feasible, involve relocation rather than
clearing.
      (2)   The buffer yard may be coterminous with required front, side, or
rear yards, and in case of conflict, the larger yard requirements shall apply.
      (3)   All buffering and screening areas shall be maintained and kept
clean of all debris, rubbish, weeds, and tall grass in conformance with
existing regulations.
      (4)   No structure, manufacturing, or processing activity or storage of
materials shall be permitted in the buffering and screening areas; however,
parking of passenger automobiles shall be permitted in the portion of the
buffering and screening area exclusive of the exterior 15 feet adjacent to the
lot line.
      (5)   The buffering and screening areas shall be located on the outer
perimeter of the lot, extending to the property line, except when there exists
a utility easement, in which case the buffering and screening area shall be
measured from the inner boundary of the utility easement. No buffer yard shall
be located on any portion of an existing or dedicated public or private street
right-of-way.
      (6)   Plant materials:
         (a)   By this chapter, canopy trees (deciduous or coniferous) shall be
considered to be trees that when full-grown will attain a height of over 30
feet in height; understory trees shall be considered to be trees that when
full-grown attain a height of between ten and 30 feet; shrubs shall be
considered to be woody perennial plants that when full-grown attain a height of
between three and 15 feet.
         (b)   Minimum size:
 
Canopy tree     Deciduous                1½  11 – 1¾ 11 in diameter
                Coniferous               6 – 8 feet in height
Understory tree                         1½ 11 – 1¾ 11 in diameter
Shrub           Deciduous and coniferous 2 – 4 feet in height
 
         (c)   Plant materials shall be permanently maintained and any plant
material which does not live shall be replaced within one year. All plant
material shall be native to Minnesota or have been known to be able to survive
and grow in the southeast Minnesota climate. All planting material shall meet
the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen.
         (d)   It is encouraged that plant materials in buffering and screening
areas be planted in natural clusters that will give privacy but will not block
views or vistas. The exception shall be commercial or industrial uses bordering
residential uses. Here a dense, visual screen is encouraged.
         (e)   Prior to the issuance of any zoning permit, complete plans
showing the arrangement of all buffering and screening areas; the placement,
species and size of all plant materials; and the placement, size, materials and
type of all fences to be placed in such buffering and screening areas shall be
reviewed by the Zoning Administrator to ascertain that the plans are in
conformance with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.086 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ERODIBLE SLOPE. All slopes with inclines in excess of 4%.
      EROSION includes both the detachment and transport of soil particles.
      LARGE FLAT SURFACE AREA (UNPAVED). An area which is flat or whose slope
is less than 4% and which consists of more than 1,000 square feet of exposed
soil.
      SEDIMENTATION. The sending out of the soil particles which are
transported by water and wind. Sedimentation occurs when the velocity of water
or wind in which soil particles are suspended is slowed to a sufficient degree
and for a sufficient period of time to allow the particles to settle out of
suspension or when the degree of slope is lessened to achieve the same result.
      SOIL EROSION. Any removal and/or loss of soil by the action of water,
ice, gravity or wind.
   (B)   Erosion control policies. Any conditional use permit or other
application requiring site plan approval and subdivision plats shall prepare a
soil erosion plan addressing the following policies. Such plan shall be
approved by the City Engineer as a condition to site plan approval.
      (1)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given
time during development.
      (2)   Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of
time as is practicable.
      (3)   If at all practicable, temporary vegetation, mulching, or other
cover shall be used to protect
areas exposed during development.
      (4)   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
surface water runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development on upstream and downstream flooding, surface water runoff
volumes, and soil erosion and sedimentation, such that there is no significant
increase thereof.
      (5)   Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as
soon as possible.
      (6)   The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of
the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
      (7)   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected and shall be
deemed a dominating factor in developing the site.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
§ 152.100 COMMON PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all
zoning applications and procedures subject to review under this chapter unless
otherwise stated.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   Each complete zoning application shall include an application, fee,
and all those application materials required that are specific to the
application.
      (2)   The application fee shall be set by ordinance of the City Council,
as it may be amended from time to time. Application fees are not refundable,
except where the Zoning Administrator has determined that an application was
accepted in error or when the fee paid exceeded the amount due, in which case
the overpayment shall be refunded to the applicant.
      (3)   Application materials shall include, but not be limited to, maps,
graphs, charts, drawings, and the like.
      (4)   Prior to approving a zoning application, the applicant shall bring
property taxes, special assessments, interest, and city utilities up to date.
   (C)   Application review procedure.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review each application and refer
them to city staff and other applicable agencies for review.
      (2)   After receipt of a complete application, the Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing on their next available meeting date.
      (3)   Public hearing.
         (a)   Public notice.
            (i)   Notice of the public hearing, its date, and time shall be
published in the official newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to the
date of the hearing.
            (ii)   Notice of the public hearing shall also be mailed at least
ten days prior to the date of the hearing to the person or persons who filed
the request or appeal, and to each owner of property situated wholly or partly
within 350 feet of the property to which the application relates.
            (iii)   Failure of any property owner or occupant to receive such
notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
         (b)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall hear such
persons as wish to be
heard.
         (c)   The applicant should appear at the hearing to answer questions
concerning the application.
      (4)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the zoning
application and shall transmit the application along with its recommendation to
the City Council. The Planning Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if
there is inadequate information.
   (D)   Decision.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Planning Commission, the
City Council shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
zoning application.
      (2)   The City Council shall state in writing its findings for approval
or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
      (3)   Any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal any zoning
decision by the City Council to the District Court for Olmsted County. Any
person seeking judicial review under this chapter must appeal within 30 days
after delivery of the decision to the appellant.
   (E)   Recording. When conditions have been satisfied by the applicant, the
city shall file with the Olmsted County Property Records and Licensing
Department a copy of any required approval documents, such as ordinances,
resolutions, and agreements.
   (F)   Withdrawal of applications.
      (1)   Any request for withdrawal of an application shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   In all cases where the applicant has requested the withdrawal of an
application, the associated fee paid and any costs incurred by the city in the
processing of the application shall not be refunded.
   (G)   Successive applications. A period of not less than one year is
required between presentation to the Planning Commission of the same request(s)
applying to a specific piece of property where prior request was denied, unless
there has been a substantial change of facts.
   (H)   Zoning certificate.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to initiate construction, conversions, whole
or partial alterations, or enlargements of a use, building, or structure
covered by the requirements of this chapter until a zoning certificate has been
issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the proposed use, building, or
structure conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning
certificates and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person.
      (3)   Violations.
         (a)   Failure to obtain a zoning certificate shall be a violation of
this chapter and punishable under §
152.108 Administration.
         (b)   Any use, site arrangement, or construction which does not comply
with the plans authorized by the zoning certificate shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter and punishable under §
152.108 Administration.
      (4)   Expiration of zoning certificate.
         (a)   If the work described in any zoning certificate has not begun
within six months from the date of issuance thereof, the certificate shall
expire.
         (b)   The certificate shall be canceled by the Zoning Administrator
and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.101 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. Site plan review is required to allow the city to review the
proposed site plan for conformance with this chapter. Site plan review shall be
required for all new construction.
   (B)   Site plan review may be part of a building permit approval process, or
may be included as part of the review process for other requests, such as
conditional use permits, variances, or plats.
   (C)   Procedure.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the site plan request and
approve or deny the application administratively. The Zoning Administrator
shall state in writing his or her findings for approval or denial.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator may choose to refer site plans to the
Planning Commission and City Council for review. If the site plan is referred
to the Planning Commission and City Council, the Council shall make the final
decision.
   (D)   Once the site plan has been approved as herein provided and the use is
established, accessory structures or uses meeting all other requirements of
this chapter may be permitted without Planning Commission review, whether or
not such proposals are consistent with the approved site plan.
   (E)   Expiration.
      (1)   The approved site plan shall expire within 12 months of approval
unless a building permit for the property has been obtained.
      (2)   The approved site plan shall expire within 24 months of approval if
the structure has not been substantially completed. SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION is
defined as the point in time when the structure has been completed to the point
where it may be used for its intended purpose.
      (3)   If the approved site plan expires before work on the structure is
complete, the applicant shall reapply for site plan review before commencing
work on the structure.
   (F)   Amendment. Where further construction occurs on the property that
increases the total amount of floor area of the use, including accessory
structures, by 20% or more or where such proposals are not consistent with the
approved site plan, the property owner shall be required to submit for review
by the Planning Commission an amended site plan.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.102 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT (CUP).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a conditional use permit (CUP) is to permit a
use that would not be appropriate generally, but may be allowed within a
certain zoning district with appropriate restrictions to mitigate the impact of
the proposed use.
   (B)   Procedure. The application for any CUP shall be made and processed
using the procedure outlined in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements.
   (C)   Criteria for review.
      (1)   The City Council shall approve the CUP only if it finds the use to
be consistent with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and the
comprehensive plan.
      (2)   Its judgement shall be based upon, but not limited to the following
criteria:
         (a)   Use will be harmonious with the general and applicable specific
policies of the Byron Comprehensive Plan and this chapter;
         (b)   Site will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so
as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the surrounding area and will not change the essential character
of that area;
         (c)   Use will not be hazardous, unhealthy, or unsafe to existing or
future neighboring uses;
         (d)   Use will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services, including streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
refuse disposal, water and sewer systems, and schools or will be served
adequately by such facilities and services provided by the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use;
         (e)   Use will not create excessive additional requirements at public
cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the
economic welfare of the community;
         (f)   Use will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment, and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property, or the general welfare because of excessive production of or
offensive traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, dust, glare, vibrations, odors, or
other pollutants;
         (g)   Site will have vehicular approaches to the property which are so
designed as not to create traffic congestion or an interference with traffic on
surrounding public thoroughfares;
         (h)   Use will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a
natural, scenic or historic feature of major importance;
         (i)   Use shall conform to specific standards of this chapter
applicable to the particular use; and
         (j)   Use will be compatible with surrounding buildings, circulation,
open space, landscaping, and parking, and be compatible with existing natural
topography, natural water courses, vegetation, exposure to sunlight and wind.
   (D)   Conditions. In recommending or approving any CUP, the City Council may
impose conditions which it considers necessary to meet the standards of this
chapter and to protect the best interests of the surrounding area or the city
as a whole. Such conditions as are imposed shall bind any successors and shall
not be affected by any subsequent transfer of ownership. Violation of any such
condition is a violation of this section. These conditions may include but are
not limited to the following:
      (1)   Ingress and egress modifications to the property and proposed
structures thereon with particular reference to vehicle and pedestrian safety
and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or other
catastrophe;
      (2)   Changes to off-street parking and loading areas where required with
particular attention to the related noise, glare, or odor effects on nearby
property;
      (3)   Changes to refuse and service areas with particular attention to
ingress and egress;
      (4)   Modifications in utility plans with reference to location,
availability, and compatibility;
      (5)   The addition of fencing, screening, landscaping, or other
facilities to protect or buffer abutting or adjacent property;
      (6)   Modification to proposed signs, if any, and proposed exterior
lighting with reference to glare, traffic, safety, and compatibility and
harmony with properties in the district;
      (7)   Changes in required yards and other open space;
      (8)   Controls on the hours of operation of all or portions of a
particular use.
   (E)   Any amendment to an approved CUP shall be reviewed using the procedure
specified in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements. Approval of the amendment shall be
granted before on-site or use changes are permitted.
   (F)   Expiration.
      (1)   If the conditional use has not commenced or a building permit for
the structure to support the conditional use has not been issued within one
year after the date of CUP approval, the permit is void.
      (2)   An applicant may request an extension of the expiration date from
the City Council. The Council may extend the permit for an additional period
not to exceed one year.
      (3)   A CUP authorizes only the conditional use specified in the permit
and expires if for any reason the authorized use ceases for more than one year.
   (G)   Revocation or modification. The city may review a CUP periodically and
may revoke a permit upon violation of any condition of the permit, any law of
the United States or the State of Minnesota, or any city ordinance. If it is
discovered after approval of the CUP that the city's decision was based at
least in part on false, misleading, or fraudulent information, the city may
revoke the permit, modify the conditions, or impose additional conditions to
ensure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.103 INTERIM USE PERMIT (IUP).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of an Interim Use Permit (IUP) is to permit a use
which would not be appropriate generally, but which may be allowed within a
certain zoning district with appropriate restrictions. An IUP is not intended
to last indefinitely, but is meant to have a specific end date for when the use
will no longer be allowed on the property. Upon request, the City Council may
determine that any principal or accessory use listed in Table 152.1 and 152.2
may be an interim use.
   (B)   Procedure. The application for an IUP shall be made and processed
using the same procedure as outlined in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements.
   (C)   Criteria for review. The City Council shall approve the IUP only if it
finds the use to be consistent with the general purpose and intent of this
chapter and the comprehensive plan. Its judgement shall be based upon the
criteria listed in §
152.102(C).
   (D)   Conditions. In recommending or approving any IUP, the City Council may
impose conditions as listed in §
152.106(D) which are considered necessary to meet the standards of this chapter
and to protect the best interests of the surrounding area or the city as a
whole.
   (E)   Amendments to an IUP shall be processed as specified in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements.
   (F)   Expiration. An interim use permit expires and the interim use must
terminate at the earliest occurrence of one of the following:
      (1)   The expiration date in the interim use permit;
      (2)   The occurrence of any event identified in the interim use permit
for the termination of the use;
      (3)   Revocation of the interim use permit;
      (4)   An amendment of the City Code that no longer allows the interim
use;
      (5)   An interim use permit expires one year after approval if the
proposed use has not commenced or a building permit for a structure to support
the interim use has not been issued; or
      (6)   An interim use permit expires if the interim use ceases operation
for a continuous period of at least one year.
   (G)   Revocation or modification. The city may review an IUP periodically
and may revoke a permit upon violation of any condition of the permit, any law
of the United States or the State of Minnesota, or any city ordinance. If it is
discovered after approval of the IUP that the city's decision was based at
least in part on false, misleading, or fraudulent information, the city may
revoke the permit, modify the conditions or impose additional conditions to
ensure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.104 ZONING CODE AMENDMENT (TEXT OR MAP).
   (A)   Purpose. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare,
or good zoning practice requires, the City Council may, by ordinance, amend,
supplement, change, or repeal the regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set
forth in this chapter.
      (1)   No such action may be taken until after a public hearing in
relation thereto, at which all interested parties and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard.
      (2)   Procedure. The application for a text or map amendment shall be
made and processed using the same procedure as outlined in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements.
         (a)   As required by M.S. § 462.357, subd. 2, as amended from time to
time, amendments to this chapter which change all or part of the existing
classification of a zoning district from residential to either commercial or
industrial shall be by passage upon a two-thirds vote of the full City Council.
   (B)   Recording of amendment.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall ensure that any zoning code
amendment is made in the city’s official code book and posted online as
appropriate.
      (2)   If, in accordance with this subchapter, changes are made in the
district boundaries or other information portrayed on the Zoning Map, such
changes shall be entered on the Zoning Map within one month after the amendment
has been approved by the City Council, together with a copy of the application
and related written material submitted, gathered, or developed for
consideration of the application for amendment of the Zoning Map and which
shall be kept as a public record by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.105 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Purpose. A variance is a modification or variation of the provisions
of this zoning code as applied to a specific piece of property. A variance may
be granted when strict enforcement of the provisions of the zoning code would
cause practical difficulties to the property owner, and when it can be
demonstrated that such action will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of
the code.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   The City Council shall act as the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   A variance may not be approved to allow a use that is not allowed
under the Zoning Code for property in the zone where the affected person's land
is located.
      (3)   Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as
defined in M.S. § 216C.06, subd. 14, when in harmony with this section.
      (4)   The City Council may recommend a variance the temporary use of a
single unit dwelling as a two-unit dwelling.
   (C)   Procedure. The application for a variance shall be made and processed
using the same procedure as outlined in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements.
   (D)   Criteria for review.
      (1)   The City Council shall approve the variance only if it finds the
following criteria are met:
         (a)   The variance is in harmony with the general purposes and intent
of this chapter;
         (b)   The variance is consistent with the Byron Comprehensive Plan;
and
         (c)   The applicant has established that there are “practical
difficulties” in complying with this chapter.
      (2)   Practical difficulties, as used in connection with the granting of
a variance, means that:
         (a)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance;
         (b)   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property not created by the landowner; and
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality.
         (d)   Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties.
         (e)   Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
   (E)   Conditions. The City Council may impose conditions in the granting of
variances. Any condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance. Violation of such
conditions, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23; Am. Ord. 2025-11, passed 9-9-25)
§ 152.106 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).
   (A)   Applicability. PUDs are processed using a development stage PUD plan
and final stage PUD plan process. Concurrent processing with platting shall be
allowed as appropriate. The development stage and final stage PUD plan
processes may also occur simultaneously when the complexity of the project will
allow.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting.
      (1)   Before submitting the development stage PUD plan application to the
city, the developer shall meet with the City Administrator, Planning
Coordinator, City Engineer, Public Works Director, and any other such personnel
as may be deemed necessary to determine the feasibility and suitability of the
application.
      (2)   This step is required so that the developer may obtain information
and guidance from city officials before entering into any binding commitments
or incurring substantial expenses of the site and plan preparation.
      (3)   During this meeting, staff will determine if the project must go
through the concept planning process specified in §
151.078 Concept Plan.
      (4)   During this meeting, staff will also determine if the proposed
project is eligible for concurrent review of the development and final stage
PUD plans.
   (C)   Development stage PUD procedure.
      (1)   The application for a development stage PUD Plan shall be made and
processed using the same procedure as outlined in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements.
      (2)   An application for preliminary plat with all necessary materials
shall be filed simultaneously. The Zoning Administrator may defer submission of
the preliminary plat until the final stage PUD plan is submitted.
      (3)   If staff has determined a PUD to be eligible, applicants may apply
for concurrent development and final stage PUD plan approval by submitting all
information required for both applications simultaneously.
      (4)   Criteria for review. The City Council shall base its actions
regarding a development stage PUD plan upon the following criteria:
         (a)   Consistency of the plan with the standards, purposes, and intent
of this chapter.
         (b)   Consistency of the plan with the Byron Comprehensive Plan’s
vision, mission, values, and policies;
         (c)   The adequacy of internal site organization, circulation, parking
facilities, public facilities, recreational areas, open spaces, sidewalks,
trails, buffering, and landscaping;
         (d)   The ability of the area surrounding the PUD to be planned and
developed in coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed
development; and
         (e)   Other factors as the city deems relevant.
      (5)   Official map designation. After approval of the development stage
PUD plans, the PUD shall be designated on the city's Official Zoning Map.
   (D)   Final stage PUD procedure.
      (1)   Within 12 months after the development stage PUD plan has been
approved, the applicant shall submit an application for final development plan
approval. Failure to do so shall result in the development stage PUD plan
becoming null and void.
      (2)   The final stage PUD plan may, if permitted by the City Council as
part of a phasing plan approved during the development stage PUD review,
constitute only that portion of the approved development stage PUD plan which
the applicant proposes to record at that time.
      (3)   The City Council, upon written request by the developer, may extend
the period permitted for the final stage PUD plan application for periods of
not more than 12 months each upon a finding that:
         (a)   The proposed use(s) is consistent with the Byron Comprehensive
Plan at the time the request for an extension is considered; and
         (b)   The project design meets the applicable City Code standards in
effect at the time the request for an extension is considered, or the design is
modified to satisfy those standards.
      (4)   The application for final stage PUD plan shall be made and
processed using the same procedure as outlined in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements with the exception of a public
hearing.
      (5)   Criteria for review. The City Council shall base its actions
regarding a final stage PUD plan upon the final plan’s substantial compliance
with the approved development stage PUD plan. Substantial compliance shall
mean:
         (a)   The development's residential density has not altered over 5%;
         (b)   The floor area of nonresidential uses has not been altered by
over 5%;
         (c)   Open space has not been decreased or altered to change its
original design or use;
         (d)   All conditions prescribed in the development stage PUD plan
approval have been incorporated into the final stage PUD plan, and the original
development concept has not been altered;
         (e)   Consistency of the plan with the standards, purposes, and intent
of this chapter; and
         (f)   Consistency of the plan with the Byron Comprehensive Plan’s
vision, mission, values, and policies.
      (6)   If approval is granted, a PUD permit shall be issued to the
developer by the Zoning Administrator which shall contain any conditions
attached by the Council.
   (E)   Effect of final stage PUD plan decision.
      (1)   Recording.
         (a)   Within one year after the final stage PUD plan has been approved
by the City Council, all conditions of approval shall be met, required
improvements shall be installed or a contract and sureties insuring their
installation shall be filed, and a complete final stage PUD plan shall be
provided to the city.
         (b)   At the city’s discretion, the applicant shall record portions of
the final stage PUD plan with Olmsted County.
         (c)   Failure to fulfill provisions (a) and (b) above shall result in
the requiring of a new development stage PUD plan which must be reviewed in
accordance with the procedure set out in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements to ensure compliance with any new
requirements.
         (d)   An applicant may request an extension of the expiration date
from the City Council. The Council may extend the approval for an additional
period not to exceed one year.
      (2)   Phased PUD.
         (a)   It is recognized that certain PUDs may involve construction over
an extended period of time.
         (b)   If it is proposed to develop a project during a period exceeding
two years, the developer shall submit a phasing plan in accordance with §
151.079(C) as part of the development stage PUD plan application.
      (3)   No building permit shall be issued for a building in a PUD until
the plans have been reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator, Planning
Coordinator and the Building Official.
   (F)   Termination of final stage PUD plan approval. If final stage PUD plan
approval is given and thereafter the applicant wishes to abandon the plan, the
applicant shall notify the city in writing. Upon a finding by the Planning
Commission that there has not been substantial development (as indicated by
installation of utilities or completion of 5% of the proposed floor area)
within the site area within 24 months after final development plan approval was
granted, such final stage PUD plan approval may be terminated after public
hearing by the Planning Commission and upon approval by the Council.
   (G)   Amendment of a PUD.
      (1)   No changes in the final stage PUD plan may be made unless they are
shown by the applicant to be required by changes in conditions or circumstances
not foreseen at the time of the final plan approval.
      (2)   Proposed development of land for which a PUD has been approved or
modifications to an existing project which does not conform to the approved
final stage PUD plan shall be processed as either a minor amendment or a major
amendment.
      (3)   Minor amendments meeting the requirements of provision (D)(5) above
may be reviewed and approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator.
      (4)   Any major amendment to the final PUD plan shall require review and
approval of the development stage and final stage PUD plans using the procedure
identified in §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements. The development stage and final
stage PUD plans may be reviewed concurrently. An amendment shall be considered
major if it involves any change greater than specified in provision (D)(5)
above.
         (a)   The Planning Commission and City Council decision on the
proposed change shall be based on all requirements of Chapters
151 Subdivision Regulations and
152 Zoning Regulations and the approved PUD plans.
      (5)   Related subdivision amendments.
         (a)   A development approved as a PUD may be subdivided or
resubdivided after the final plat and final stage PUD plan have been approved
and development completed or partially completed.
         (b)   If a proposed subdivision or resubdivision of a PUD will create
a new lot line, move a lot line, or involves any public utility or street
easement or right-of-way, the applicant shall make application to the city for
the approval of the subdivision or resubdivision.
         (c)   The subdivision or resubdivision of a PUD shall be processed by
the city under the same procedures, rules, and regulations as for a final plat
and an amendment to the PUD.
         (d)   All pertinent information required by the Planning Commission
and City Council shall be submitted with the application forms.
         (e)   Any approved changes shall be recorded as amendments to the
final stage PUD plan and final plat.
         (f)   Where such proposal for subdivision or resubdivision requires
the change of use, density or bulk standards, open space and other provisions
or requires other changes in the approved final plan, a conditional use
application shall be filed simultaneously with proper application for
subdivision or resubdivision.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.107 APPEAL OF ZONING CODE INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Purpose. The appeal of Zoning Code interpretation process shall
facilitate review of questions and interpretation that arise in the
administration of this chapter, including review of any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Such appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board or commission of the city.
   (C)   The City Council shall act as the Board of Adjustment.
   (D)   Procedure.
      (1)   Filing. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Council
through the Zoning Administrator's office specifying the grounds thereon.
      (2)   Submission. The application for an appeal of Zoning Code
interpretation shall be filed pursuant to §
152.100 Common Procedures and Requirements within 30 days of the alleged
grievance or judgment in question.
      (3)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal of Zoning Code interpretation shall
put on hold the decision appealed unless the officer whose decision is being
appealed certifies in writing to the City Council that a stay would, in their
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
      (4)   Decision.
         (a)   The City Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made in the premises and to that end shall have all the powers of
the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct
the issuance of a permit.
         (b)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the City
Council shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or
to effect any variation in the application of this chapter.
         (c)   The reason for the City Council’s decision shall be stated in
written findings.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.108 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   The City Council shall act as the Board of Adjustment for the City
of Byron for the purposes of this chapter.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall act upon all questions as they may
arise in the administration of this chapter, including the interpretation of
zoning district boundaries, appeals of decisions of the Zoning Administrator,
and variances.
   (B)   Violations. Any structure or use erected, altered, or maintained in
violation of this chapter is declared unlawful. In the event of a violation or
threatened violation of this chapter or other official control adopted under
M.S. § 462.351 through 462.365, the Zoning Administrator or their designee may
institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or
abate such violation or threatened violations.
   (C)   Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the causes and basis thereof and
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall
record properly such complaint, investigate in a timely fashion, and take
action thereon as provided by this chapter. The person(s) filing the complaint
shall remain confidential as required by state law.
   (D)   Administrative action for violations. If the Zoning Administrator
finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he or she
shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations indicating
the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He
or she shall order discontinuance of the legal use of land, buildings or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, or entity who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in §
10.99. Each day that a violation is committed or permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any fine or sentence shall not
exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and
the city may pursue, by appropriate actions or proceedings, any or all
additional other remedies.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
SIGNS
§ 152.125 PURPOSE.
   Signs have an impact on the character and quality of the environment as a
prominent part of the scenery; they attract or repel the viewing public and
affect the safety of vehicular traffic. Their suitability or appropriateness
helps to set the tone of the neighborhood. The purpose of this section shall be
to regulate the placement, erection, and maintenance of signs in the city so as
to promote the health, safety, aesthetics, economic welfare, and general
welfare of the community. The following standards in this section are,
therefore, adopted to regulate signs.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.126 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign or sign structure that is located on a building or
property that has been vacant or unoccupied for a period of three months or
more, or a sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose that no longer
applies.
   ALTER. Refers to any major change to a sign, but shall not include routine
maintenance or painting.
   ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict
action or create a special effect or scene.
   AWNING. A temporary hood or cover that projects from the wall of a building
and which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the
supporting building.
   BALLOON. A flexible, non-ferrous inflated bag in various shapes, sizes, and
colors.
   BANNER. A temporary sign made of flexible material affixed to a building,
vehicle, poles, or other supporting structure by any or all corners. No banner
may be constructed in whole or in part of paper.
   BANNERETTE. Flexible material that resembles a flag and has the minimum
dimensions of two feet by two feet and no larger than three feet by five feet.
A smaller-sized bannerette is defined as a pennant.
   BEACON. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or
directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also,
any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
   BILLBOARD. A freestanding, off-premises sign designed for view from a major
roadway.
   CABINET SIGN. A sign that has framing around the entire sign message with a
removable face.
   CANOPY SIGN. The area of copy, graphic, or identification which is affixed
to a projection or extension of a building or structure, including a marquee,
erected in such a manner as to provide a shelter or cover over the approach to
any entrance of a store, building, or place of assembly. The portion of the
canopy, projection, or other architectural feature which contains no copy or
graphic identification shall not be defined as signage, but if illustrated,
shall be included in the total sign area as specified in §
152.131(A).
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or
illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or
the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight
times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy
sign for purposes of this section.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that,
directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service, or other commercial activity.
   FLAG. A piece of cloth or bunting varying in color and design, used as a
symbol, standard, emblem, or insignia identifying a governmental agency or any
civic, charitable, religious, institutional, patriotic, corporate, fraternal,
or similar organization.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are
permanently anchored in the ground and that are independent from any building
or structure.
   GOVERNMENTAL SIGN. A sign which is erected by a governmental unit for
identification or traffic.
   GROUND MOUNTED SIGN. A freestanding sign erected on one or more freestanding
shafts, posts, or piers which are solidly affixed to the ground and not
attached to a building. A ground mounted sign shall be considered one sign even
though it may have two faces.
   ILLUMINATED ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES. Features which include, but are not
limited to, wall-roof and window-mounted neon, the wall surface between
multiple rows of neon, illuminated sign bands, backlit canopies, awnings or
wall banding features, and the like.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which is lighted by an artificial light source
either external (light source not within sign) or internal (light source within
sign), or by means of reflective materials.
   MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign that is intended to be incorporated into
some form of landscaping design scheme or planter box, is attached to the
ground by means of a freestanding support structure, is solid from grade to the
top of the structure, constructed with materials that are the same as the
primary building materials of the principal structure, and is placed directly
on the ground or on an interior planter base which is incorporated into a
design arrangement. A MONUMENT SIGN shall be considered as one sign though it
may have two faces.
   MULTI-FACED SIGN. Any sign with sign faces oriented to more than two
directions.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the
adoption of this section that does not conform to the requirements of this
section.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign located upon property other than the lot of a
development or use for which the sign is intended.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign located upon the same property as the development
or use for which the sign is intended.
   PENNANT. Flexible material suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually
triangular-shaped and in a series, designed to move in the wind.
   PERMANENT SIGN. A sign permanently attached to a building, structure, or the
ground which is constructed of durable materials and intended for long-term
use.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure and designed to be transported, including, but not limited
to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, signs converted to A-
or T-frames, and menu and sandwich board signs.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other than a wall sign which is perpendicular to and
projects from a binding, is supported by a wall of a building or structure,
where the leading edge extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface of such
wall.
   PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign communicating the street address of a
building for public safety reasons, whether script or in numerical form.
   PYLON SIGN. A freestanding sign erected on one or more freestanding shafts,
posts or piers which are solidly affixed to the ground and not attached to a
building. A pylon sign shall be considered as one sign even though it may have
two faces.
   RIBBONS or STREAMERS. Long or varied lengths of flexible material used to
decorate.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign which is erected, constructed or attached wholly or in
part upon any roof or over the highest roofline of a building.
   ROOFLINE. The top of the coping; or when the building has a pitched roof, at
the intersection of the outside wall with the roof.
   SIGN. A communication device displaying graphics, symbols, or written copy
visible from the public right-of-way and designed to attract the attention of
the general public. A sign shall be considered as a structure or a part of a
structure for the purpose of applying yard and height regulations except as
herein provided.
   SIGN AREA. The area that includes the smallest rectangle around each line of
copy for individual mounted-letter signs and the entire face of a sign,
including the sign copy surface and any framing. trim or molding, but not
including the supporting structure for all other signs. The maximum SIGN AREA
is the maximum allowable gross surface area in square feet of a sign or signs.
The maximum number of signs cannot be arranged and integrated so as to create a
cumulative gross SIGN AREA in excess of such requirements as may be applicable.
   SIGN COPY. Words, letters, logos, figures, symbols, illustrations, or
patterns that form a message or otherwise call attention to a business,
product, service, or activity, or to the sign itself.
   SIGN FACE. The surface of the sign including letters and background upon,
against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated.
   SIGN HEIGHT (MAXIMUM). The vertical distance measured from the highest
adjacent grade, within one foot of the base of the sign, to the top of the
sign.
   SIGN HEIGHT (MINIMUM). The vertical distance measured from the highest
adjacent grade, within one foot of the base of the sign, to the bottom of such
sign.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. The supports, uprights, bracing, and framework for a sign.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign which is erected or displayed for a specific period
of time, and not of a permanent nature.
   WALL GRAPHICS. A sign which is painted directly on an exterior wall surface.
   WALL SIGN. A sign which is affixed to the exterior wall of a building and
which is parallel to the building wall. A wall sign does not project more than
12 inches from the surface to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the top
of the parapet wall. Banners are not included in this definition.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign affixed to the outside or inside of a window. This does
not include merchandise on display.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.127 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
   (A)   Signs hazardous to traffic.
      (1)   Any sign which obstructs or impairs the vision of drivers or
pedestrians or detracts from the visibility of any official traffic-control
device.
      (2)   Any sign which contains or imitates an official traffic sign, or
signal.
      (3)   Any sign which includes distracting, flashing, or moving lights
which, by existing standards, is found to be a traffic hazard.
      (4)   Any sign which, by reason of its location, color, or intensity,
creates a hazard to the safe, efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic. No private sign shall contain words which might be construed as
traffic controls, such as “Stop,” “Caution,” “Warning,” and the like, unless
such sign is needed to direct traffic on the premises.
   (B)   Off-premises signs except as permitted in this section.
   (C)   Signs located on private property without the consent of the owner
thereof.
   (D)   Structurally unsafe, dilapidated, or abandoned signs.
   (E)   Signs erected, placed, or maintained on fences, trees, utility poles
or the supports thereof, except as allowed for special events.
   (F)   Signs attached or supported on a permanently parked vehicle or semi-
trailers. This shall not include signs painted directly on a parked vehicle or
semi-trailer used in the business or facility or on site.
   (G)   Projecting signs.
   (H)   Roof signs.
   (I)   Portable signs.
   (J)   Wall graphics.
   (K)   Beacons.
   (L)   Multifaced signs.
   (M)   Signs supported by guy wires.
   (N)   Cabinet signs on buildings.
   (O)   Bannerettes, pennants, ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs,
balloons and hot or cold air inflatable devices, human sign spinners, or
similar devices, except as may be approved by a special event permit in
accordance with the provisions as set forth in §§
152.125 et seq., Signs.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23; Am. Ord. 2024-02, passed 5-14-24)
§ 152.128 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained in a safe,
orderly condition at all times, including the replacement of defective parts,
cleaning, and other items required for maintenance of the sign. Vegetation
around, in front of, behind, and underneath the base of ground signs for a
distance of ten feet shall be neatly trimmed and free of weeds, and no rubbish
or debris that would constitute a fire or health hazard shall be permitted
under or near the sign.
   (B)   All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the Minnesota State
Building Code and the National Electrical Code. The maximum brightness shall
not exceed 100 foot-lamberts.
   (C)   All signs utilizing electricity shall be subject to the state's
electrical code and electrical service shall be buried or concealed.
   (D)   No signs other than governmental signs shall be erected or temporarily
placed within any street rights-of-way or upon any public lands or easements or
rights-of-way, except by conditional use permit.
      (1)   Temporary signs located within sports facilities on city-owned land
may be allowed with a sign permit provided the following standards are met:
         (a)   Number and size of signs shall be determined by the approved
sign permit.
         (b)   No sign shall be illuminated except by the regular sports
facility lighting during hours of use.
         (c)   Signs are allowed to be installed during each respective sport
season.
   (E)   No sign or sign structure shall be erected or maintained if it
prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign
or sign structure shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
   (F)   Signs shall be professionally prepared.
   (G)   Anchorage requirements.
      (1)   All signs shall be braced or secured to prevent motion.
      (2)   No sign shall be attached to hang from any building until all
necessary wall attachments have been approved by the Building Official.
   (H)   Illumination.
      (1)   Lighted signs shall be lighted only to the extent that the message
on the sign is illuminated and shall not cast glare onto public streets or
adjacent property.
      (2)   Signs with external lighting shall have no exposed light sources or
fixtures unless decorative fixtures are utilized and the light source is fully
concealed and diffused. If a wall sign is mounted above the first floor of a
building, the illumination, if any, shall be internal.
      (3)   Illuminated architectural features or portions thereof, not defined
as signage or a canopy sign, shall be applied the rate of one-third the
architectural feature area toward the maximum allowable sign area permitted
under §
152.131(A). Illuminated architectural features shall include, but not be
limited to, wall-, roof- and window-mounted neon, the wall surface between
multiple rows of neon, illuminated-sign bands, backlit canopies, awning or wall
banding features, and the like.
   (I)   Window signs shall not cover more than 25% of the window area on each
elevation of a building. All window signs shall be placed on the inside surface
of the glass, except for temporary painting applied directly to the glass
surface.
   (J)   The maximum angle permitted between faces of a double-face
freestanding sign is 60 degrees or less is one sign; anything more is two
signs.
   (K)   Signs that are utilized and displayed at athletic fields or in parades
shall not be counted toward total allowances for sign quantities or square
footages.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.129 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs are allowed without a permit unless otherwise specified.
These signs, if placed in accordance with the following standards, will not
apply toward the maximum allowable sign area but shall comply with all other
applicable provisions of this section:
   (A)   A minimum of one property identification sign identifying the correct
property number as assigned by the city shall be required on each principal
building in all districts.
      (1)   Such sign shall be of sufficient size to be legible from the
nearest street yet shall not exceed nine square feet in area.
      (2)   The numbers shall be metal, glass, plastic, or similar durable
material and the numbers shall not be less than three and one-half inches in
height, in a contrasting color to the base or made of some reflective material
and so placed to be easily seen from the street.
   (B)   Flags.
      (1)   No more than three flags may be displayed outside of a principal
building.
      (2)   A maximum of six flags may be allowed on a property provided a
permit is issued and the following standards are met:
         (a)   No two pairs of flags may be the same.
         (b)   Where multiple flagpoles are used, there shall be a maximum
spacing of 20 feet allowed between the poles.
      (3)   Flagpoles shall not exceed:
         (a)   25 feet in height in any residential zoning district.
         (b)   50 feet in height for all other zoning districts.
   (C)   Governmental signs erected by or on order of a public officer or
employee in the performance of official duty.
   (D)   Traffic control signs authorized by federal, state, or municipal
governments with property jurisdiction.
   (E)   Official notices authorized by a court, public body, or public safety
official.
   (F)   Warning and restrictive signs, such as “No Trespassing,” and “No
Hunting” signs placed upon private property by the owner, not to exceed one
square foot in area.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.130 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Temporary signs are exempt from permit requirements unless otherwise
specified, but shall otherwise conform to the requirements of this section.
   (B)   On-premises temporary signs.
      (1)   Signs specified in M.S. Ch. 211B.
      (2)   Banner signs.
         (a)   Only two temporary banners may be displayed by each business at
any time.
         (b)   Each banner shall be no greater than 32 square feet in area.
         (c)   No banner may be displayed or used as a replacement for
permanent signage.
         (d)   City staff shall have the authority to order the removal of any
banner which appears to be deteriorated, in disrepair or on property that
appears to be abandoned.
         (e)   All banners shall be maintained such that they do not become
ripped, torn, defaced, damaged, loose, or unsecured.
      (3)   Properties with open building permits.
         (a)   One temporary sign per street frontage is permitted on any
property with an open building permit.
         (b)   No sign may exceed 32 square feet.
         (c)   Signs shall be painted on all sides, including support posts.
            (i)   Once a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the site,
signs shall be removed within 30 days for single-tenant buildings and within 60
days for multi-tenant buildings.
      (4)   New development. A developer may obtain a sign permit to erect on-
premises temporary signage in any zoning district as follows:
         (a)   Sign quantity.
            (i)   For a development project of three to 25 acres, one sign not
to exceed 100 square feet of sign copy area may be erected.
            (ii)   For projects of 26 through 50 acres, one or two signs not to
exceed 200 aggregate square feet of sign copy area may be erected.
            (iii)   For projects over 50 acres, one, two or three signs not to
exceed 300 aggregate square feet of sign copy area may be erected.
         (b)   No dimension shall exceed 25 feet, exclusive of supporting
structures.
         (c)   The sign shall be set back from all property lines no less than
one foot per one foot of sign height.
         (d)   Signs shall be painted on all sides, including support posts.
         (e)   If such signs are lighted, they shall be illuminated only during
those hours when the model homes or other development are open for conducting
business.
         (f)   Such sign(s) shall be removed once 95% of the project is
developed.
      (5)   Properties for sale or rent.
         (a)   One temporary sign is permitted per street frontage of the
property.
         (b)   Signs may be wall or freestanding signs and shall be removed
within 10 days after the closing on the property.
            (i)   Freestanding signs shall be properly anchored into the ground
using posts with minimum dimensions of four inches square or three inches
diameter.
         (c)   Such signs shall not measure more than 12 square feet in R-1, R-
2, R-3 districts, and shall not measure more than 40 square feet in all other
districts. The 40-square foot limitation may be increased to 64 square feet,
provided a permit is issued and the following standards are met:
            (i)   The sign shall be a maximum height of 12 feet.
            (ii)   The sign shall be set back from the front property line no
less than one foot per one foot of sign height.
            (iii)   The sign shall not be illuminated.
         (d)   Such signs shall be painted on all sides, including support
posts.
      (6)   Properties for lease.
         (a)   Wall or freestanding signs.
            (i)   Such signs shall be limited to one per street frontage of the
property.
            (ii)   The gross area and total height of a temporary property for
lease sign shall be limited to the maximums prescribed in §
152.131(A), except that the sign area for a building that contains a minimum of
50,000 square feet of aboveground leasable area may be increased to 32 square
feet provided that the building is located in a Commercial or Industrial
district.
            (iii)   Signs shall be set back from the front property line no
less than one foot per one foot of sign height.
               a.   If the sign cannot be located to comply with the minimum
setback requirement from the front property line without locating the sign in a
parking lot or other paved surface, the sign may be located up to the front
property line, provided that the sign will not disrupt any public utility
service and/or interfere with the sight line visibility of motorists on the
adjoining roadway. Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area or four
feet in width.
            (iv)   If ground-mounted, the following design standards shall
apply:
               a.   Signs shall be constructed of painted, smooth-finish
plywood and, if ground- mounted, shall have either flush or side-mounted, four-
inch by four-inch painted wood post(s).
               b.   Sign faces up to 32 square feet in area shall be
constructed of one sheet of material.
               c.   Flush-mounted signs shall include a four-inch-wide painted
border on the sign faces in a color to match the signposts and contrast with
the background of the sign face. The sign face area shall include the border.
               d.   Side-mounted signs shall include decorative post tops and
four-inch-wide painted top and bottom supports in a color to match the
signposts and contrast with the background of the sign faces. The sign face
area shall not include the posts and supports.
               e.   Skirting and landscaping in addition to sod shall be
optional for ground- mounted signs, and all such landscaping shall be
maintained to the standard prescribed in §
152.129(A).
         (b)   Banner signs.
            (i)   For any property in the R-3, C, or I zoning districts
containing a new building for lease, one wall-mounted banner may be installed
during construction and the first six months following the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
            (ii)   The banner may be displayed up to an additional six months
if the building is less than 50% occupied at six months past the date of
occupancy for a maximum of one year, including any time the banner is displayed
during construction. Exceptions to this time frame will be considered on a
case-by-case basis.
            (iii)   The maximum size of such banners shall not exceed two times
the area limits of §
152.131(A).
            (iv)   Such banners shall be constructed with top and bottom ropes
seamed into the banner and securely attached to the building, and shall comply
with the following requirements:
               a.   Minimum 12-ounce weight vinyl material.
               b.   Minimum 240 pounds per square yard of tensile strength.
               c.   Minimum 110 pounds per square yard of tear strength.
            (v)   Such banners may be illuminated.
      (7)   Temporary outdoor promotional sales or events.
         (a)   Signage and related devices used in conjunction with sales or
events are permitted in addition to the maximum allowable sign area.
         (b)   A permit is required prior to the display of any signage or
related devices in conjunction with sales or events. The permit fee shall be
set annually by City Council resolution.
         (c)   Signage and related devices shall meet the following standards:
            (i)   Small balloons: The size of small balloons or a group of
connected balloons shall not exceed two feet as the largest dimension, except
that balloon arches not exceeding eight inches in height shall be allowed.
            (ii)   Tents: Tents, including all ties, ropes, stakes, and the
like, shall be located entirely upon the permittee's property and shall comply
with the city's setback requirements for accessory buildings.
            (iii)   Bannerettes:
               a.   Bannerettes may be used on light standards or flagpoles.
               b.   No more than one bannerette shall be allowed per standard
or pole.
               c.   Bannerettes shall be smaller than any U.S. flag on the
property and shall not be flown at a height greater than any U.S. flag allowed
on the property.
            (iv)   Banners:
               a.   Banners may be attached to poles, tents, and buildings,
provided they are well secured and are prevented from being blown around
uncontrollably by the wind.
               b.   Banners shall not be larger than 100 square feet nor higher
than the wall of the principal building on the lot.
               c.   All banners shall be maintained such that they do not
become ripped, torn, defaced, damaged, loose, or unsecured.
            (v)   All signage and related devices shall meet the lighting
requirements found in §
152.129 General Provisions.
            (vi)   No signage or related devices shall be located in the public
right-of-way.
            (vii)   All signage and related devices shall be removed no later
than the last day of the special event.
   (C)   Off-premises temporary signs. No person shall install or cause to be
installed an off-premises temporary sign, except as follows:
      (1)   Temporary off-premises signs may be installed in any district as
follows:
         (a)   No sign shall exceed 28 inches by 28 inches in size.
         (b)   Sign placement:
            (i)   The signs shall not be located more than one mile from the
property.
            (ii)   The signs shall not be placed closer than five feet to any
curb.
            (iii)   The signs shall not be placed on a sidewalk.
            (iv)   The signs shall not interfere with traffic visibility.
            (v)   The signs shall not be placed on private property without the
written consent of the property owner.
         (c)   Sign quantity per property shall be limited to a maximum of 12
signs, with a maximum of two signs per intersection.
         (d)   A sign may be in place for a maximum of 30 days.
      (2)   The Planning Commission and the City Council may authorize
temporary off-premises signs for any business areas that have access to any
public street that is under construction or reconstruction, or is being
repaired. The signs shall be removed upon completion of the street
construction, reconstruction or repairs.
      (3)   New residential development: A developer may obtain sign permits to
erect off-premises temporary signs as follows:
         (a)   Each developer shall be allowed two such signs per entrance to
the development up to a maximum of four such signs.
         (b)   Each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and six feet
in height.
         (c)   Each sign shall be erected on private property and shall be set
back at least five feet from all lot lines.
         (d)   Signs shall be painted on all sides, including support posts.
The signs shall be uniform in design and size.
         (e)   Signs shall not be illuminated.
         (f)   Signs may remain in place until occupancy permits have been
issued by the city for 90% of the lots in single-unit subdivisions and 80% of
the units in all other residential developments, at which time the signs shall
be removed. The city shall issue no additional building permits for new
construction within the development until all off-premises signs have been
removed.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.131 PERMANENT SIGNS.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Signs attached to buildings shall project no more than five feet
from the wall on which they are attached, or in the case of wall signs that do
not project, they shall not cover more than 15% of the wall upon which they are
attached or extend above the maximum height of the wall upon which they are
attached.
      (2)   Maximum aggregate sign area per lot.
         (a)   The maximum aggregate sign area allowed per lot is 100 square
feet. This area shall include all permanent signage unless otherwise specified
in this section.
         (b)   On commercial properties located outside of the Highway 14
commercial corridor, maximum aggregate signage may be increased to 150 square
feet with approval of a conditional use permit or as part of an approved PUD.
      (3)   Freestanding sign height.
         (a)   As measured to the top of the sign, the following table
specifies the maximum allowable freestanding sign height:
   Table 152.10. Freestanding Height.
 
Use of Property                                Sign height
Commercial                                     15 feet
Industrial                                     15 feet
Non-residential use within Highway 14 corridor 35 feet
 
         (b)   On commercial properties within the Highway 14 corridor, the
maximum height of any freestanding signs may be increased to 50 feet with
approval of a conditional use permit or as part of an approved PUD.
      (4)   Signs located on property for lease shall have meet the following
dimensions:
         (a)   Maximum sign area is 8 square feet.
         (b)   Maximum sign height:
            (i)   10 feet for residential property
            (ii)   16 feet for non-residential property
   (B)   On-premises permanent signs.
      (1)   The following permanent signs shall be allowed in the R-1, R-2, and
R-3 zoning districts by permit:
         (a)   Ground or monument signs
            (i)   Two ground or monument signs shall be allowed at each
principal entrance to a residential development.
               a.   Signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all
property lines.
               b.   Each sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area,
exclusive of walls or supports.
               c.   Larger signs may be allowed as part of a PUD or with
approval of a conditional use permit.
            (ii)   One ground or monument sign shall be allowed on property
used for general agriculture, institutional, or membership organization uses.
               a.   No sign shall exceed ten square feet in area per side.
               b.   There shall be no more than one sign for each lot or
principal structure.
      (2)   The following permanent signs shall allowed in the C and I zoning
districts by permit:
         (a)   Wall signs
            (i)   Number
               a.   The maximum number of wall signs on any principal building
shall be two. Each sign shall be placed on a separate building facade, with or
without street frontage except as allowed in provision (iv) below.
               b.   For single-occupancy buildings, the maximum number of wall
signs may be increased by two with the approval of conditional use permit
provided following minimum standards are met:
                  i.   No freestanding sign shall exceed six feet in height
upon the lot.
                  ii.   The wall signs shall be identical in style, wording,
color and size.
               c.   For multiple-occupancy buildings, each occupant shall have
no more than one sign, except that the end tenants may have a maximum of two
signs each to be located on the front and side elevations of the tenant space.
            (ii)   Size
               a.   The cumulative total wall sign area, when added to the
gross sign area of all freestanding signs on the site, shall not exceed the
maximum aggregate allowable sign area per lot as specified in §
152.131(A).
               b.   When a building fronts on two or more streets, calculation
of the maximum allowable sign area shall be based upon the front building
facade and the smallest building facade facing a street frontage.
               c.   No building side may have signage in excess of the maximum
allowable sign area of that building facade.
            (iii)   Wall signs shall be constructed with a maintenance-free/
permanent finish material. Wall signs shall not be painted.
            (iv)   Temporary business signs made of cloth or clothlike material
are allowed as a wall sign in lieu of a permanent wall sign subject to the
following requirements:
               a.   Permits shall be limited in duration to no more than three
months.
               b.   Temporary wall signs shall be securely attached to the
building in such a manner that no portion of the sign will be allowed to blow
around freely in the wind.
               c.   Where a sign criterion has been prescribed for multiple-
occupancy buildings, the temporary wall sign shall be sized to fit within the
specified sign band area.
               d.   There shall be no additional sign lighting allowed in
addition to that which has been approved for the building.
            (v)   A sign that is above the highest roofline of a building but
on a parapet wall that does not extend all the way around the building shall be
architecturally integrated into the building design. This type of sign shall
not be considered a roof sign.
         (b)   Freestanding signs.
            (i)   Number
               a.   One freestanding sign is allowed upon any single lot.
               b.   Additional freestanding signs may be allowed, provided they
are in compliance with the following standards:
                  i.   The signs are constructed as a monument sign and shall
not exceed a height of six feet.
                  ii.   Decorative shrubbery and flowers are incorporated as a
part of the monument design and are maintained on a regular basis.
                  iii.   The signs, if illuminated, may be either internally or
externally lighted in accordance with these regulations.
                  iv.   The gross area of the signs, when added together with
all other freestanding and wall sign areas, does not exceed the maximum
allowable sign area established for the lot.
                  v.   Monument signs may incorporate additional berming on a
slope of three-to-one where the berming is incorporated into an overall
landscaping design plan. Landscaping shall be provided on the slopes of the
berm in an interesting and varied appearance. Where a planter box is
incorporated, the landscaping shall occur in and around the planter with a
similar attractive design. In both cases, the height of the sign, including the
planter box, shall not exceed six feet.
            (ii)   Size.
               a.   When added to the total wall sign area, the cumulative
gross sign area of all freestanding signs shall not exceed the maximum
aggregate sign area as specified in provision (A) above.
               b.   The gross area and total height of a freestanding sign
shall be limited to the maximums prescribed in provision (A) above.
               c.   In the case of a multiple-occupancy building in the
Commercial or Industrial zoning districts, a freestanding sign larger than
provided for in provision (A) above may be approved by conditional use permit.
               d.   For monument signs, the copy and graphic area shall not
exceed the maximum square feet permitted under provision (A) above.
               e.   The minimum pylon sign height clearance to the bottom of
the sign, including
the cross-bracing, framing or sign enclosure, shall be eight feet.
            (iii)   Placement.
               a.   No signage shall be placed within the public right-of-way.
               b.   Freestanding signs
                  i.   Freestanding signs exceeding six feet in height shall be
located on the property served by the sign.
                  ii.   Freestanding signs shall be located no closer than five
feet from any driveway or parking space.
               c.   Monument signs shall be placed in compliance with §
152.081, Clear Vision Areas.
         (c)   Changeable copy signs.
            (i)   Changeable copy signs shall be allowed:
               a.   In the C district.
               b.   On any approved retail business property located in the I
district.
               c.   On any approved institutional property in a residential
district.
            (ii)   Any changeable copy sign shall meet the following standards:
               a.   All existing illegal temporary signage on the site shall be
removed prior to approval of the sign permit.
               b.   Sign type
                  i.   The sign shall be attached to or incorporated into a
freestanding sign. The sign shall be designed to complement existing signage on
the site.
                  ii.   Changeable copy signs shall not be allowed as a wall
sign, except as may be approved by a conditional use permit.
               c.   Size
                  i.   The size of the sign shall not exceed 25% of the gross
sign area when added to an existing pylon sign. This percentage limitation does
not apply to totally new signage.
                  ii.   The gross area of a freestanding sign and the maximum
allowable aggregate sign area specified in provision (A) above may be increased
by 24 square feet to accommodate a changeable copy sign.
               d.   The lower portion of the changeable copy sign shall meet
the eight-foot minimum height clearance requirement. If the bottom of a
changeable copy sign is proposed at a height below eight feet, the message
board shall be enclosed with a vandal-proof encasement and shall be designed as
a ground sign.
               e.   Where there is a grade difference of more than four feet
between the proposed location of a freestanding sign and the higher grade of
the street frontage towards which the sign is oriented, the sign height base
elevation may be established at the center line of the street, provided that
the property on which the sign is to be located either fronts on the street or
is part of a PUD that fronts on the street.
   (C)   Off-premises permanent signs.
      (1)   Off-premises signs on public property.
         (a)   The Planning Commission and the City Council may authorize the
installation of off-premises signs, either in the public right-of-way or on
public property, for government buildings, public parks, hospitals, schools,
lodging, and emergency care facilities.
         (b)   Such signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area.
         (c)   If located on public property, such shall comply with the
setback requirements of provision (B) above.
         (d)   Where practical, such signs may be located on existing sign
poles.
      (2)   Off-premises signs on private property.
         (a)   The Planning Commission and the City Council may authorize the
installation of off-premises signs on private property for places of worship
located on streets that are not classified in the Byron Comprehensive Plan as
collectors or arterials.
            (i)   Such signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area.
            (ii)   Such signs shall comply with the setback requirements of
provision (B) above.
         (b)   In a multiple-lot PUD that includes shared driveways and parking
areas among the lots, a property may display signage pertaining to an adjacent
property(s) within the PUD which have no public street frontage. Such signage
shall:
            (i)   Count toward the total allowable sign area for the adjacent
property(s);
            (ii)   Not exceed 10 square feet in area; and
            (iii)   Be designed to be compatible with the other signs in the
PUD.
         (c)   Billboards.
            (i)   Billboards are permitted by conditional use permit in the
Commercial and Industrial zoning districts.
            (ii)   Upon obtaining a conditional use permit for a billboard, the
company or person obtaining the permit shall file with the city a performance
bond in the minimum amount of $10,000 or a letter of credit or cash bond in
like amount to guarantee compliance with the terms and conditions of the
permit. The $10,000 shall cover one through five years.
            (iii)   Design standards.
               a.   The maximum sign size shall be 250 square feet. Billboards
may incorporate cutouts protruding beyond the framed perimeter of the sign
face, provided the total sign area does not exceed 250 square feet.
               b.   The maximum sign height to the uppermost portion of the
billboard shall be 45 feet. Billboards shall adhere to principal structure
setbacks for the zoning district in which they are located.
               c.   Billboards shall have a maximum of two faces.
               d.   Billboards shall be a single support, metal structure free
of any supports or guy wires. The metal shall be either painted or treated in
such a manner as to prevent deterioration.
               e.   All electrical wiring shall be underground and concealed.
            (iv)   Placement.
               a.   Billboards are permitted only where the adjacent streets
are contiguous to the Highway 14 corridor.
               b.   The minimum distance between billboards shall be 1,000
feet.
               c.   No billboard shall be constructed within 150 feet of the
point of tangency of the entrance or exit ramp on any intermediate arterial or
interstate freeway or within 150 feet of the intersection of the nearest right-
of-way lines of any other class of street. The point of tangency shall be
measured from the point where the off-ramp meets the adjacent traffic lane. No
billboard shall be constructed between ramps on an interchange.
               d.   All signs shall be located a minimum distance of 300 feet
from any public right-of-way boundary.
            (v)   The lot on which a billboard is located shall be improved by
landscaping and must be maintained in an acceptable manner.
            (vi)   Existing billboards are allowed as a principal use of
property. Billboards shall be removed from a lot before any building or
structure is erected on the lot.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23; Am. Ord. 2024-02, passed 5-14-24)
§ 152.132 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Any lawfully constructed nonconforming or any legal sign existing upon
the effective date of this section may be maintained and continued at the size
existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified.
   (B)   Upon adoption of this section, a nonconforming sign must not be:
      (1)   Structurally altered or moved except to bring such nonconforming
sign into conformance with this chapter.
      (2)   Expanded or enlarged.
      (3)   Repaired or otherwise rehabilitated after damage or deterioration
of more than 50%, except to bring into conformance with this section.
   (C)   All nonconforming signs must be brought into conformance, on a sign-
by-sign basis, at the time that a sign is altered. This shall not include
routine maintenance as required by this section.
   (D)   Temporary signs are not entitled to non-conforming status. Such signs
must be brought into compliance as directed by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.133 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Permit and fee required. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
no sign or structure shall be erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt, or
relocated until the required fee as determined by city policy has been paid and
a permit has been issued by the city.
   (B)   Removal of unsafe and illegal signs. The city may require the removal
of any unsafe or illegal sign in the following manner:
      (1)   The Building Official or his or her designee shall give written
notice to the owner and/or party responsible for the sign to comply with the
standards required by this section in a prescribed time frame and manner.
      (2)   Signs on private property. Thirty days' notice in writing shall be
given to the owner of such sign, or of the building, structure, or premises on
which such sign is located, to either comply with this section or remove the
sign. The owner of the sign, building, structure, or premises shall also, upon
removal of any sign, be fully responsible for repairing, replacing and
returning the ground, building walls, or other mounting surface to its original
condition or to a proper condition consistent with the present appearance of
the area building wall or surface.
      (3)   Signs on public property. The city may impound signs which have
been illegally installed upon public property or within public right-of-way or
easement. The sign owner may retrieve the signs according to the following:
         (a)   Fee payment. For impounded signs, there shall be an impoundment
and storage fee as shall be revised annually in the City Council Fee Schedule.
         (b)   Retrieval of sign. The sign shall be retrieved from a designated
impound area during routine business hours and within 15 days from the date of
impounding. After 15 days, the city will dispose of the sign.
         (c)   Liability. The city is not held liable for any damage to
impounded signs.
      (4)   Abandoned signs. Signs located on a building or property that has
been vacant or unoccupied for a period of 12 months or more, or a sign which
pertains to a time, event, or purpose that no longer applies:
         (a)   Wall signs (individual letters) - shall be removed.
         (b)   Wall signs (cabinet) - a blank face shall be inserted in the
cabinet.
         (c)   Freestanding signs - the sign area shall be totally covered.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, occupant, property owner or owners, firm, partnership, or
corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in §
10.99. Each date that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 5-9-23)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
             Adding that part of Block Three in Newell’s Addition to the original town,
43-1  4-9-58 now village of Byron commencing at a point in the West line of Tremain
             Street 174 feet South of the Northeast corner of Block Three, running West,
             parallel with the North line a distance of 256 feet.
             Adding a parcel of land in the Northeast Quarter of Section 32, Township 107
             North, Range 15 West, commencing at the Southeast Corner of Block 5, thence
61-02 - -    North along the East line of Block 5 a distance of 34.49 feet to the North
             right- of-way line of Highway #14 for a place of beginning, thence East
             along said right-of-way line a distance of 47.5 feet.
66-01 5-20-  Annexing the West 40 acres in the North Half of the Northwest Quarter of
      66     Section 32, Township 107 North, Range 15 West.
      8-14-  Annexing the East 633 feet of that part of the Southwest Quarter of the
68-02 68     Northwest Quarter of Section 32, Township 107, Range 15, lying North of the
             Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way.
69-   2-13-  Annexing the East 265 feet of the South 400 feet of the Northwest Quarter,
      69     Section 32, Township 107 North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County.
      1-22-  Annexing part of the South Half of the Northeast Quarter, Section 31,
70-1  70     Township 107, Range 15 lying South of the right-of-way of the Chicago and
             Northwestern Railway as presently located in the section.
70-04 9-9-70 Annexing the premises located in the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest
             Quarter, Section 32, Township 107, Range 15.
      8-11-  Annexing certain land commencing at a point on the North right-of-way line
71-01 71     of T.H. 14 located 433 feet West of the North-South center line of Section
             33, Township 107, Range 15.
             Annexation of land commencing at the Northwest Quarter of Section 32,
71-04 12-8-  Township 107 North, Range 15 West for a place of beginning, then Southerly
      71     along the West Section line of Section 32 to the North right-of-way line of
             the Chicago and Northwestern Railway railroad track.
             Annexation of land commencing at the Northwest corner of the Northeast
      1-26-  Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 32, Township 107 North, Range 15
72-02 72     West for a place of beginning, then Southerly along the West line of the
             Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 32 to the North right-
             of-way line of the Chicago and Northwestern Railway railroad track.
             Annexation of the premises located in the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest
72-06 6-21-  Quarter, Section 32, Township 107, Range 15 lying South of the Chicago-
      72     Northwestern Railroad right-of-way as now located in the quarter section
             except that part platted as Cheery Meadows First Subdivision.
      11-7-  Annexation of part of the NW Quarter of Section 33, Township 107, Range 15
73-07 73     West, Kalmar Township, which lies south of the Chicago Northwestern Railroad
             right-of-way and north of Highway 14.
             Annexation of part of the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of
78-05 11-22- Section 32, Township 107 North, Range 15 West, beginning at a point on the
      78     east line of the quarter section which is 418.9 feet south of the northeast
             corner thereof.
             Annexation of part of the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of
      6-22-  Section 31, Township 107 North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County, commencing at
83-05 83     the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter; thence easterly on a
             Minnesota State Plane Grid Azimuth from North of 89 degree 04 minutes 46
             seconds, along the north line of the Southwest Quarter.
      3-13-  Annexation of part of the Northwest Quarter of Section 33, Township 107
85-02 85     North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County, commencing at the southwest corner of
             the Northwest Quarter of Section 33; containing 58.2 acres more or less.
             Annexation of part of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of
             Section 31, Township 107 North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County commencing at
      10-2-  the southeast corner of said Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter;
85-05 89     thence westerly on a Minnesota State Plane Grid Azimuth from north of 269
             degrees 04 minutes 46 seconds along the south line of said Northeast Quarter
             of the Northeast Quarter 702.02 feet to the southwest corner of Lorentz
             Estates Second Subdivision.
             Annexation of part of the North Half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 31,
             Township 107 North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County, commencing at the
90-01 4-11-  southeast corner of said North Half, thence westerly on a Minnesota State
      90     Plane Grid Azimuth from north of 269 degrees 05 minutes 19 seconds azimuth
             along the south line of said North Half 702.02 feet to the southwest corner
             of Lorentz Estates Second Subdivision.
             Annexation of part of the Northwest Quarter of Section 33, Township 107
91-02 7-10-  North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County, beginning at the Northeast Corner of
      91     the Northwest Quarter of Section 33; thence North 90 degrees 00 minutes 00
             seconds West, containing 37.8 acres more or less.
      5-11-  Annexation of the north 35 acres of the west half of the Southeast quarter,
94-03 94     Section 32, Township 107, Range 15, Olmsted County, exclusive of the
             existing highway right-of-way.
             Annexation of certain land beginning at a point on the south line of the
      4-12-  Northwest Quarter of Section 32, Township 107, Range 15 at a distance of 363
95-02 95     feet west of the southeast corner thereof; thence west on said south line
             270 feet; thence north and parallel with the east line of said Northwest
             Quarter 400 feet.
             Annexing the North Half of the North Half of the Southeast Quarter of
97-01 6-5-97 Section 29, Township 107, Range 15, Olmsted County, Minnesota excepting
             therefrom, the West 945.66 feet thereof; containing 25.46 acres, more or
             less.
2000- 11-9-  Annexing that part of the northwest quarter of Section 31, Township 107
105   00     North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County.
2025-        Revising and replacing Ord. 77-01, and granting a franchise to Minnesota
07    9-9-25 Energy Resources the right to import, manufacture, distribute and sell gas
             for public and private use within and through the limits of the city.
            
 
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
             Granting a franchise to Northern States Power Company to construct, operate,
73-02 3-28-  repair and maintain in the City of Byron an electric distribution system and
      73     transmission lines for the furnishing of electric energy to the city and its
             inhabitants and transmitting electric energy into and through the city.
             Granting a franchise to Northern Natural Gas Company to construct, maintain
77-01 6-3-77 and operate a system of mains, pipes, services and public places of the City
             of Byron, Minnesota, for the purpose of transmitting, distributing and selling
             gas for lighting, heating, industrial and other uses in the city.
             Granting a franchise to Northern States Power Company to construct, operate,
2000- 10-26- repair and maintain in the City of Byron, Minnesota an electric distribution
104   00     system and transmission lines for the furnishing of electric energy to the
             city and its inhabitants and transmitting electric energy into and through the
             city.
2000- 12-28- Granting a franchise to CC VIII Operating LLC, dba Charter Communications, for
1228  00     the maintenance and operation in the City of Byron of a cable system.
             Granting a franchise to People’s Cooperative Services to construct, operate,
02-07 7-24-  repair and maintain an electric distribution system and transmission lines for
      02     the furnishing of electric energy to the city and transmitting electric energy
             into and through the city.
 
 
TABLE III: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Property to be re-zoned from Agricultural to C-2 General
                     Commercial. A tract of land located in the Southwest
                     Quarter of Section 32, Township 107, North Range 15 West,
76-04    10-12-76    Olmsted County, commencing at the northeast corner of the
                     southwest quarter of Section 32, Township 107, North of
                     Range 15 west and running thence south along the east line
                     thereof a distance of 385.9 feet for a place of beginning,
                     thence south 33 feet.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1 Single Family Residential
                     to R-2 Multiple Family Dwelling. A part of the east 80
                     acres of the south 120 acres of the southeast quarter of
77-01A   4-13-77     Section 29, Township 107 North, Range 15 West, Byron,
                     Minnesota, described as follows: Beginning at the
                     southeast corner of the southeast Quarter of said Section
                     29. Containing 12.90 acres.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1 Single Family Dwelling to
77-03    6-22-77     R-2 Multiple Family Dwelling. That part of the Southeast
                     Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 31, Township
                     107 North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County Minnesota.
                     Property to be rezoned from C-2 General Commercial to R-
                     1 Single Family Dwelling. Commencing at the Southwest
                     corner of said Northwest Quarter, thence northerly on a
77-04    6-22-77     Minnesota State Plane Grid Azimuth from North of 358
                     degrees 57 minutes 00 seconds, along the west line of said
                     Northwest Quarter, 225.00 feet to the point of beginning.
                     The tract contains 1.87 acres more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from C-2 General Commercial to R-
                     2 Multiple Family. The east 263.00 feet of the west 426.00
                     feet of the Northwest Quarter of Section 33, Township 107
77-05    6-22-77     North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County, Minnesota, which
                     lies southerly of the southerly line of the Chicago and
                     Northwestern Railroad Right of Way. Said tract contains
                     3.60 acres more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from C-2 General Commercial to R-
                     2 Multiple Family. A part of the West Forty (40) acres of
                     the south one hundred twenty (120) acres of the southeast
77-09    12-28-77    quarter (SE 1/4) of Section 29, Township 107,Range 15,
                     described as: Commencing at the Southeast corner of the
                     said West Forty (40) acres, thence North 300 feet, thence
                     West 215 feet, thence south 300 feet, thence East 215 feet
                     to the place of beginning.
                     Property to be rezoned from C-2, General Commercial, to R-
                     2, Multiple Family. The west approximate 150 ft. of Block
81-01    1-14-81     2, Original Town, beginning at the south property line of
                     the U.S. Post Office, south to NE Frontage Road less the
                     south 85 ft.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1, Single Family Dwelling,
                     to R-2, Multiple Family. That part of lot 4, Block 1,
81-02    1-14-81     Loosbrock First Addition which lies South of the following
                     described line: Beginning at a point on the East line of
                     said Lot 4 which lies 5 feet south of the northeast corner
                     thereof; containing 1 acre more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1, Single Family, to R-2,
81-03    1-14-81     Multiple Family. Commencing at the southeast corner of
                     said southwest quarter, thence due north, assumed bearing,
                     along the east line thereof, 1260.00 feet.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1, Single Family Dwelling to
                     C-1, Highway Commercial PARCEL "B" tract containing 3.98
81-04    1-14-81     acres more or less; PARCEL "C" Block 2 of Cheery Meadows
                     Third Subdivision contains 1.31 acres more or less; PARCEL
                     "D" - All of Block 3 of Cheery Meadows Second Subdivision
                     containing 1.45 acres more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-2, Multiple Family Dwelling
81-05    1-14-81     to C-1, Highway Commercial. Tract contains 10.21 acres
                     more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1, Single Family Dwelling to
                     C-2, Commercial all that part of the following described
81-06    1-14-81     tract: That part of the northeast quarter of the southwest
                     quarter (NE 1/4 SW 1/4) of Section 32, Township 107 North,
                     Range 15 West.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1, Single Family Dwelling to
81-07    1-14-81     R-2, Multiple Family. Tract containing 4.12 acres more or
                     less.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1 to Industrial. That part
92-02    12-9-92     of the Southwest Quarter of Section 33, Township 107
                     North, Range 15 West, known as the Woelfel Estates and
                     containing 16.75 acres more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-3 to R-2. That part of the
93-02    9-22-93     South Half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 31,
                     Township 107, Range 105, City of Byron,. Olmsted County,
                     Minnesota, containing 2.39 acres, more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1 to R-2: That portion of
                     Lot 1 Block 1 of the Subdivision known as Valley View
                     Estates, City of Byron, Olmsted County, Minnesota, which
94-01    2-23-94     was previously zoned R-1, to R-2 to conform with the
                     existing lot lines of Lot 1. The intent of this Ordinance
                     is to define the entire area of Lot 1, Block 1 of Valley
                     View Estates as an R-2 zone.
                     Property to be rezoned from R-1 to Commercial. Com at
97-04    9-11-97     SWcor Blk 4Th N128ft Th E158ft Th S150.5ft Th W159ft to
                     Beg BIk 4. Property is also known as 302 1st Avenue
                     Northeast.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential(R-1) to
                     Commercial: the West 72' of the South 57' of the East half
98-01    2-12-98     of Block 4, Original Plat of the Town of Byron. The
                     property is currently being used as a parking lot for
                     Agriland Elevators.
                     Property to be rezoned from Industrial to Residential (R-
                     1): commencing at the SE corner of Block 4, Original plat
                     of the Town of Byron, thence South on the elongated East
98-02    2-12-98     line of said Block 4, a distance of 30', thence Westerly
                     86', thence North 30', thence Easterly along the South lot
                     line of Block 4 to the place of beginning. This property
                     is currently the front lawn of 303 2nd Street N.E.
                     Property to be rezoned from Downtown Commercial to Mixed
98-03    5-14-98     Density Residential (R-2) the West 79 feet of Lot 7 and
                     Lot 8, Block 2 Original Plat 18 4th Street Northwest.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) to PRD R-2.
                     The Northwest Quarter of Section 28, the South Half of the
01-01    11-28-01    South Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 21, the
                     Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 29;
                     tract contains 398.61 acres, more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) to
                     Residential (R-1) Permanently. Part of the North 1/2 of
02-01    2-13-02     the North 1/2 of Section 29, Township 107 Range. 15 West,
                     Olmsted County, Minnesota. Said Tract contains 14 acres,
                     more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) to PRD R-2.
02-02    2-27-02     That part of the Northeast Quarter of Section 33, Township
                     107 North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County, Minnesota,
                     containing 73.26 acres.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) to
                     Commercial. That part of the Northwest Quarter of the
02-04    4-24-02     Northeast Quarter, the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast
                     Quarter, and the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast
                     Quarter, all in Section 33, Township 107 North, Range 15
                     West, Olmsted County, Minnesota, containing 39.94 acres.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) -Temporary
                     to Residential (R-1) - Permanent. The West 945.66 feet of
02-05    6-12-02     the North Half of the North Half of the Southeast Quarter
                     of Section 29, Township 107 North, Range 15 West, Olmsted
                     County Minnesota. Parcel contains 14.30 acres, more or
                     less.
                     Property to be rezoned from Agricultural to Residential
02-06    8-28-02     (R-1), one part containing 11.05 acres, another part
                     containing 4.64 acres, more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) to Mixed
02-07    8-28-02     Density Residential R-2.The North 150 feet of the West 150
                     feet of Lot 10 Dibell and Westcott.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) to
02-08    9-11-02     Commercial. That part of the Southwest Quarter of the
                     Northeast Quarter of Section 33, Township 107 North, Range
                     15 West, Olmsted County, Minnesota, containing 5.33 acres.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) -Temporary
                     to Residential PRD-R2. That part of the Northwest Quarter
03-01    1-22-03     of the Northeast Quarter of Section 29, Township 107
                     North, Range 15 West, Olmsted County, Minnesota, tract
                     contains 25.92 acres more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) -Temporary
03-02    2-26-03     to Residential PRD-R2 and Commercial. The Northwest
                     Quarter of Section 34, Township 107 North, Range 15 West,
                     north of the railroad, less certain parcels.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) -Temporary
                     to Commercial. All that part of the Northeast Quarter (NE
03-07    - -         1/4) of Section 33, Township 107 North, Range 15 West,
                     lying north of the right-of-way of the Winona and St.
                     Peter Railway Company, Olmsted County excepting three
                     parcels.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) Temporary to
04-03    10-13-04    Residential (R-1) permanent. That part of the Southwest
                     Quarter of Section 29, Township 107 North, Range 15 West,
                     Olmsted County, parcel contains 18.38 acres, more or less.
                     Property to be rezoned from Residential (R-1) Temporary to
                     R-1/Institutional. All of the Olmstead County Highway
                     Right- of-Way Plat 16, which lies in the Northwest Quarter
                     of Section 29, Township 107 North, Range 15 West, Olmsted
05-01    2-23-05     County, Minnesota. Also all of the Olmsted County Highway
                     Right-of- Way Plat 16, which lies in the North Half of the
                     Northeast Quarter of Section 29, Township 107 North, Range
                     15 West, Olmsted County. Also the South Half of the
                     Southwest Quarter of Section 20, Township 107 North, Range
                     15 West, Olmsted County.
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Minnesota Rules
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cite Code Section
M.S. Cite               Code Section
Ch. 12                  33.04,
                        33.28
12.25, subd. 5          33.30
12.31                   33.03
12.43                   33.16
14.57–14.70           112.21,
                        112.99
15.73, subd. 3          92.03
18.77                   98.02
18.77, subd. 8          98.02
21.72                   98.02
Ch. 28A                 152.022
65B.48, subd. 5         76.01
84.92                   76.03
88.16–88.22           93.11
89.001                  91.02
89.01                   91.02
89.51–89.64           91.02
97B.021                 114.13
97B.045                 114.13
103G.291                53.01
120A.05                 117.01
120A.24                 117.01
Ch. 144                 113.27,
                        113.30
144.382, subd. 4        53.02
144.391                 111.01
144.411–144.417       32.02
145A.04(1)              130.37
145A.04(9)              130.37
146A.08, subd. 1(b)     133.28,
                        113.32
Ch. 147                 113.27
Ch. 148                 113.27
152.01-152.025          114.13
Ch. 152                 113.28,
                        113.32
152.0263, subd. 5       117.01
152.027, subds. 1 and 2 114.13
Ch. 157                 152.022
157.16                  112.03
157.16, subd. 3(d)      112.03
161.242                 95.02
168.10                  95.02
168B.04, subd. 2        95.02
169.041                 95.02
169.14                  71.02
169.222                 73.03
169.345, subd. 2        76.01
169.522                 76.01,
                        76.04
169.69                  71.04
169.693                 71.04
Ch. 211B                152.130
216B.02                 92.03
216B.02, subds. 4       92.03
216B.02, subds. 6       92.03
216B.097                50.04
216C.06, subd. 14       152.105
Ch. 216D                92.05,
                        92.16
                        92.10,
216D.01 through 216D.09 92.16,
                        92.25
216D.04, subd. 3        92.03
221.81, subd. 1a        113.01
237.16                  92.01
                        92.01,
237.162                 92.03,
                        92.18
237.162, subd. 4        92.03
                        92.01,
237.163                 92.03,
                        92.18
237.163, subd. 2(b)     92.02
237.163, subd. 6        92.30
237.79                  92.01
237.81                  92.01
Ch. 238                 92.03
238.086                 92.01
245.462, subd. 23       117.01
260.185                 130.99
300.06                  92.06,
                        92.09
Ch. 308A                92.03
Ch. 326                 152.065
326B.103, subd. 3       152.022
327.31, subd. 6         152.022
                        97.08,
                        112.01,
                        112.02,
Ch. 340A                112.06,
                        112.09,
                        112.21,
                        112.99,
                        114.13
340A.24                 112.08
340A.28                 112.08
340A.101                112.03,
                        112.08
340A.285                112.08
340A.301, subd. 6(a)    112.08
340A.301, subd. 6(c)    112.08
340A.301, subd. 6(d)    112.08
340A.301, subd. 6(i)    112.08
340A.301, subd. 6(j)    112.08
340A.404, subd. 1(b)    112.08
340A.404, subd. 4(a)    112.08
340A.404, subd. 4(b)    112.08
340A.404, subd. 5       112.08
340A.408                112.09
340A.408, subd. 2(b)    112.08
340A.408, subd. 3       112.08
340A.408, subd. 5       112.09
340A.409                112.11
340A.413, subd. 3       112.06
340A.414                112.20
340A.414, subd. 6       112.08
340A.503                130.36
340A.504                112.18
340A.504, subd. 3       112.08
340A.504, subd. 3(c)    112.08
340A.509                112.02
340A.801                112.11
340A.4011, subd. 1      112.08
Ch. 342                 117.01,
                        117.02
342.01                  117.01
342.01, subd. 50        117.01
342.11                  117.02
342.13                  117.02
342.13(c)               117.01
342.17                  117.01
342.22                  117.01,
                        117.02
342.22, subd. 4(b)      117.02
342.22, subd. 5(e)      117.02
342.24                  117.02
342.39, subd. 2         117.04
Ch. 349                 110.01,
                        110.14
349.11-349.21           110.99
349.11–349.23         110.07,
                        110.08
349.213                 110.01
364.03, subd. 3         113.28
366.011                 100.01
366.012                 100.01
412.151                 53.02
412.221                 96.01
412.221, subd. 32       130.37
412.501                 31.01
412.601 through 412.751 53.02
412.851                 152.033
415.01                  100.01
415.11                  30.35
Ch. 429                 92.23
429.061                 92.47,
                        92.49
429.021                 96.01
429.101                 92.47,
                        92.49
444.075                 52.02
Ch. 453                 92.03
Ch. 453A                92.03
                        92.23,
Ch. 462                 151.004,
                        152.001
462.351– 462.365      152.108
462.352                 151.008
462.354                 151.008
462.354, subd. 1        152.021
462.357                 117.01
462.357, subd. 1(e)     117.03
462.357, subd. 2        152.104
462.357                 152.001,
                        152.002
462.358                 151.004,
                        152.001
462.358, subd. 3b       151.079,
                        151.080
462.358, subd. 4b       151.076
462.3593                152.035
462.3593, subd. 9       152.035
463.152–463.261       96.01
463.16–463.152        96.09
466.02                  152.004
466.07                  152.004
471.59                  33.30
471.709                 113.27
505.03, subd. 2         151.075
Ch. 515                 114.02
Ch. 515A                114.02
Ch. 515B                114.02
609.02, subd. 02(4a)    73.99
                        113.28,
609.33                  113.32,
                        114.13
609.52                  113.28
609.66-609.67           114.13
609.72                  97.12,
                        114.13
609.74                  113.28
609.75-609.76           114.13
609.75-609.763          110.07,
                        110.99
609.221                 114.13
609.222                 114.13
609.223                 114.13
609.224                 114.13
609.321                 113.28,
                        113.32
609.321-609.3241        114.13
609.322                 113.28,
                        113.32
609.324                 113.28,
                        113.32
609.527                 113.28
609.528                 113.28
609.582                 113.28
609.763                 110.07
609.2231                114.13
609.3242                113.32
609.3243                113.28,
                        113.32
617.23                  113.28,
                        113.32
617.23-617.299          114.13
624.712-624.716         114.13
                        
 
 
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA RULES
Minn. Rule Cite Code Section
Minn. Rule Cite        Code Section
                       150.34,
1300.0160, subp. 3     150.35,
                       150.37-
                       150.39
7030.1000–7030.1050  71.04
7077.0105(41)(b)       151.008
Ch. 7080               51.21
                       92.01,
Ch. 7560               92.10,
                       92.16,
                       92.18
7560.0150, subp. 2     92.23
7819.0050-7819.9950    92.01
7819.1000 subp. 3      92.08
                       92.03,
7819.1100              92.13,
                       92.18
7819.1250              92.28
7819.1300              92.19
7819.3000              92.13
7819.3100              92.24
7819.3200              92.27
7819.4000              92.23
7819.4100              92.23
7819.5000              92.18,
                       92.24
7819.5100              92.24
7819.9900 to 7819.9950 92.03
                       
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
43-1      4-9-58      T.S.O. I
45        5-14-58     T.S.O. I
47        7-9-58      T.S.O. I
48        11-3-58     T.S.O. I
53        10-1-59     T.S.O. I
61-02     – -       T.S.O. I
66-01     5-20-66     T.S.O. I
68-02     8-14-68     T.S.O. I
69        2-13-69     T.S.O. I
70-1      1-22-70     T.S.O. I
70-3      12-9-70     31.01-
                      31.03
70-04     9-9-70      T.S.O. I
71-01     8-11-71     T.S.O. I
71-04     12-8-71     T.S.O. I
72-02     1-26-72     T.S.O. I
72-06     6-21-72     T.S.O. I
73-02     3-28-73     T.S.O. II
73-07     11-7-73     T.S.O. I
76-04     10-12-76    T.S.O. III
76-05     12-22-76    31.01
77-01A    4-13-77     T.S.O. III
77-01     6-3-77      T.S.O. II
77-03     6-22-77     T.S.O. III
77-04     6-22-77     T.S.O. III
77-05     6-22-77     T.S.O. III
77-09     12-28-77    T.S.O. III
78-05     11-22-78    T.S.O. I
81-01     1-14-81     T.S.O. III
81-02     1-14-81     T.S.O. III
81-03     1-14-81     T.S.O. III
81-04     1-14-81     T.S.O. III
81-05     1-14-81     T.S.O. III
81-06     1-14-81     T.S.O. III
81-07     1-14-81     T.S.O. III
83-05     6-22-83     T.S.O. I
85-02     3-13-85     T.S.O. I
87-01     4-22-87     32.02
85-05     10-2-89     T.S.O. I
90-01     4-11-90     T.S.O. I
91-02     7-10-91     T.S.O. I
92-02     12-9-92     T.S.O. III
93-02     9-22-93     T.S.O. III
94-01     2-23-94     T.S.O. III
94-03     5-11-94     T.S.O. I
95-02     4-12-95     T.S.O. I
                      73.01-
169       11-8-95     73.04,
                      73.99
                      90.01-
412       9-25-96     90.19,
                      90.99
10A       12-18-96    32.01
                      74.01,
                      74.02,
84        12-18-96    74.05,
                      74.07,
                      74.09,
                      74.99
                      51.01-
                      51.04,
144       12-18-96    51.20-
                      51.24,
                      51.99
168       12-18-96    Ch. 75, Sched. I
                      110.01,
349       12-18-96    110.05,
                      110.99
445       12-18-96    50.05
609       12-18-96    130.01
97-03     5-8-97      51.04
97-01     6-5-97      T.S.O. I
97-04     9-11-97     T.S.O. III
                      70.01-
                      70.03,
                      70.99,
                      71.01-
459       7-24-97     71.03,
                      71.05-
                      71.08,
                      72.01-
                      72.04
                      111.01-
                      111.06,
                      111.20,
461       7-24-97     111.23-
                      111.25,
                      111.98,
                      111.99
98-01     2-12-98     T.S.O. III
98-02     2-12-98     T.S.O. III
98-03     5-14-98     T.S.O. III
98-18     12-10-98    30.20-
                      30.23
                      96.01-
561       10-14-99    96.07,
                      96.99
                      95.01-
500       12-23-99    95.09,
                      95.99
                      50.01,
444       5-25-00     50.02,
                      50.04
                      130.15-
260       7-13-00     130.21,
                      130.99
                      51.35-
429       8-24-00     51.39,
                      51.99
2000-104  10-26-00    T.S.O. II
2000-105  11-9-00     T.S.O. I
2000-1228 12-28-00    T.S.O. II
01-01     11-28-01    T.S.O. III
500       1-23-02     95.02
02-01     2-13-02     T.S.O. III
02-02     2-27-02     T.S.O. III
02-04     4-24-02     T.S.O. III
02-05     6-12-02     T.S.O. III
02-06     8-28-02     T.S.O. III
02-07     7-24-02     T.S.O. II
02-07     8-28-02     T.S.O. III
02-08     9-11-02     T.S.O. III
03-01     1-22-03     T.S.O. III
03-02     2-26-03     T.S.O. III
03-07     - -         T.S.O. III
                      150.25,
                      150.26,
                      150.29-
03-08     11-26-03    150.32,
                      150.34-
                      150.39,
                      150.41,
                      150.42
03-09     11-26-03    51.04
03-10     11-26-03    50.06
03-11     11-26-03    150.55
03-12     1-1-04      150.56
412       2-11-04     90.08,
                      90.09
0401      3-24-04     Adopting Ordinance
04-02     6-23-04     113.01-
                      113.06
04-03     10-13-04    T.S.O. III
                      74.01-
-         10-13-04    74.09,
                      74.99
                      110.01-
                      110.03,
                      110.05-
-         11-10-04    110.11,
                      110.13-
                      110.16,
                      110.99
05-01     2-23-05     T.S.O. III
-         -           96.02
-         3-23-05     98.01-
                      98.07
                      99.01-
-         3-23-05     99.04,
                      99.99
                      50.02,
                      50.04-
-         7-13-05     50.06,
                      51.04,
                      51.23
100       4-26-06     92.99
                      94.01,
                      94.02,
                      94.05,
-         5-23-07     94.06,
                      94.08-
                      94.17,
                      94.99
-         1-23-08     72.01-
                      72.03
114       6-25-08     114.01-
                      114.15
52        10-8-08     52.01-
                      52.04
-         3-11-09     33.01-
                      33.30
-         9-23-09     113.15
-         2-10-10     50.07
                      92.45-
100       1-13-10     92.49,
                      92.99
-         9-8-10      50.05
                      91.01,
                      91.02,
-         3-9-11      91.36-
                      91.44,
                      91.99
                      97.01 -
                      97.03,
-         4-13-11     97.06 -
                      97.14,
                      97.99
-         6-9-11      50.02
                      115.01 -
-         10-26-11    115.08,
                      115.99
                      76.01-
-         9-27-12     76.06,
                      76.99
                      94.01,
-         9-27-12     94.30 -
                      94.38,
                      94.99
                      116.01-
116       4-24-13     116.09,
                      116.99
                      72.01-
-         10-22-13    72.04,
                      72.99
                      51.35-
-         11-26-13    51.39,
                      51.99
                      70.01-
-         6-10-14     70.03,
                      70.99
-         6-10-14     71.01-
                      71.08
-         2-10-15     50.02
2015-02   9-22-15     94.32
                      72.01,
2016-01   1-12-16     96.05,
                      96.08
-         6-28-16     130.35 -
                      130.37
                      91.01 -
                      91.03,
2016-06   11-15-16    91.35 -
                      91.45,
                      91.99
-         7-25-17     90.20
2-2017    11-14-17    92.01 -
                      92.31
2018-01   2-13-18     92.46
                      53.01 -
53        3-13-18     53.07,
                      53.99
-         6-12-18     94.01, 94.51
19-01     2-12-19     100.01 -
                      100.08
19-02     3-12-19     94.37
19-03     3-12-19     92.08
2019-04   3-12-19     72.01
19-06     5-14-19     113.15
                      111.01 -
                      111.03,
                      111.05,
19-07     6-11-19     111.06,
                      111.20,
                      111.24,
                      111.25
                      94.32 -
20-02     7-14-20     94.35,
                      94.37
                      50.01 -
20-03     7-14-20     50.06,
                      50.20,
                      50.21
20-04     7-28-20     76.01 -
                      76.03
                      94.01,
20-05     9-8-20      94.60 -
                      94.66
                      51.01,
                      51.22,
20-06     10-13-20    51.36 -
                      51.38,
                      51.99
                      111.02,
                      111.03,
                      111.05,
                      111.06,
20-07     10-13-20    111.20,
                      111.23 -
                      111.25,
                      111.98,
                      111.99
                      150.29,
                      150.30,
21-03     5-12-21     150.32,
                      150.34 -
                      150.39,
                      150.42
                      110.01 -
                      110.03,
                      110.05 -
22-01     2-8-22      110.11,
                      110.13 -
                      110.16,
                      110.99
                      112.01 -
112       3-8-22      112.21,
                      112.99
2022-03   5-10-22     30.01 -
                      30.04
2022-04   10-24-22    30.35
                      151.001 -
                      151.008,
                      151.020 -
                      151.026,
                      151.040 -
                      151.044,
                      151.060 -
                      151.062,
                      151.075 -
                      151.082,
                      151.999,
                      152.001 -
                      152.009,
2023-02   5-9-23      152.020 -
                      152.022,
                      152.030 -
                      152.037,
                      152.050 -
                      152.052,
                      152.065,
                      152.066,
                      152.080 -
                      152.086,
                      152.100 -
                      152.108,
                      152.125 -
                      152.133,
                      152.999
2024-01   5-14-24     96.05
2024-02   5-14-24     152.127,
                      152.131
                      152.022,
2025-01   1-14-25     152.035,
                      152.065
2025-02   1-14-25     152.066
2025-04   1-14-25     117.01 -
                      117.05
                      113.25 -
2025-05   3-11-25     113.36,
                      113.99
2025-07   9-9-25      T.S.O. II
                      72.01 -
2025-08   9-9-25      72.04,
                      72.99
2025-09   9-9-25      114.11
2025-10   9-9-25   152.066
2025-11   9-9-25   152.105
                     
 
